2
                                Copyright	©	 2020	Nancy	Jooyoun	Kim
The	right	of	Nancy	 Jooyoun	Kim	to	 be	identified	as	the	Author	of	the	Work	 has
been	asserted	by	her	in	accordance	with	the	Copyright,	Designs	and	Patents	Act
                                                           1988.
                                          First	 published	in	2020	by
                                             PARK	 ROW	 BOOKS
                            By	 arrangement	with	Harlequin	Books	 S.A.
                             First	 published	in	Great	Britain	 in	2020	by
                                             HEADLINE	  REVIEW
                      An	 imprint	of	 HEADLINE	  PUBLISHING	  GROUP
                   First	published	in	 Great	Britain	as	an	Ebook	in	2020	by
                                                 Headline	 Review
                      An	 imprint	of	 HEADLINE	  PUBLISHING	  GROUP
                                                              1
  Apart	 from	any	use	permitted	under	UK	 copyright	law,	 this	publication	 may
 only	be	reproduced,	stored,	or	transmitted,	in	any	form,	 or	by	any	means,	with
    prior	permission	in	 writing	 of	the	publishers	or,	in	the	case	of	reprographic
  production,	 in	accordance	with	the	terms	of	licences	issued	by	the	Copyright
                                                Licensing	 Agency.
    All	 characters	in	this	publication	 are	fictitious	and	any	resemblance	to	real
                          persons,	living	 or	dead,	is	purely	coincidental.
        Cataloguing	 in	Publication	Data	is	available	 from	the	British	 Library
                                           ISBN	 978	1	4722	8160	9
                        Cover	 image	©	Krakenimages.com/Shutterstock
                                  HEADLINE	  PUBLISHING	  GROUP
                                          An	Hachette	UK	 Company
                                                  Carmelite	House
                                           50	Victoria	 Embankment
                                               London	 EC4Y	0DZ
                                               www.headline.co.uk
                                               www.hachette.co.uk

3
                                          About	     the	  Book


















Margot	Lee’s	mother	is	ignoring	her	calls.	Margot	cannot	understand	why,	until
 she	makes	a	surprise	trip	home	to	Koreatown,	LA.	What	she	finds	there	makes
                  her	realise	how	little	she	knows	about	her	mother,	Mina.
Thirty	 years	earlier,	Mina	Lee	steps	off	a	plane	to	take	a	chance	on	a	new	life	in
America.	Stacking	shelves	at	a	Korean	grocery	store,	the	last	thing	she	expects	is
to	fall	in	love.	But	that	moment	will	have	shattering	consequences	for	Mina,	and
                                 everything	she	left	behind	in	Seoul.
Through	the	intimate	lens	of	a	mother	and	daughter	who	have	struggled	all	their
 lives	to	understand	each	other,	Margot	and	Mina’s	story	unravels	the	unspoken
  secrets	that	can	drive	two	people	apart	–	or	perhaps	bind	them	closer	together.

4
                                     About	    the	  Author

















                                               ©	Andria	Lo
Born	and	raised	in	Los	Angeles,	Nancy	Jooyoun	Kim	is	a	graduate	of	UCLA	and
      the	University	of	Washington,	Seattle.	Her	essays	and	short	fiction	have
  appeared	in	the	Los	Angeles	Review	of	Books,	Guernica,	NPR/PRI’s	Selected
 Shorts,	The	Rumpus,	Electric	Literature,	Asian	American	Writers’	Workshop’s
                            The	Margins,	The	Offing	and	elsewhere.

5
                                         Contents

Title	Page
Copyright	Page
About	the	Book
About	the	Author
Dedication
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Summer	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Summer	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Summer	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Summer	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Fall	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Fall	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Fall	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Winter	1987—1988
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Winter	1988
Margot:	Winter	2014
Mina:	Spring	2014
Margot:	Winter	2014
Mina:	Summer	2014
Margot:	Winter	2014
Mina:	Fall	2014
Margot:	Winter	2014—2015
Acknowledgments

6
For	my	mother

7
Margot

Fall	2014

8
       MARGOT’S	FINAL	CONVERSATION	WITH	HER	MOTHER	had	seemed	so	uneventful,
so	ordinary—another	choppy	bilingual	 plod.	Half-understandable.
       Business	was	slow	 again	today.	 Even	all	 the	Korean	businesses	downtown
are	closing.
       What	did	 you	eat	for	dinner?
       Everyone	 is	going	 to	Target	 now,	the	big	 stores.	It	costs	the	 same	and	it’s
cleaner.
       Margot	 imagined	 her	brain	like	 a	fishing	 net	with	 the	 loosest	of	weaves	as
she	watched	the	Korean	 words	 swim	 through.	She	had	 tried	to	 tighten	 the	net
before,	but	learning	another	language,	especially	her	mother’s	 tongue,	frustrated
her.	Why	didn’t	 her	mother	learn	to	speak	English?
       But	 that	 last	conversation	was	two	 weeks	ago.	And	 for	 the	past	few	 days,
Margot	had	only	 one	question	on	 her	mind:	 Why	didn’t	  her	mother	pick	 up	the
phone?
       Since	Margot	 and	Miguel	 had	left	Portland,	the	rain	 had	been	relentless	and
wild.	  Through	  the	 windshield	  wipers	  and	 fogged	 glass,	 they	  only	  caught
glimpses	 of	 fast	 food	 and	 gas,	 motels	 and	 billboards,	 premium	  outlets	 and
“family	  fun	 centers.”	 Margot	 gripped	 the	wheel,	 hands	 cramping,	 damp	with
fear.	The	rain	 had	started	 an	hour	ago,	 right	 after	they	 had	made	a	pit	 stop	 in
north	Portland	to	see	the	famous	thirty-one-foot-tall	  Paul	Bunyan	 sculpture	with
his	cartoonish	smile,	red-and-white	checkered	shirt	 on	his	barrel	chest,	his	hands
resting	on	top	of	an	upright	ax.
       Earlier	 that	morning	 in	Seattle,	Margot	 had	stuffed	a	backpack	and	a	duffel
with	a	 week’s	worth	 of	 clothes,	picked	up	 Miguel	 from	 his	apartment	with	 two
large	suitcases	and	 three	 houseplants,	and	 merged	onto	 the	 freeway,	 driving
Miguel	 down	 for	 his	 big	 move	 to	 Los	Angeles.	 They’d	  stop	in	 Daly	 City	  to
spend	the	night	at	Miguel’s	 family’s	 house,	which	would	 take	about	ten	hours	to
get	to.
       At	  the	start	of	 the	drive,	 Miguel	 had	 been	lively,	 singing	 along	to	 “Don’t
Stop	Believin’”	  and	 joking	 about	all	 the	men	 he	would	 meet	in	 LA.	 But	 now,
almost	four	 hours	into	 the	road	trip,	 Miguel	 was	silent	 with	 his	forehead	 in	his
palm,	taking	deep	breaths	as	if	trying	hard	not	to	think	 about	anything	at	all.
       “Everything	  okay?”	Margot	 asked.	“I’m	 just	thinking	 about	my	parents.”
       “What	 about	your	parents?”	She	lowered	her	foot	on	the	gas.
       “Lying	  to	them,”	 he	said.	“About	 why	 you’re	 really	 moving	down	 to	LA?”
Miguel	 had	taken	a	job	offer	at	an	accounting	firm	 in	 a	location	more	conducive
to	his	 dreams	of	 working	  in	theater.	 For	the	 last	 two	 years,	they	 had	worked
together	at	a	 nonprofit	 for	 people	 with	 disabilities.	 She	was	 an	administrative
assistant;	he	crunched	numbers	 in	Finance.	 She	would	 miss	 him,	 but	she	was

9
happy	for	him,	 too.	 “The	theater	classes?	The	plays	that	you	 write?	 The	Grindr
account?”
       “About	  it	all.”
       “Do	 you	ever	think	 about	telling	 them?”
       “All	  the	time.”	 He	sighed.	“But	 it’s	easier	this	way.”
       “Do	 you	think	 they	know?”
       “Of	   course	they	 do.	 But	  .	 .	 .”	  He	 brushed	his	 hand	 through	  his	 hair.
“Sometimes,	agreeing	to	the	same	lie	is	what	makes	a	family	family,	Margot.”
       “Ha.	 Then	what	do	you	call	 people	who	agree	to	the	same	truth?”
       “Well,	  I	don’t	 know	any	of	these	people	personally,	but—scientists?”
       She	laughed,	 having	expected	him	 to	say	friends.	 Grasping	the	 wheel,	she
caught	the	sign	for	Salem.	Her	hands	were	stiff.
       “Do	 you	need	to	use	the	bathroom?”	she	asked.
       “I’m	  okay.	We’re	 gonna	stop	in	Eugene,	right?”
       “Yeah,	 should	be	another	hour	or	so.”
       “I’m	  kinda	 hungry.”	 Rustling	 in	 his	pack	on	 the	floor	 of	 the	back	seat,	he
found	an	apple,	which	he	rubbed	clean	with	the	edge	of	his	shirt.	“Want	 a	bite?”
       “Not	 now,	 thanks.”
       His	 teeth	 crunched	into	 the	f	 lesh,	the	scent	 cracking	through	 the	odor	 of
wet	floor	mats	and	warm	vents.
       Margot	 was	struck	by	 the	image	of	her	mother’s	serene	face—the	downcast
eyes	above	the	high	cheekbones,	the	relaxed	mouth—as	she	peeled	an	apple	with
a	paring	knife,	 conjuring	 a	continuous	 ribbon	 of	skin.	 The	resulting	 spiral	 held
the	shape	of	its	 former	 life.	 As	a	child,	 Margot	 would	 delicately	 hold	 this	peel
like	a	small	animal	 in	the	palm	of	her	hand,	this	proof	 that	her	mother	could	be	a
kind	of	 magician,	 an	artist	who	 told	 an	origin	 story	through	 scraps—this	is	 the
skin	of	a	fruit,	this	 is	its	smell,	this	is	its	color.
       “I	  hope	the	weather	clears	up	soon,”	Miguel	 said,	interrupting	 her	memory.
“It	 gets	pretty	 narrow	and	windy	 for	 a	while.	 There’s	 a	scary	point	 right	 at	the
top	of	 California	 where	 the	road	is	 just	zigzagging	 while	 you’re	 looking	 down
cliffs.	It’s	 like	 a	test	to	see	if	you	can	stay	on	the	road.”
       “Oh,	 God,”	 Margot	said.	“Let’s	 not	talk	 about	it	anymore.”
       As	 she	refocused	on	the	rain-slicked	road,	the	blurred	lights,	 the	yellow	and
white	lines	 like	 yarn	 unspooling,	 Margot	 thought	about	 her	mother	 who	 hated
driving	 on	the	freeway,	 her	mother	 who	no	 longer	answered	the	phone.	 Where
was	her	mother?
       The	windshield	 wipers	squeaked,	clearing	sheets	of	rain.
       “What	 about	you?”	 Miguel	 asked.	“Looking	forward	 to	seeing	your	mom?”
       Margot’s	  stomach	dropped.	“Actually,	  I’ve	  been	trying	 to	call	 her	 for	 the

10
past	few	days	to	let	her	know,	 to	let	 her	know	that	 we	would	 be	coming	down.”
Clenching	 the	wheel,	 she	 sighed.	 “I	 didn’t	  really	 want	  to	tell	  her	 because	I
wanted	this	to	be	a	fun	trip,	but	then	I	felt	 bad,	so	.	.	.”
       “Is	 everything	 okay?”
       “She	 hasn’t	been	answering	the	phone.”
       “Hmm.”	  He	shifted	in	 his	seat.	“Maybe	her	phone	battery	died?”
       “It’s	  a	landline.	Both	landlines—at	 work	and	at	home.”
       “Maybe	 she’s	on	vacation?”
       “She	 never	goes	on	 vacation.”	 The	windshield	 fogged,	 revealing	smudges
and	streaks,	past	attempts	to	wipe	it	clean.	She	cranked	up	the	air	inside.
       “Hasn’t	 she	ever	wanted	to	go	somewhere?”
       “Yosemite	  and	 the	Grand	 Canyon.	 I	 don’t	 know	  why,	 but	 she’s	always
wanted	to	go	there.”
       “It’s	  a	big	 ol’	 crack	in	 the	ground,	Margot.	 Why	 wouldn’t	 she	want	 to	see
it?	It’s	God’s	 crack.”
       “It’s	   some	 kind	 of	  Korean	 immigrant	  rite	  of	 passage.	National	  parks,
reasons	to	wear	hats	and	khaki,	stuff	like	that.	It’s	like	 America	America.”
       “I	 bet	she’s	okay,”	 Miguel	 said.	“When	did	you	 see	her	last?”
       “Last	 Christmas,”	 she	said.
       “Maybe	 she’s	just	been	busier	than	usual.	We’ll	 be	there	soon.”
       “You’re	  probably	right.	 I’ll	 call	 her	again	when	we	stop.”
       A	 heaviness	expanded	inside	her	chest.	She	fidgeted	with	the	radio	 dial	but
caught	only	static	with	 an	occasional	blip	 of	 a	commercial	or	 radio	announcer’s
voice.
       Her	 mother	was	fine.	They	would	 all	be	fine.
       With	 Miguel	 in	LA,	 she’d	have	more	reasons	to	visit	now.
       The	 road	 lay	before	 them	like	  the	peel	of	 a	 fruit.	 The	 windshield	 wipers
hacked	away	water	falling	from	 the	sky.
       In	 Redding,	 California,	 shrouded	by	mountains	 and	dense	national	forests,
Margot	 and	Miguel	 stopped	at	 the	first	 place	they	 could	 find—a	 greasy	spoon
with	 red	vinyl	  booths,	a	 jukebox,	 a	waitress	 in	white	  uniform.	 The	 hostess,	a
blond	ponytailed	 college	 student,	led	 them	to	 a	table	 and	handed	them	 plastic
menus.	An	  old	  man	 in	 a	 trucker	  hat	 sat	 at	 the	 counter	  by	 himself.	  In	 a
neighboring	 booth,	  two	 girls	  colored	 paper	 place	 mats	 while	  their	  parents
observed.
       Being	 from	 LA,	 in	 particular	Koreatown,	 where	Korean	 food	and	Mexican
joints	 had	 been	 the	 norm,	  Margot	  always	 thought	  of	 the	 classic	  diner	 as
“charming”	 and	 “novel,”	  a	location	 of	 unspoken	heroism	 out	 of	a	 movie	 or	a
short	story	about	decent,	hardworking	 white	 Americans	 trying	 to	catch	a	break.

11
Margot	remembered	when	 she	had	moved	to	 Seattle	eight	years	ago	 and	made
her	first	white	 friends—people	who	seemed	to	navigate	their	identities,	their	 skin
tones,	their	appearances	so	easily,	in	such	an	invisible	 way,	 as	if	 the	world	 had
been	created	for	them,	which,	in	 a	sense,	it	had.	Many	of	 them—with	 their	 blue
eyes	and	tall	noses—appeared	intrinsically	 attractive	because	even	white	people
who	weren’t	supermodels	were	at	least	white.
       She	 didn’t	 want	 to	 think	 that	 way	 since,	theoretically,	 it	 made	 no	sense.
Beauty	is	a	construct,	 but	theory	 is	not	 the	reality	 we	live,	 she	thought.	Theory
didn’t	live	 in	 the	bones.	Theory	didn’t	erase	the	years	of	self-scrutiny	in	 a	mirror
and	not	 seeing	anyone	at	 all,	 not	 a	protagonist	 or	 a	beauty,	 only	 a	television
sidekick,	a	 speechless	creature,	who	at	best	was	“exotic,”	  desirable	 but	simple
and	foreign.	Growing	  up,	she	had	often	wondered,	 If	only	 I	 had	bigger	 eyes	or
brown	hair	 instead	of	black.	If	only	.	.	.
       The	 food	 arrived,	interrupting	  her	thoughts.	 Margot	 and	Miguel	 devoured
their	meals—a	cheeseburger	and	fries,	a	tuna	melt	on	rye,	and	tomato	soup—like
animals.	Margot	 tried	  to	slow	 down,	 but	 everything	 tasted	 too	good,	 perfect,
American.	All	 she	could	hear	was	mutual	chewing,	sips,	and	gulps—an	orchestra
of	fulfillment.	  She	wanted	to	sit	here	forever,	forget	about	her	problems,	LA,	 her
mother.
       “We	 should	hit	 the	road,	no?”	Miguel	 asked.	“Wanna	switch?”
       They	 paid	 the	bill	 and	 went	outside,	 where	clouds	 had	cleared	out	 for	 an
evening	sky	 that	promised	 stars.	The	moon	 glowed	silvery	 white	 like	 a	 door’s
empty	fisheye.	 Margot	regretted	 not	packing	 a	winter	 coat,	only	 a	windbreaker
and	a	few	sweaters	for	the	warmer	weather	in	LA.
       About	 five	 inches	taller	 than	Margot,	Miguel	  adjusted	the	mirrors,	then	the
seat	to	give	his	legs	more	room.	The	top	of	 his	pomaded	hair	brushed	up	against
the	fabric	of	the	roof.
       He	 merged	onto	the	freeway,	driving	 hard	and	fast.	Whistling	 around	slow-
moving	 cars,	he	always	 signaled,	never	 cutting	 anyone	off.	 Margot	 had	 never
imagined	how	  quick	 and	nimble	 her	 car	 could	 be,	how	 such	 confidence	 and
fearlessness	could	both	impress	and	terrify	her.	She	had	become	so	used	to	going
at	her	own,	or	her	mother’s,	speed.
       Her	 mother	never	liked	the	idea	of	 traveling	anywhere	far.	 She	rarely	spoke
of	the	 past,	but	she	had	once	 told	Margot	 that	 at	the	 age	of	four,	 she	had	fled
with	her	family	  from	the	north	 during	the	 Korean	War.	Somehow,	she	had	been
separated	from	her	parents	permanently	in	 that	bloody	 time.	 Movement	 for	 her
mother	was	essentially	an	experience	of	loss	that	Margot,	 American-born,	 could
never	imagine.	 And	 yet	 Margot	 herself	 had	 inherited	 the	same	anxiety	 about
driving	  fast,	  particularly	   on	 freeways.	  She	  thought	 too	  much	  about	  the

12
experience	of	speed	itself,	its	danger,	rather	than	getting	somewhere	at	last.
       Hitting	   flat	  straight	 highway	  without	  traffic	  through	 farms	  and	 fields,
Margot	untied	 her	ponytail.	 She	could	feel	 herself	relax,	 her	shoulders	and	grip
loosening.	The	sky—an	inky	 ombré	of	 blue	and	black—stretched	wide	 to	reveal
a	field	of	stars,	twinkling	 at	them	from	 vast	distances.
       Once,	 twenty	 years	ago	when	Margot	 was	 six,	her	 mother	had	 packed	up
their	Oldsmobile	 for	 a	weekend	trip	 to	 Vegas—the	only	 road	trip	 she	had	ever
taken	with	 her	mother,	 who	never	took	 more	 than	a	day	off	 work.	 On	 the	way
there,	she	had	 driven	 below	 the	speed	limit	  in	 the	 slow	 lane	the	 entire	 time,
stretching	what	 should’ve	  been	a	four-hour	  trip	 into	 an	 entire	 day.	 Cars	and
trucks	zoomed	 by,	 honking.	 Through	 open	 windows,	 a	dry	 breeze	carried	 an
odor	of	 petroleum,	mesquite,	and	sage.	Dust	powdered	 Margot’s	 face	and	arms
as	she	slumped	low	in	her	seat.
       “Where	 are	we	going?”	Margot	 had	asked.
       “Somewhere	 very	special,”	her	mother	said.
       “Will	  there	be	ice	cream?”
       Her	  brown	  eyes,	hard	  as	 cabochons	the	 entire	  drive,	  softened	 in	 the
rearview	mirror.	 “Yes.”
       Driving	  down	  the	Strip,	 Margot	  had	marveled	 at	 the	 seductive	lights,	 a
wonderland	 of	 distraction	 and	 pleasure.	Here	 they	 could	 have	 anything—ice
cream,	games,	stuffed	 animals,	 cheeseburgers	for	breakfast,	 walls	 made	from
hard	candy	that	they	could	lick.	 But	instead	they	spent	most	of	 their	one	full	 day
in	a	 shabby	motel	 outside	of	 Vegas,	waiting	 for	 what—or	 for	 whom—Margot
never	knew.
       After	  hours	of	 waiting,	 they	left	 the	next	 morning.	 On	the	drive	 back,	 her
mother	had	seemed	so	utterly	deflated	that	Margot	didn’t	have	the	courage	to	ask
why	they	 had	driven	so	far.	 She	always	assumed	that	her	mother	didn’t	 want	to
talk	 about	the	 things	that	 hurt	 her.	But	 maybe	 Margot	 was	wrong	 about	 that.
Maybe	now	 as	an	adult,	she	was	growing	 into	 a	woman	 who	 could	understand
and	support	her	mother,	despite	the	different	languages	they	knew.
       A	 light	 every	now	and	then	winked	 from	distant	 points	in	the	black	sky	 and
fields	 around	 Margot	 and	 Miguel.	  Driving	  with	 the	 road	 illuminated	  by	 the
stretch	of	their	 headlights	made	her	feel	as	if	 she	was	on	a	rocket	 ship,	blasting
into	unknown	 depths,	an	infinite	 spray	 of	stars	and	planets,	tiny	 galaxies	in	 the
void.
       She	closed	her	eyes.	Why	didn’t	 her	mother	pick	up	the	phone?

13
       THE	NEXT	MORNING	AFTER	SPENDING	THE	NIGHT	AT	Miguel’s	parents’	house,
they	were	on	Interstate	5,	listening	 to	a	story	 on	the	local	NPR	 station	about	the
devastation	of	the	drought.	 She	never	knew	 how	much	 she	loved	the	sun—Los
Angeles’s	interminable	 light—until	 she	had	moved	to	Seattle	where	the	cold	and
rain	stretched	for	 gray	days	on	end.	Growing	 up,	 she	had	often	found	the	 light-
filled	 sky	oppressive	in	its	 ceaselessness,	the	doldrums	of	wearing	shorts	almost
every	day.	That	 heat,	those	clothes	could	 be	glorious	 on	a	day	 off,	 but	Margot
and	her	mother,	who	worked	 long	hours	at	 her	store	six	days	a	week,	never	had
any	time	for	 vacation.	 But	now	 as	she	contemplated	the	goldenness	of	the	sun-
scorched	earth	against	a	backdrop	of	cloudless	blue	sky,	she	could	appreciate	the
warmth	and	light	as	if	she	had	escaped	a	prison.
       Hours	 later	 as	Margot	 merged	onto	the	 101	South,	the	 sun	began	its	long
descent,	transforming	the	sky	into	 a	wash	of	muted	blue	that	blended	into	 bright
streaks	of	hot	pink,	 the	glow	 of	 tangerine	in	 the	west.	After	 crawling	  along	for
thirty	 minutes	with	 other	drivers,	 possessing	that	quintessential	LA—bored	 and
spiritually	 deceased—look	in	the	eyes,	Margot	 and	Miguel	 exited	at	 Normandie
Avenue	and	drove	down	 the	bustling	streets	of	 her	neighborhood,	Koreatown—
clusters	of	signs	 in	Korean,	 shopping	plazas,	parents	holding	 bags	of	 groceries
and	the	hands	of	 children,	 the	 elderly	 in	 sun	hats	hunched	 over	and	 hobbling
across	streets,	teenagers	with	baggy	pants	and	backpacks.
       “I	  don’t	know	 if	 I’ve	 ever	been	to	Koreatown	 before,”	Miguel	  said,	staring
out	the	window.
       “Have	 you	spent	much	time	in	LA?	 You’ve	 been	a	few	times,	right?”
       “Yeah,	  I’ve	 done	the	 touristy	 stuff.	 Santa	Monica,	 Venice,	 Beverly	 Hills,
downtown.”
       “There’s	 not	 a	lot	of	 reason	to	be	in	Koreatown,	 I	guess,	unless	you’re	into
the	food.	 It’s	 changing	 now,	 though.”	 Margot	  explained	how	 in	 recent	 years,
developers	were	carving	playgrounds	for	 the	fashionable	and	moneyed,	building
condos,	hotels,	and	restaurants	in	the	neighborhood.	“It’s	 so	strange	to	me,”	 she
continued.	“Why	 would	anyone	want	to	come	here?”
       “It’s	  just	 different	 for	 people,	that’s	all,”	  Miguel	 said.	“People	 want	 to	go
places	that	 are	 different.	  It’s	  slumming,	 what	  rich	 people	 do	 for	  shits	 and
giggles.”
       Margot	 shook	her	head.	“For	 me,	being	different	 wasn’t	a	good	 thing.	All	 I
wanted	growing	  up	was	 everything	 on	 television—dishwashers	 and	 windows
that	shut	properly	and	a	yard.”
       “You	  didn’t	 have	a	yard?	Even	poor	people	have	yards,	Margot.	 With,	 you
know,	 like	 clotheslines	 and	 roosters	and	 limping	  dogs	.	 .	 .”	 He	 smiled,	 and
Margot	laughed.

14
       “We	 lived	 in	 an	apartment,	the	same	one	my	mom	lives	 in	 now,”	 she	said.
“We	never	had	a	house.”
       They	 pulled	up	to	the	front	 of	the	building	 that	she	and	her	mother	had	lived
in	for	 as	 long	 as	she	could	 remember—a	nondescript,	 gray	 stucco	three-story
complex.	The	 windows	 on	 the	bottom	 floor	 had	 security	 bars	over	them.	 The
large	agaves	planted	out	front	resembled	tired	 sentinels	that	badly	 needed	a	day
off.	Margot	 and	her	mother	lived	on	the	middle	 floor	 in	a	two-bedroom	unit	 with
a	small	 north-facing	  balcony	 that	 looked	 partially	  out	 onto	 another,	 almost-
identical	building	 and	back	alley.
       “Let’s	  sit	here	for	 a	bit?”	 she	asked.	The	old	 embarrassment	rose	from	the
pit	of	 her	stomach,	the	shame	she	felt	 when	she	brought	classmates	home	from
school	to	work	 on	 group	projects.	 Margot	 and	her	mother	 never	entertained	or
invited	 anyone	inside	 for	 fun.	 No	 matter	 how	 clean	her	 mother	 tried	 to	keep
things,	the	space	always	seemed	shabby	and	disorganized—a	closet	 for	storage
and	sleeping	and	fighting	  rather	than	 a	home.	But	 what	 else	could	 her	mother
afford?
       It	 was	easy	to	 see	now	how	a	 place	like	 this,	so	different	 from	 her	Seattle
neighborhood	of	  green	trees	 and	clean	 sky	 and	open	 windows	 without	  bars,
could	make	her	feel	embarrassment	and	shame	about	her	home.	Not	that	life	was
less	confusing	in	Seattle,	but	it	was	much	less	in	her	face	all	the	time—the	crowd
of	emotions,	 the	struggle	 to	 put	 food	on	 the	table,	 the	fear	 of	 being	 followed
down	 the	street	 at	 night,	 kidnapped	 or	 stabbed.	Always	  looking	 behind	 her.
Maybe	this	 was	why	 she	couldn’t	 leave	the	 past	behind—everything	 about	her
life	 had	trained	 her	 to	look	  back.	By	 never	 looking	 forward,	  she	was	always
tripping,	falling	 over	things.
       Miguel	  touched	her	arm.	“Do	 you	 want	to	 call	your	 mom	again?	Does	she
have	a	cell	phone?”
       Margot	 took	 a	deep	breath	and	unbuckled	 her	seat	belt.	 “She	has	one	that
she	uses	for	emergencies,	but	 it’s	 never	on.	 It’s	 a	 flip	 phone,	and	 she	doesn’t
know	how	to	check	voice	mail.”
       “Sacrilège,”	 he	said	in	a	bad	French	accent.
       “She’s	  technologically	  in	 the	 Stone	 Age,”	 Margot	  went	 on.	 “She	 can’t
really	read	English	 either,	 and	her	eyes	are	kind	 of	bad.	My	  Korean	isn’t	 good
enough	to	help	her.	It	always	ends	in	a	fight.”
       How	  many	hours	 had	 she	spent,	words	 stumbling	 like	 stones	 out	of	 her
mouth,	trying	  to	 explain	 something	in	 Korean	 to	 her	mother?	 A	 utilities	  bill.
How	 to	work	 the	 remote	control.	 A	 car	 insurance	policy.	 And	 in	 those	hours,
Margot	 would	 always	slip,	 somehow	yelling	  at	her	 mother,	as	her	 mother	had
often	 done	to	 her	 as	a	 child	 when	 she	 had	misbehaved	 by	 oversleeping,	 by

15
missing	church,	even	by	falling	 ill	 and	needing	to	go	to	the	hospital.
       Her	 mother	 had	once	 screamed,	“How	 am	 I	 going	 to	 pay	for	 this?	 Why
don’t	 you	  take	 better	 care	 of	 yourself?”	  Her	  mother	 didn’t	  have	 time	  for
empathy.	She	always	had	to	keep	moving.	If	she	stopped,	she	might	drown.
       “Would	  you	 mind	waiting	 in	 the	car?”	 Margot	 asked.	The	broken	security
gate	shrieked,	then	 slammed	behind	 her.	Holding	  her	 breath,	she	climbed	 the
dark,	dank	 staircase,	which	 smelled	 of	 wet	socks	 and	old	 paint	 fumes,	to	 the
second	floor,	where	she	knocked	on	the	apartment	door.	 The	fisheye	was	empty
and	dark.
       This	 was	no	longer	her	home.	Yet	 with	a	memory	 that	lived	not	 in	her	head
but	 in	 her	 hands,	she	 turned	 the	 key	 for	 the	 dead	 bolt,	 which	  was	already
unlocked,	and	then	the	doorknob.	She	had	spent	most	of	 her	life,	 her	childhood,
dreading	the	inside	of	that	 apartment,	not	out	of	fear	 but	out	of	 hatred	and	spite.
Hatred	for	 her	mother.	 Hatred	 for	 the	money	 they	didn’t	  have.	Hatred	 for	 her
father,	missing,	 gone,	a	coward.	Hatred	 for	her	 mother’s	accent.	Hatred	 for	 the
furniture,	 stained,	falling	 apart.	Hatred	for	 herself,	her	life.	 She	hated	it	 all.	She
wanted	this	world	to	disappear,	to	burn	it	all	 down.
       As	 she	 opened	the	door,	 a	 dark	odor	 of	 decayed	fruit,	  putrid	 and	sharp,
swelled	around	her	head	like	a	tidal	wave.	Acid	 erupted	from	her	mouth	 onto	the
arm	that	shielded	her	face.	She	flipped	on	the	light.	 There	was	a	broken	ceramic
sculpture	of	 the	Virgin	 Mary	 on	 the	floor,	 tour	 brochures	on	their	 coffee	table,
and	in	this	intimate	 chaos,	her	mother	facedown	on	the	carpet	with	her	right	 arm
extended,	the	left	one	by	her	side,	her	feet	in	sheer	nude	socks.
       Later,	 Margot	  would	 remember	 the	screams	and	 would	 realize	 that	they
were	coming	from	her.
       She	fell	 to	her	knees.	The	hallway’s	amber	glow	 was	soft	like	feathers.	Face
tingling,	 she	lay	her	forehead	on	the	carpet	where	the	head	of	a	tiny	nail	 pressed
against	her	skin.	 Miguel’s	  hands	abruptly	 gripped	 her	 shoulders	from	 behind,
easing	her	to	her	feet.	They	wobbled,	weak,	down	the	stairs	into	the	open	air,	the
street.
       As	  the	sun	 disappeared	below	 the	 horizon,	 the	 sky	 became	 the	longest
bruise—purple	and	blue.	The	cruel	light	 left	its	mark.
       She	 rested	on	 the	 uneven	 curb,	 head	in	 her	 arms	 folded	 on	 her	 knees,
Miguel	next	to	 her.	Hiccuping	through	tears,	she	struggled	to	breathe.
       Maybe	 she	should	 have	checked	her	mother’s	 pulse,	maybe	she	shouldn’t
have	called	the	police.	 What	 if	 her	mother	 was	only	 hurt	badly,	 or	drunk?	 No,
she	never	drank	and	a	person	that	was	hurt	would	 not	lie	 on	the	floor	 facedown
like	that.	 And	she	couldn’t	 bear	the	thought	 of	being	 near	that	smell,	that	body,
the	first	time	she	had	seen	her	mother	in	almost	a	year.

16
       That	 was	her	umma.	That	was	her	head.	Those	were	her	feet.
       Sirens	 blared	from	 a	distance,	getting	 louder	 as	they	arrived.	 She	directed
two	police	officers	 and	an	EMT	 to	her	mother’s	apartment.	Another	 two	officers
asked	her	questions.	She	was	appalled	at	how	little	she	could	answer.	But	she	did
tell	them	miscellaneous	things	about	her	mother—that	 she	worked	all	day	at	this
store	and	that	she	went	to	church.
       A	 wiry	  Korean	man	 in	 his	sixties,	 perhaps	the	landlord	 or	 even	a	janitor,
spoke	to	the	officers	for	 about	ten	minutes.	Afterward,	 he	stood	on	the	sidewalk,
smoking	with	 a	 few	casual	observers	who	 had	emerged	out	of	 the	surrounding
buildings,	curious	about	the	lights	and	the	noise.
       They	 took	her	body	away	in	a	black	bag	on	a	stretcher.
       Her	 name	was	Mina.	Mina	Lee.
       Yes,	that	was	her	mother.

17
     Mina

Summer	1987

18
       MINA	STEPPED	OFF	THE	PLANE	INTO	A	FLASH	OF	HEAT,	thinking	she	had	made	a
grave	mistake.	 But	  it	 was	 too	 late.	 The	 world	 opened	 up	 like	 a	 hot	 mouth
devouring	her.	Yet	hadn’t	 it	been	that	way	her	whole	 life	 already?	She	reminded
herself	that	 this	airport,	 LAX,	  was	 actually	 easier,	much	 more	organized	 than
Seoul,	or	any	other	great	city,	much	safer	even	than	her	own	childhood.
       She	fought	 back	the	memory	of	 the	screaming,	stampeding	crowd	in	 which
she	had	been	separated	from	her	parents	while	fleeing	 the	north	during	 the	war.
Her	four-year-old	 hands	groping	to	 grab	them.	The	rush	of	 bodies.	The	moment
she	lost	 sight	 of	 her	mother	 and	 father.	 Surrounded	by	 the	 distress,	the	 pain
etched	into	strangers.	The	dead	along	 the	road,	the	elderly	 who	 had	fallen,	 and
those	shuddering,	hungry	people	who	did	not	have	anything	left	to	protect.
       And	 in	 the	airport	now,	her	heart	throbbed	as	she	waded	through	the	crowd
to	get	out.	She	was	doing	this	again,	and	again	she	was	doing	it	alone.
       A	  steady	 stream	 of	 people	 jostled	  in	 the	 same	 direction—friends	  and
families,	 smiling,	  reunited,	 businessmen	in	 gray	 and	 navy	 suits	 traveling	 by
themselves.	She	was	in	another	country,	foreign,	alone.	The	breath	rushed	in	and
out	of	her	lungs.	Her	underarms	were	clammy	 and	cold.	What	if	 she	fainted	now
before	she	could	even	make	it	out	the	door?
       On	 paper,	she	was	on	vacation,	visiting	a	friend	from	 work.	 She	had	always
wanted	to	 visit	 America.	 She	 would	 be	 here	for	 a	month	 to	 see	the	 sights—
Disneyland,	the	 beaches,	Yosemite.	On	 paper,	she	would	  relax,	enjoy	 herself,
and	return	to	her	life	in	Seoul,	her	job	as	a	designer	of	women’s	casual	clothes.
       The	 papers	did	not	 say	that	she	was	going	to	 find	 a	job	 here,	that	she	was
going	to	start	a	life,	that	 she	hoped	to	find	an	employer	to	sponsor	her,	and	if	she
could	not	do	that,	 she	would	stay	anyway—invisible,	  unofficial,	 undocumented.
The	papers	did	not	say	that	she	had	nothing	to	return	to,	nothing	 that	she	wanted
or	could	live	 with	 any	longer.	The	papers	did	not	say	that	she	did	not	 know	how
to	sit	 still	  anymore,	 that	she	 did	 not	 know	 how	 to	 stay	 in	 her	apartment	 by
herself,	that	 she	could	 not	bear	the	 gnawing	 familiarity	  of	 that	haunted	 place,
those	ruined	streets,	that	ruined	home.	The	papers	did	not	say	that	everything	 in
her	suitcases	was	now	all	 that	she	had.	Every	 single	one	of	 her	belongings	had
been	stuffed	compactly	inside	 of	them.	Selling	 and	giving	 away	most	of	 her	life
had	been	an	act	of	self-immolation,	 whittling	  herself	down	 enough	to	stay	alive
until	God	took	 her	home,	wherever	that	meant.
       A	 wave	of	 relief	 washed	over	her	as	she	stepped	outside	of	the	airport	into
the	blast	 of	  hot	 air	 and	 sunshine.	After	  loosening	 the	 hand-dyed	 silk	 scarf,
sienna-and-ocher-colored,	around	her	 neck,	she	reached	inside	 her	purse	 for	 a
napkin	to	wipe	her	forehead.
       She	 had	 already	 secured	a	 place	to	 stay—a	 small	  bedroom	 in	 a	 house

19
owned	by	an	ahjumma	who	lived	 by	herself	in	Koreatown.	 Her	friend	 Mrs.	Shin,
a	former	coworker	 in	Seoul,	had	recommended	the	place	after	she,	her	husband,
and	two	children	 had	immigrated	 and	stayed	there	for	a	few	 months	themselves
three	years	prior.
       On	 the	 edge	of	  the	sidewalk,	 Mina	  raised	her	 hand,	 hailing	 a	 cab.	The
driver,	 a	tall	  Sikh	 man,	 helped	her	 with	  her	luggage,	 heaving	 her	two	  large
suitcases	into	the	trunk.	She	realized	 that	she	had	never	seen	a	person	who	was
Sikh	before.	 Sweat	streamed	down	her	 face	and	neck	 inside	the	 sauna-like	car
despite	the	windows	being	open.	She	reached	forward,	showing	 him	the	address
she	had	written	in	 English	on	 a	slip	of	 lined	 paper.	The	shakiness	of	the	letters,
the	seismographic	script	revealed	to	her	how	nervous	she	had	been	writing	down
that	address,	as	if	signing	a	contract	for	the	rest	of	her	life.
       “First	  time?”	 he	asked,	his	 eyes	smiling	 in	 the	 rearview	 mirror.	 His	 dark
turban	skimmed	the	roof	of	the	car.
       “Ex-cuse	 me?”
       “First	 time?”
       “Oh.”	  She	scoured	her	mind	for	English	words	 like	a	dresser	with	too	many
drawers.
       “English?”
       “No.”	  She	shook	her	head.
       “Chinese?”
       “Korea.”
       The	 driver	 accelerated	 onto	the	 freeway,	 weaving	 in	 and	 out	of	 a	 brash
symphony	of	 traffic.	 A	horn	 section	of	big	 rigs.	Brakes	screeching.	A	 chorus	of
road	rage.	Synthesized	pop	music,	all	leg	 warmers	and	big	hair,	blasted	from	 an
open	window,	 while	 records	 scratched	into	 “The	 Batterram”	 one	lane	 over.	A
man	shouted,	“Go	fuck	yourself,”	 like	 cymbals	crashing.
       Damp	 clothes	clung	to	 her	body.	She	wiped	her	 face,	trying	 not	to	ruin	 her
makeup,	and	gripped	the	door	handle.
       As	 they	passed	pedestrians	in	the	streets	of	LA,	 Mina	 wondered	where	 the
Koreans	were.	Occasionally,	 another	Asian	face	 appeared	in	a	neighboring	 car.
But	here	in	this	cacophonous	world	of	 concrete,	metal,	and	glass,	in	this	smell	of
gasoline	and	rubber,	she	could	not	see	herself.	She	felt	 disembodied	in	this	 new
place,	where	she	did	not	 know	 the	language,	where	the	signs,	the	billboards	 all
blared	something	in	English,	gibberish.
       She	rummaged	inside	her	purse	for	the	photograph	that	she	had	always	kept
with	her,	 one	of	her,	her	husband	and	daughter,	both	now	 dead.	Hands	shaking,
she	rubbed	 the	 edges	of	 his	 face	 with	  her	 thumb	 and	 then	the	 face	 of	 her
daughter,	soft	and	serene	after	a	day	of	hiking	 in	 the	woods.	She	wanted	to	kiss

20
the	photograph.	She	thought	of	the	last	time	she	had	seen	her	daughter,	and	how
she	had	scolded	 her,	 for	 nothing,	 something	 so	stupid—dropping	  a	 dish	 and
chipping	it	on	the	ground.
       Had	 she	known	that	would	 be	their	 final	moment	 together,	would	 she	have
yelled?	No,	  she	would’ve	  held	 her.	 She	would’ve	  kissed	 her.	 She	would’ve
confessed	that	she	was	terrified	of	 everything	her	daughter	did,	 things	breaking,
objects	in	 disarray,	because	she	could	not	 afford	 to	lose	another	 thing	that	 she
loved	in	her	life.	 She	didn’t	have	the	strength	to	rebuild	herself.
       Then	it	 happened.	She	lost	everything	again.
       “Here	 we	are.”
       She	had	been	crying.	 In	the	rearview	 mirror,	 the	driver	 frowned,	furrowing
his	brow.
       He	 carried	 her	 suitcases	up	 the	concrete	 driveway,	 which	  sloped	gently
toward	the	entrance	of	 the	home.	 The	house	appeared	broken,	too,	with	 cracks
along	the	beige	stucco,	windows	held	together	with	tape.	Orange	and	lemon	trees
and	weeds	grew	wildly.	  Shingles	peeled	away	from	 the	 roof	or	 lay	 askew.	She
placed	the	 photograph	in	 her	 purse	and	 wiped	 the	tears	 away	from	  her	face,
carefully,	before	knocking	 on	the	door.
       The	 driver	 stood	beside	her,	waiting	 to	make	sure	someone	answered.	She
felt	 self-conscious	standing	 with	 this	 man,	not	 knowing	 exactly	 how	 to	 thank
him,	 because	his	 silence,	his	 wordlessness,	calmed	 her	 nerves.	She	 knocked
again.	The	door	opened	to	reveal	a	woman	in	her	fifties	 with	 a	short	brown	 bob,
gray	at	the	roots.	She	bowed	her	head	and	greeted	Mina	in	Korean.
       “Mrs.	 Lee?”
       “Yes.”	  Mina	turned	to	the	driver.	 “Thank	you.	 How	.	.	.	much?”
       “Oh,	 that’s	 okay.	Next	time.”	 He	handed	her	a	business	card.	“You	can	pay
me	next	time.”
       “No,	 no.”	 She	reached	into	her	purse.
       He	 lowered	the	bags	inside	the	house	and	walked	away,	but	at	the	bottom	of
the	driveway	he	stopped	and	said,	“Good	luck.	You’re	 going	to	be	okay.”
       She	waved	in	response,	speechless.
       “Here,	 let	me	take	your	bags,”	the	woman	said.	“You	 must	be	tired.”
       “No,	 I’ve	 got	it.”
       They	 each	took	one	of	the	heavy	suitcases	deeper	inside	the	home,	dark	and
cool	like	 a	cave.	A	single	 fan	rotated	in	 the	corner,	kicking	 up	the	 curtains	with
its	draft.	 The	house	had	dirty	  walls,	 no	artwork	 except	some	portraits	 of	 Jesus
and	a	ceramic	sculpture	of	Mary.
       “Let	 me	show	you	your	 room.”

21
       MINA	LAY	IN	HER	TWIN-SIZE	BED,	EAGER	TO	BE	DOING	something—shopping	for
food,	 finding	   work,	  calling	  Mrs.	  Shin—anything.	   But	  she	 didn’t	   have	 a
telephone	in	her	room	 yet.	And	 the	sprawling	 map	of	Los	 Angeles	that	she	had
brought,	geared	 toward	 tourists,	 confused	her—major	 attractions,	 such	 as	the
Hollywood	 Walk	  of	 Fame,	Beverly	 Hills,	  and	Disneyland,	 strung	 together	by
miles	and	miles	of	freeway.	She	stared	at	the	cottage	cheese	ceiling,	immobilized
by	the	 dread	of	 having	to	 decide	on	 what	to	 do	 next.	There	 seemed	to	be	too
much	information	 to	learn.
       She	closed	her	 eyes,	taking	deep	breaths.	She	didn’t	 want	to	 panic,	to	 feel
anything.	She	was	tired	of	feeling.
       She	asked	God	to	help	her,	to	tell	her	what	to	do.
       She	had	already	sold	 all	her	 belongings,	quit	her	 job	in	 Seoul.	Without	 her
husband	and	daughter,	there	was	 nothing	 left	 for	 her	there	in	 that	 country,	 on
those	streets,	in	narrow	 alleyways	echoing	 their	footsteps.	 What	else	could	 she
do	now	but	 surrender	to	her	fate,	 to	the	multitude	 of	 decisions	that	brought	 her
right	here	in	this	room	 alone	with	the	windows	 open,	feeling	damp	from	her	own
sweat	in	a	stranger’s	clean	sheets,	staring	at	a	stranger’s	ceiling?
       Knuckles	 tapped	on	her	bedroom	door.
       “Yes?”	  she	asked	in	Korean,	sitting	up,	careful	 not	to	crush	the	map	by	 her
side.
       “Hello.”	  An	 unfamiliar	 woman’s	voice,	 husky	yet	clear.	Mina	smoothed	her
hair	down	 with	 her	hands	and	opened	the	door,	where	a	woman,	 perhaps	a	few
years	older	than	her,	 with	 a	long	face,	 curly	 hair,	and	high	 cheekbones,	smiled
generously.
       “I	 live	 next	door.”	 She	pointed	down	the	hall.	“You	 just	came	today?”
       “Yes.”
       “You	  must	be	tired.”
       “Yes,	 very.”
       “I’m	  cooking	dinner.	 Do	you	want	to	join	 me?”
       “Oh,	 no.”	 Her	stomach	growled.	“That’s	 okay.”
       “Please	join	 me.	I	have	some	rice	and	soup.”
       Mina’s	  head	throbbed	between	her	brows	and	on	the	sides	of	her	skull.	She
wanted	to	jump	 back	into	 bed,	but	 she	knew	that	the	 food	would	 help	 her,	and
she	had	nothing	of	 her	 own	to	 eat.	She	didn’t	 know	 how	 to	get	 to	the	grocery
store	either.
       “I	 have	plenty	to	 share,”	the	woman	said.
       Mina	  followed	 the	 woman	 to	the	 galley	 kitchen	 where	in	 a	 small	dining
nook,	 she	had	 set	 out	 banchan—kimchi	  and	seasoned	spinach	 and	 soybean
sprouts—as	well	as	two	sets	of	paper	napkins,	chopsticks,	and	spoons.	Staring	at

22
the	objects	 neatly	 arranged,	Mina	 realized	 how	 little	 she	 possessed,	and	how
vulnerable,	how	 small	that	 made	her	feel.	She’d	 have	to	buy	 all	 those	things—
utensils,	bowls,	at	least	one	pot	and	pan.
       “Please	have	a	seat.”
       Sliding	  herself	onto	the	dining	 nook	 bench,	she	could	see	how	 the	kitchen
hadn’t	been	renovated	 or	repaired	in	 years.	The	 greasy	wallpaper,	 a	pattern	of
tiny	periwinkle	 flowers,	 peeled	off	 the	walls.	Several	of	 the	cabinet	doors	didn’t
close	completely,	or	hung	askew,	as	if	on	the	edge	of	falling.
       The	 woman	 said,	 “It’s	  very	  hot,”	 while	  placing	 two	 bowls	  of	 rice	 and
kimchi	 jjigae	 with	 tofu	 and	mushrooms	on	 the	table.	 With	 the	steam	from	 the
dish	rising	 in	front	 of	 her,	Mina	 realized	it	 had	been	close	to	twenty-four	 hours
since	her	 last	full	  meal.	 She	wanted	 to	 dive	 into	 the	 food	 but	waited	 out	 of
politeness	in	front	of	the	stranger.
       “Where	 are	 you	from?	 Please	go	ahead.”	The	woman	 gestured	toward	the
bowl	in	front	 of	Mina.
       Mina	 blew	 on	the	soup	before	tasting	 what	was	the	most	tremendous	thing
on	earth.	The	brininess	of	the	doenjang	on	her	tongue	replenished	her	body	while
springtime	bloomed	 like	 purple	wildflowers	  in	 her	head.	It	reminded	 her	of	 the
feeling	of	that	first	 bite	of	food	 after	losing	her	parents,	when	she	had	been	found
on	the	side	of	 a	dirt	 road	by	an	older	 man,	a	villager,	 who	 had	taken	her	to	 his
house	and	fed	her	a	single	meal	of	doenjang	jjigae	before	he	had	to	let	her	go	on
her	own.	 She	remembered	how	 she	had	cried	 for	 her	mother	 as	she	ate,	 tears
falling	 into	 the	soup,	 and	how	 the	man	 with	 half	 of	 his	teeth	 missing	tried	 to
comfort	her,	patting	 her	on	the	back.	Of	 course,	he	probably	wanted	to	help	her,
but	what	could	anyone	do	during	 a	war,	when	a	child	had	been	another	mouth	to
feed,	a	 liability,	  when	 children	 losing	 their	 parents	 or	parents	 watching	 their
children	blown	 to	bits	had	been	the	norm?
       “I’m	  from	 Seoul,”	Mina	 said.
       “Me,	 too.	Well,	 not	too	far	 from	there.”
       “Oh.”
       They	 ate	in	silence	for	the	rest	of	the	meal.	Outside,	crickets	sang.
       They	  were	  two	  women	 by	  themselves,	 living	   in	  this	 house	 without
husbands,	and	apparently	without	 children,	 too.	 Boarders.	Too	many	 questions
might	lead	to	too	much	information,	 too	much	in	common,	 too	much	pain.
       She	dreamed	of	 nothing	 that	night.	 A	 purple	 surrender,	the	best	sleep	she
had	had	in	months	without	pills,	 without	drinking,	 without	 even	prayer.
       In	 the	 morning,	 she	went	 to	 the	 bathroom	that	 she	now	 shared	with	  the
woman	down	 the	hall.	She	unpacked	her	 toiletry	 bag,	laying	 out	her	toothpaste
and	 soap	at	  a	 corner	 of	 the	  vanity	 without	   disturbing	 the	  other	 woman’s

23
belongings—a	folded	  pink	 washcloth,	 a	slimy	  bar	of	 soap,	 a	toothbrush	 in	 a
bright	green	plastic	 cup.	In	 the	mirror,	  her	black	 hair	fell	 to	 her	shoulders	in	 a
tangled	bird’s	 nest.	She	couldn’t	 find	 her	brush,	so	she	used	her	fingers	to	 rake
through	the	mess,	discarding	stray	hairs	in	the	wastebasket.
       After	  a	long	shower,	 she	lay	down	 in	bed	again,	clean	 and	relaxed,	on	the
edge	of	forgetting	the	world	 for	 a	few	more	hours.	A	 sweet	bird	chirped	close	to
her	window	while	 a	weed	whacker,	a	few	houses	down,	shredded	and	whirred.
       A	 knock	on	the	door	startled	her.	She	rose	to	answer	it.
       “Do	 you	 need	anything?”	the	landlady	 asked.	Her	face	was	soft	and	gentle,
with	a	hint	of	 pink	lipstick.
       “Oh.”	  Mina	propped	up	the	towel,	slipping	 from	 her	wet	hair.
       “I’m	  going	to	the	store.	Do	you	want	 to	get	some	groceries	with	me?”
       “Yes,	 yes.	Let	me	get	dressed.”	Despite	the	heat,	she	picked	out	a	long	pin-
striped	skirt,	 a	tan	blouse.	She	applied	 liquid	 eyeliner	 and	rose-colored	lipstick
carefully,	as	if	 painting	her	lips	like	 art.	Worried	 about	the	wad	of	cash	hidden	in
a	sock	under	the	mattress,	she	locked	the	door	with	a	padlock	behind	her.
       In	 the	landlady’s	 car	with	 the	windows	 down	and	the	fan	 vents	blasting	air
in	their	faces,	they	drove	for	 about	five	minutes	through	a	dusty	white	 light,	 eyes
squinting.	 The	neighborhood	 was	 mostly	 concrete	and	 treeless	except	for	  the
battered-looking	 palms	with	  thorny	 ribs,	 the	tired	 and	curled-leaf	  citrus	 trees,
and	hibiscus	plants,	with	 their	 platesize	blooms	and	ashy	jungle-colored	 foliage
in	the	dry	summer	heat.
       “Did	  your	friend	Mrs.	 Shin	tell	you	 about	rent?”	the	landlady	asked.
       “Yes,	 $200,	right?	I	 can	pay	you	when	we	get	home.”
       “Do	 you	know	 where	you’re	going	 to	work	yet?”
       “No,	  not	yet.”	 Mina	  scanned	the	storefronts,	the	 brightly	 colored	 signs	in
Korean—Drugstore,	Books,	 Piano	Lessons.	“My	 friend	 mentioned	some	people
she	knows	at	a	restaurant.	She	thought	I	could	wait	 tables	or	cook.	What	 do	you
do?”
       “I	 own	 a	clothing	store.	It’s	small,	 but	I	get	by.”
       “Clothing?	  What	kind?”
       “Women’s.”
       “I	 used	to	design	clothing.”
       “Oh,	 really?”
       “Yes,	 I	worked	 for	a	small	clothing	 company	in	Seoul.”
       “Hmm.”	  She	sped	up,	changing	lanes.	“I	wish	I	 could	hire	you	 to	help	me.	I
need	some	help.	But	business	has	been	pretty	bad.”
       “Oh.”
       “Yes,	 ever	 since	my	husband	left,	 I’ve	 been	struggling.”	  She	pulled	into	 a

24
large	 lot	  outside	 of	  a	 freestanding	  Korean	 supermarket	  buzzing	 with	   the
movements	of	 ordinary	 life,	 a	kaleidoscope	of	 social	 statuses	(shiny	Mercedes
Benzes,	beat-up	Buicks,	Ford	trucks),	mothers	with	 children	in	 tow	loading	 bags
of	groceries	into	their	cars,	working	 men	on	break,	smoking	cigarettes	in	silence.
       “Idiot,”	  the	landlady	 yelled	at	a	car	beating	her	to	a	spot.
       Once	 they	 had	 finally	  parked,	 Mina	 followed	  the	 landlady,	 who,	  in	 an
automatic	 gesture,	 grabbed	a	 shopping	  cart.	 The	 entire	 place	 had	 signs	 in
Korean,	 too,	 which	 comforted	  her.	 Everything	  was	Korean,	  the	brands,	 the
language	on	boxes	and	packaging.
       She	  picked	 out	  some	 produce	  for	  herself—a	 small	  watermelon,	  two
oranges,	spinach,	and	a	bag	of	onions—and	 went	down	 the	aisles	for	 staples—
rice,	  ramen,	  doenjang,	  and	   gochujang.	  Everything	   seemed	  surprisingly
affordable,	even	more	affordable	in	some	instances	than	in	Seoul.
       At	 the	 checkout,	Mina	 pulled	 $20	from	 her	 wallet	uncertainly,	 new	 to	the
foreign	 currency.	 The	 cashier—who	 looked	  in	 his	 midthirties,	  younger	 than
Mina,	with	 a	bit	 of	gray	at	the	temples	of	 his	thick	 black	hair—lowered	 his	eyes
as	if	to	protect	 her	from	any	 sense	of	scrutiny	that	might	 arouse	embarrassment.
His	 arms	were	 smooth	 and	 lean.	She	 became	aware	 of	 her	chest	 rising	 and
falling,	a	fire	 in	the	pit	of	 her	stomach.
       After	 the	bagger	had	loaded	their	cart,	Mina	 and	the	landlady	passed	a	large
cork	bulletin	  board	 by	the	 sliding	 doors.	 Among	 a	 riot	 of	 advertisements	for
various	home	and	car	repair	services,	banks	and	churches,	a	pink	flyer	spelled	in
large	Korean	letters:	help	wanted.
       She	looked	back	toward	 the	checkout	where	the	same	man	who	had	rung	up
her	groceries	met	her	eyes	this	time	 and	smiled.	 She	felt	his	gaze	on	 her	as	she
turned	to	leave.	She	thought	 of	the	 cold	hard	coins,	 the	change	he	had	dropped
into	her	 hand.	Was	it	 the	 very	edges	of	 his	 fingertips,	 a	flower	 unfurling,	  that
grazed	her	open	palm?	Or	had	she	imagined	that	detail,	that	feeling?
       Her	 heart	raced.	She	replayed	in	her	mind	the	unmistakable	curve	of	his	lip,
his	soft	brown	gaze,	unblinking.

25
Margot

Fall	2014

26
       AFTER	SHE	COLLECTED	THE	DEATH	CERTIFICATE	downtown,	Margot	drove
beneath	the	gunmetal	morning	 light	  and	weeping	 palm	trees	to	 the	brand-new
police	station.	 She	had	never	been	to	 a	police	 station	before,	 and	for	 whatever
reason	had	imagined	 them	 to	 be	 as	grubby	 as	her	 elementary	 school,	 which
smelled	of	chemical	cleaners,	chalk	dust,	and	rubber.	In	 the	waiting	 area,	people
of	 all	 ages	appeared	anxious	or	 tired.	 A	 grandfather,	 red	 polo	 shirt	 and	gold
bracelets,	crossed	his	 arms	 in	 front	  of	 his	 chest,	 eyes	downcast.	 A	  mother,
strands	rising	 from	 coppery	 hair	 tied	 in	 a	bun,	 observed	 two	 children	 thumb
wrestling.
       Bleary-eyed	 and	weak,	Margot	 had	not	 slept	the	past	two	 nights—haunted
by	visions	of	 her	mother,	that	 careful	bob	of	 hair,	that	 soft	extension	of	 her	one
arm	as	if	reaching	for	something,	 or	perhaps	just	an	attempt	to	break	her	fall,	the
instinct	to	create	some	final	grace,	some	final	comfort	for	 herself.
       After	  she	had	discovered	her	mother’s	 body,	 she	and	Miguel	 had	 found	a
hotel	 on	 the	 outskirts	 of	  Hollywood	  near	 Vermont	  Avenue—a	 nondescript,
three-story	 beige	structure—one	  of	 many	 hotels	 in	 the	 area	 of	 questionable
cleanliness	and	ornate	bedspreads	that	would	not	show	stains.
       She	 spent	most	of	 the	 next	day	 with	 the	 maroon-colored	curtains	 closed.
Her	chest	ached	like	 a	bowl	 made	of	stone,	a	mortar	 in	which	 the	pestle	of	 her
mind	ground	 down	 the	images	 of	 her	mother	 in	 that	living	  room,	 their	 living
room,	a	tableau	of	 ordinary	 life	 gone	awry,	 the	objects	that	 witnessed	her	final
breath—a	broken	  one-foot-tall	 figurine	  of	  the	 Virgin	  Mary,	 a	 bowl	  of	 nuts
knocked	over,	 tour	  brochures	for	  excursions	to	 national	 parks	 (Yellowstone,
Yosemite,	the	Grand	 Canyon)	on	the	 coffee	table.	The	 smell,	that	 putrid	 smell,
the	rot.
       When	 was	the	 last	time	 she	had	seen	her	mother?	Was	 it	 a	year	ago,	last
Christmas?	The	days	 spent	at	her	 mother’s	 store,	full	  of	 holiday	 string	 lights.
Margot	 hung	clothes	 on	 rounders	and	racks	 that	 glided	 into	 place	on	 casters,
swept	the	industrial	gray	carpet,	rang	up	and	bagged	purchases	at	the	counter,	or
helped	customers	choose	the	perfect	gifts—a	crimson	sweater	embroidered	with
bells,	a	pair	of	bootcut	jeans,	a	slinky	dress	for	New	Year’s	 Eve.
       Every	 night,	 except	on	Christmas	when	they’d	 treat	themselves	at	the	local
soondubu	restaurant,	Margot	  and	her	 mother	 had	 dinner	 at	home—the	 usual
stews,	a	variety	 of	 banchan,	 grilled	 mackerel	 or	 gulbi.	 They’d	 sit	 together	 in
silence	underneath	 the	 dust-filled	  overhead	light,	  eating	 from	 the	 jumble	  of
plates	and	 bowls	  accumulated	 over	 the	 years—romantic	  and	 rose-bordered,
pastel	blue-and-white-checkered,	  stamped	 with	  1970s	brown	  butterflies	  and
flowers.	Their	 apartment	was	a	testament	to	the	accretion	that	could	happen	in	a
family’s	 life—not	  through	intention	 but	 necessity.	Objects	were	acquired	while

27
on	sale	or	in	thrift	  stores	or	as	gifts,	like	 flotsam	 and	jetsam	as	if	they	 had	been
stranded	on	an	island.	Nothing	could	be	thrown	away	or	denied.
       But	 Margot	 would	 incinerate	 it	 all	 if	 she	could.	 She	decorated	her	life	  in
Seattle	with	 austerity	 and	 care,	leaning	 toward	 neutral	 colors	 and	 patternless
designs	perhaps	as	a	rebellion	 against	 her	mother,	 against	all	 that	 her	 mother
represented	to	her—poverty,	 tastelessness,	foreignness,	uncleanliness,	a	lack	of
control.
       “Are	  you	 going	 to	stay	 in	Seattle?”	 her	mother	 had	asked.	The	 tidy	 bob,
graying	at	the	temples,	had	been	tucked	behind	 her	pink	 ears,	revealing	the	two
gold	hoops	that	glinted	 like	 metal	lures.	Her	 eyes	remained	downcast	as	she	bit
the	mak	kimchi,	tart	and	scarlet,	that	she	always	made	at	home.
       “Yes,	  I	 like	 it	 there,”	 Margot	 said	 in	English.	 She	 sipped	the	 last	of	 the
miyeok	guk—anchovy-flavored	 and	lightly	 briny,	 beaded	with	sesame	oil—from
her	spoon.
       “But	 it	 rains	all	the	time.”
       “It’s	  not	 so	bad.	 I’m	 used	to	 it.”	 That	 was	a	 lie.	 She	hated	the	 rain.	She
missed	Los	Angeles	 but	 didn’t	 know	 how	 she’d	 live	 there.	She	already	 had	a
decent	job	in	 Seattle	and	could	 afford	 her	own	 apartment	in	 a	quiet	residential
neighborhood	that	smelled	year-round	of	 spruce	and	pine.	(The	only	needles	she
had	ever	found	 dropped	 from	 trees.)	In	 LA,	 she	would	 have	 to	move	 back	 in
with	her	mother	 at	least	temporarily.	 But	she	didn’t	 know	how	 to	explain	 this	to
her,	not	in	Korean,	not	in	English,	 not	in	any	language.
       “Do	  you	 have	a	boyfriend	  there?”	It	 was	 a	question	 that	her	 mother	had
asked	more	frequently	  than	Margot	 had	 liked.	 Sometimes	the	 inquiry	 seemed
casual,	hopeful;	her	 daughter	might	 meet	someone	responsible	and	kind,	 settle
down,	start	a	family.	 But	 other	times	 the	question	was	carved	by	a	fear	 that	her
daughter	would	do	 the	exact	opposite—drink	 late	into	 the	night,	meet	men	 who
would	 be	reckless	with	  her	feelings,	 her	future,	 her	 life,	 end	up	 pregnant	and
alone—which	in	 a	way	could’ve	happened	at	that	time.
       It	 had	been	a	month	since	Margot	had	begun	seeing	Jonathan,	a	much	older
coworker,	a	 job	 counselor	for	 people	with	 disabilities.	  The	first	 time	 they	 had
kissed,	their	mouths	touched	gently,	 narrow	columns	of	 sunlight	pressing	on	the
office	walls	 around	them.	The	wet	earth	from	his	afternoon	 cigar,	entangled	with
something	else,	a	clean	citrus—a	bright	 decay.	His	sonorous	vintage	radio	voice
saying	her	name:	Margot.
       But	 she	couldn’t	 tell	 her	 mother	about	any	 of	this.	 How	 could	her	 mother
understand	a	relationship	 that	 made	no	 sense	to	Margot	 nor	 her	 friends?	The
only	explanation	 was	one	that	she	could	never	articulate	out	 loud—that	 she	was
lonely	and	bored	and	she	found	him	 to	be	thrilling.	  He	was	a	coworker.	 He	was

28
over	twenty	years	older	than	her.	 He	was	blind.	He	 was	a	widower.	His	 life	 was
ripe	with	 so	much	 experience,	and	she	could	 get	lost	 in	 being	around	him.	 He
shrank	her.	He	whittled	her	down.	He	made	her	small,	so	small	that	she	and	what
she	wanted—a	more	creative	life,	a	more	individual	 sense	of	accomplishment,	of
meaning—could	evaporate,	disappear.
       But	  she	couldn’t	  explain	 this	 to	 her	 mother.	 Even	if	  she	spoke	 enough
Korean,	how	 would	 her	mother	 understand	this—hunger?	It	 wasn’t	 a	desire	 to
die,	but	a	need	to	hide,	to	delete	herself.	She	wanted	to	be	an	artist,	and	that	was
dangerous.	How	could	 she	afford	 the	time	 and	money	 to	 have	more	art	 in	 her
life?	How	 could	 she	ever	be	an	artist	if	 she	had	to	 worry	 about	not	only	 taking
care	of	herself	but	 also	her	mother	one	day?	All	  they	had	was	each	other	in	 the
end.	And	  since	 she	denied	 herself	 so	 much,	 why	  not	 dive	 into	 being	  with
Jonathan,	who	always	 told	 her	 what	a	 wonderful	 person	she	was,	 how	 smart,
how	 thoughtful,	 how	  kind?	 Jonathan	made	 her	 feel	 like	 the	 most	 important
person	in	 the	 world	  because	she	erased	herself	 with	  him.	 She	 listened.	She
supported.	She	approved.	She	was	like	the	mother	she	had	always	wanted.
       So	again,	she	lied.	“No,	 I	don’t	 have	a	boyfriend.	I’m	 too	busy	with	 work.”
       Her	 mother	stood	to	clear	 their	empty	bowls	 and	plates.	Not	a	grain	 of	rice
remained.
       “I	  wish	 you	  would	 live	 near	 me,”	 she	 said	softly,	  before	 turning	 away
toward	the	kitchen	 sink	where	 she	blasted	the	hot	water	to	 soak	the	empty	pots
and	pans.
       Margot	  experienced	a	sense	of	 lightness,	relief	 that	 topic	 of	 conversation
had	been	extinguished	for	now,	yet	 she	could	feel	the	burn	of	 regret	for	her	lies,
her	ingratitude	 toward	a	mother	 who	 had	sacrificed	so	 much	for	 their	 survival,
her	lack	 of	 commitment	 toward	learning	 Korean,	 even	if	 only	 to	 speak	to	 her
mother—rising,	 rising	 toward	 her	tongue	 and	eyes.	They	 were	tears,	ones	 she
had	hidden	from	her	mother.
       That	 was	almost	a	year	ago.	In	 the	end,	her	relationship	with	 Jonathan	was
only	 two	  months	 long,	 culminating	  in	  the	 most	 predictable	 and	 uneventful
heartbreak.	And	now	her	mother	was	dead.
       She	had	always	counted	on	one	more	hour,	one	more	day,	one	more	year	to
explain	herself	to	 her	mother,	to	tell	 her	that	she	loved	 her	more	than	anyone	in
the	world	 but	could	 never	live	 around	her,	never	 live	under	 the	same	roof	with
her	again.
       Now	 Margot	 would	 never	have	the	chance	to	help	her	 understand.	To	help
them	both	understand.
       “Margot?”	  Someone	was	calling	her	name.	In	the	waiting	 room,	 she	looked
up	at	Officer	  Choi	who	 had	been	at	 the	apartment	two	 days	ago	when	 Margot

29
had	found	her	mother’s	body.	He	was	young,	perhaps	in	his	late	twenties	or	early
thirties	 at	 most.	 His	 hair	  glistened	 like	 black	 enamel	 as	 if	 he	 had	 recently
showered	or	left	 the	 gym	 for	 work.	 But	 the	heavy	gun	 and	uniform	  made	her
nervous,	uptight.	She	couldn’t	 quite	 meet	his	eyes.	A	white	 mug	 steamed	in	his
hand.	“Would	you	 like	some	coffee	or	water?”
       “No,”	  she	said,	standing	to	follow	him.
       They	 passed	closed	doors	down	a	bright	long	 corridor	that	 smelled	of	floor
wax	to	reach	a	shared	office,	 which	 had	a	tall	 bookshelf	filled	  with	legal	 books
and	manuals.	An	open	file	 rested	on	the	desk	with	muted	 multicolored	 sheets	of
paper	and	a	lined	notepad.
       Margot	 seated	herself	across	from	him.	 Behind	his	head,	the	vertical	 blinds
were	half-closed	  and	 tilted	 in	  a	way	  so	that	  she	could	 still	  see	 his	 face—
diamond-shaped	with	 heavy	eyebrows	and	 high	 cheekbones.	She	realized	then
that	he	was	handsome,	which	made	her	even	more	anxious,	her	thoughts	pacing
like	an	animal	in	a	cage.
       “Do	 I	 know	you	from	 somewhere?”	Officer	 Choi	asked.
       “Not	 that	I	 know	of,”	 Margot	 said.	“I	haven’t	 lived	in	LA	 for	 years.”
       “Where’d	  you	go	to	high	school?”
       “Fairfax.”
       “Ah,	  that’s	it.”
       “Really?”	  He	 wasn’t	 familiar	 at	all.	 Actually,	  she	hardly	remembered	any
Korean	 kids	 there	 except	  herself.	 Most	  of	 her	 friends	  had	 been	 Mexican,
Salvadoran,	Filipino.
       “Yeah.	 I	think	 you	were	a	few	years	before	me.”	He	smiled.	“Small	 world.”
       Was	she	that	out	of	 it	in	 high	school?	She	had	been	too	busy	experimenting
with	drugs,	 a	half	tab	of	 acid	on	her	 tongue,	spending	her	free	time	 charcoaling
still	lifes	 of	fruit	 or	hiding	 in	 the	muted	red	glow	of	 a	darkroom.	She	was	artistic
and	antisocial.	He	had	probably	been	popular,	a	jock.
       Officer	  Choi	cleared	his	throat	and	leaned	forward,	 bracing	his	arms	on	the
desk.	“I’m	 sorry	about	your	mom.	I	 know	this	.	.	.	must	be	a	lot	right	 now	.	.	.”
       Tiny	  drops	of	 sweat	formed	 on	 her	face.	She	rubbed	 between	her	brows,
pressing	the	pain	that	throbbed	inside	her	head.	She	spotted	the	death	certificate
on	his	desk	and	remembered	the	black	box	ticked	beside	the	word	Accidental.
       Margot	 closed	her	eyes,	inhaling	 through	 her	mouth	as	if	 to	protect	herself
from	 the	memory	 of	 the	 scent	of	 her	mother’s	 body.	 The	 putrid	 smell	 of	 the
rotten	fruit—sweet,	 foul,	and	gaseous.	Acid	soured	her	mouth.	She	could	feel	his
gaze	lingering	 on	 her	 face.	 When	 she	glanced	 up	 at	him,	  his	eyes	 dropped,
scanning	his	notes.
       “Died	  last	Saturday	or	 Sunday.	Hematoma,”	he	 said,	scrunching	his	brow.

30
“Found	 on	Wednesday.	All	  her	possessions	seemed	to	be	intact,	 her	keys,	 her
Corolla.	Cash	in	her	purse.	No	forced	entry.	Shoes,	slippers	by	the	door.”
       The	 outstretched	arm.	The	feet	in	the	nude	socks.	How	tiny	 she	appeared	to
be	on	the	ground.
       A	 trip.	 A	 fall.	 A	 horrible	 way	 to	 die.	To	 have	survived	 all	 those	traumas,
those	hardships—a	war,	an	orphanage,	immigration,	 being	 a	single	mother	 in	a
foreign	country—only	  to	die	by	 something	as	mundane	as	a	slipper	or	a	shoe.	It
was	terrible.	It	was	all	so	very	terrible.
       “Are	 you	 sure	you	don’t	want	any	water?”	he	asked,	sitting	up	in	 his	chair.
       “No.	 No,	 that’s	okay.”
       “I	  know	that	this	 is	a	lot.	It’s	 a	lot	 to	process.”	His	 eyes	softened.	“It	 never
makes	sense	to	lose	people—especially	like	this.”
       There	 would	  be	no	 goodbye,	 no	 farewell.	 Her	 mother’s	  body	 was	in	  a
mortuary,	awaiting	 cremation.	There	 were	no	plans	for	 a	funeral.	 There	was	no
will.	  They	  never	 discussed	 her	  mother’s	  wishes	 after	  death.	 They	  rarely
discussed	her	mother’s	desires	at	all.	Margot	 only	 knew	that	her	mother	 wanted
Margot	to	be	closer	to	her.	I	wish	you	would	live	 near	me.
       There	 would	 only	 be	ash—silent	and	 heavy	in	 a	box.	What	 would	 she	do
with	her	mother	now?
       “Even	 though	this	 is	a	closed	case	.	.	.	I	wanted	to	make	sure	that	you	don’t
suspect	anything?	 That	 nothing	 suspicious	 was	 going	 on,	 or	 that	 there	 isn’t
something	you	want	to	tell	me	about.”
       Finding	 her	mother’s	 body	was	one	nightmare,	but	sitting	 in	this	 room	with
a	police	 officer	 was	 another.	What	 good	 could	 the	police	  do	for	 her	 and	her
mother	now?	 What	 good	had	 they	 ever	done?	There	 were	so	 many	 instances
growing	up	 when	she	and	her	mother	needed	help—when	they	had	been	robbed
at	gunpoint	once,	 or	when	a	 thief	 had	broken	into	 their	 apartment—but	no	one
ever	thought	 of	 calling	 the	police.	 No	 one	 ever	knew	 what	 they	 would	 do	or
whose	side	they	were	on,	if	 they	could	get	her	mother	 deported	somehow.	What
did	he	care?	Who	cared	if	he	was	Korean,	too,	or	went	to	her	high	school?
       “She	 went	 to	work.	 She	had	a	simple	 life.	 She	worked	 hard.	She	was	.	.	 .
boring.”
       Margot	  believed	 all	 these	statements	to	 be	true.	 But	 could	 she	convince
herself	that	she	knew	 her	mother?	Because	she	didn’t.	 Her	world	 was	designed
to	erase	her	mother.	 Her	 mother	was	 just	another	 nobody,	another	 casualty	of
this	city,	of	 this	country	that	lured	you	with	 a	scintillating	 lie.
       She	 had	been	an	inconvenience.	 A	 casualty	of	 more	important	 things.	 Of
more	important	people.
       “When	 had	you	spoken	to	her	last?”

31
       “A	  few	 weeks	ago?	Something	like	 that.”	 Business	was	slow	again	 today.
Even	all	the	 Korean	businesses	downtown	are	closing.	 “She	.	.	 .	she	mentioned
that	she	was	struggling	at	work.	 She	was	struggling	financially,	  but	none	of	that
is	new.”	Had	she	been	asking	for	help?	Had	she	needed	money?
       “And	  you	said	her	business	was	in	a	swap	meet	down	south.	Near	Bell.”
       “Huntington	  Park.”
       She	imagined	her	mother	 coming	home	that	night,	exhausted,	taking	off	 her
leather	ankle	boots.	 But	 why	 was	the	light	  switched	off?	 Was	 it	 earlier	in	 the
day?	Was	there	still	light	 outside	streaming	in	 through	the	window?	 In	Margot’s
mind,	her	mother	removed	her	shoes	and	tripped	on	the	slippers	she	always	kept
by	the	door.	There	were	always	two	pairs.	One	for	Margot.	 Or	maybe	her	mother
was	going	somewhere.	Maybe	 she	was	heading	out	 the	door	 and	realizing	 that
she	forgot	something,	turned	around	and	tripped	 in	the	 dark.	How	 terrible.	How
infuriating.	 She	wanted	to	scream,	Why	didn’t	  you	take	better	care	 of	yourself?
But	there	was	no	one	to	hear	her	now.
       “Did	  she	have	any	employees?”
       “No,	 just	her.”
       “Was	 she	friends	with	any	of	 the	neighboring	store	owners?”
       “Yes.	  Well,	 there’s	 this	 woman	 .	 .	.	 She	has	 a	children’s	  clothing	 store
across	the	aisle	from	my	mom.”
       His	 pen	scratched	on	the	pad.	“Did	they	get	along?	Did	your	 mom	get	along
with	everyone?”
       “I	  think	 so.	When	I	 was	growing	 up,	she	had	some	trouble	with	 being	one
of	the	few	 Korean	 store	owners	there.	She	thought	the	 customers	and	the	other
store	owners	might	not	like	her	since	her	Spanish	was	bad.”
       Margot	 remembered	how	her	mother	would	 yell,	Amiga,	amiga,	 to	potential
customers	as	they	 walked	  away	 on	 the	green-painted	 pathways	 between	the
stores.	Sometimes	they	would	 stop	and	wave	goodbye.	 Other	times	they	 would
simply	ignore	 her.	Occasionally	they	would	 pinch	their	 noses	around	the	Korean
food	that	she	brought	from	home.	Her	mother	had	the	profound	capacity	to	 brush
the	insults	off,	 but	Margot	 could	not.	They	would	 haunt	her	for	 her	life.	 She	had
loved	her	 mother	more	 than	anyone	but	 was	also	deeply	 ashamed	of	her—her
poverty,	her	foreignness,	her	language,	the	lack	of	agency	in	her	life.	 She	did	not
know	how	to	love	 anyone,	including	herself,	without	 shame.
       Tears	leaked	out	of	her	eyes.	She	grabbed	a	tissue	from	a	box	on	his	desk.
       “I	  wanted	you	to	know	 that	you	 can	call	me	if	 you	need	anything,”	 Officer
Choi	said	kindly.	 “You	 have	my	card?”
       “I	 just	 wish	I	knew	what	 to	do	with	her	now.	With	 her	ashes.”
       “Did	  she	go	to	church?”

32
       “Yes.”	  The	clay	Spanish	tile	 roof.	 The	tall	creamy	 white	building.	 The	bell
tower.
       “Could	  they	help	 you?	Could	 they	help	you	 figure	 out	what	 she	would’ve
liked?”
       “Yes,	 of	course.	I	don’t	 think	I’m	 quite	 ready	yet	for	that.”
       “Your	  dad?”	 He	furrowed	 his	 brow.	 “Is	 he	still	 around?	Can	 he	help	you
somehow?”
       The	words	 your	dad	bit	at	her	quick,	like	 an	eel	hiding	in	 seagrass.
       “I	  don’t	 .	.	 .	I	 didn’t	 know	 him.”	 She	had	 often	been	judged	 by	people	at
church,	at	school,	who	didn’t	 understand	how	she	could	survive	without	 a	father.
Don’t	 you	wonder	who	he	is?	Do	 you	think	 he’d	ever	come	back?	She	had	been
pitied,	 too.	 But	 most	 of	 all,	  she	had	 been	excluded,	 unable	 to	 relate	 to	 the
structure	of	family,	  both	in	 America	 and	in	 what	she	knew	of	 Korean	 life.	 The
message	had	 always	 been	 that	 women	 without	   men	 lacked	 shape,	women
without	men	 were	always	waiting	 for	 them	to	appear	like	 images	in	a	darkroom
bath.

33
       WHAT	WOULD	MARGOT	DO	WITH	ALL	THE	MUNDANE	objects	that	made	up	her
mother’s	 life?	  A	 tangle	 of	  rosaries	 in	 a	 dusty	 ceramic	  dish.	 Faded	school
portraits	of	Margot	 with	 her	gapped	teeth	and	the	horrible	bangs	that	her	mother
cut	straight	across.	An	old	single-CD	 boom	box	covered	in	a	fur	of	 dust.	A	dingy
white	 teddy	 bear,	glossy	 crooked	 nose,	gripping	  a	stuffed	 red	 satin	 heart.	A
framed	 photo	 of	  her	 and	 her	 mother	 on	 the	 day	 of	  Margot’s	  high	 school
graduation.	A	 box	of	 albums	that	had	gotten	so	old,	 most	of	 the	images	slipped
out,	no	longer	held	by	 the	ancient	adhesives.	Closets	and	drawers	full	of	clothes.
She	didn’t	 understand	 why	 her	mother	 needed	so	 many	sweaters	and	 pajama
pants	and	blankets.	It	was	Southern	California	after	all.
       It	 had	been	about	 a	week	since	her	mother	 had	died	 and	a	few	 days	since
discovering	her	mother’s	 body.	A	 part	of	her	 wanted	to	leave	everything	 and	go
back	to	Seattle,	let	the	landlord	deal	with	it.
       But	  then	 her	 own	 childhood	  possessions—her	old	 clothes,	 schoolwork,
photos,	 immunization	  records,	 notebooks—which	  she	 didn’t	  even	 have	 the
courage,	the	energy	to	 confront	 in	 the	other	 bedroom,	would	 be	abandoned	as
well.
       Eventually	  she’d	have	to	 go	through	 her	old	 room,	which	 her	 mother	had
used	mostly	for	storage,	keeping	the	twin-size	bed	for	 Margot’s	 visits	around	the
holidays.	As	 a	teenager,	Margot	would	 retreat	there	after	dinner,	disappear	with
a	notebook	 and	 pen,	 crank	 up	 her	moody	  music—PJ	 Harvey,	 Fiona	 Apple,
Portishead—to	drown	out	 the	sound	of	her	mother	watching	 the	Korean	channel
in	the	 living	 room.	 Sometimes	she’d	exit	 her	room	 and	catch	 a	glimpse	of	 her
mother	nodding	her	head	as	if	in	 conversation	with	the	screen.	It	must’ve	 been	a
relief	after	 a	long	day	in	 a	foreign	country	 to	be	immersed	in	 images	where	you
belonged	just	by	 sound	and	gesture	and	face.	How	 much	 language	itself	 was	a
home,	a	shelter,	as	well	 as	a	 way	of	 navigating	 the	larger	 world.	 And	 perhaps
that	was	why	 Margot	  never	put	 much	effort	  into	 learning	Korean.	 She	hadn’t
been	able	to	stand	being	under	the	same	roof	as	her	mom.
       But	  now	  Margot	  could	 see	 that,	  despite	 moving	  to	 Seattle,	 she	 was
everywhere	inside	of	 this	apartment.	It	 wasn’t	just	 her	mother’s	objects	covered
in	dust,	but	her	own—the	 photographs	of	Margot	 as	a	gap-toothed	little	 girl,	 the
certificates	of	 Margot’s	 grade-school	accomplishments	framed	 and	hung	on	the
walls,	which	 meant	nothing	to	 Margot	but	 clearly	were	a	source	of	 pride	for	 her
mother.
       It	  was	obvious	 now	 how	 much	 they	 depended	on	 each	other—for	 food,
shelter,	a	sense	of	identity	  in	this	 world—and	 how	 much	 Margot	 had	resented
that.	She	didn’t	 want	 to	 need	or	be	needed	by	 her.	Her	 mother	was	 too	heavy
with	history,	 with	 sadness,	unspoken	and	unexplained.	She	rarely	mentioned	her

34
childhood	 and	had	 only	 sometimes	vaguely	 referenced	the	 variety	 of	 jobs—a
cook,	 a	textile	  cutter,	 a	seamstress—that	she	 had	 been	forced	 to	 work	  as	a
teenager	to	survive.
       Margot	 knew	that	 at	some	point	her	mother	had	moved	from	 the	orphanage
into	 a	 boardinghouse	where	 she	 had	shared	 a	room	  with	 three	 other	 young
women,	 either	 orphans	or	 exiles,	 without	  families	 for	  shelter—a	particularly
thrilling	 time	when	 Mina	had	finally	 been	free	to	live	 her	own	life,	 free	from	 the
scrutiny	of	adults.
       Margot	  never	felt	 strong	or	 sturdy	 enough	for	 the	details	 of	 her	mother’s
truth.	She	 could	 barely	handle	 her	own.	 Growing	  up	American	  was	all	 about
erasing	the	past—lightly	acknowledging	 it	but	then	forgetting	 and	moving	on.
       But	  history	 always	 rose	 to	 the	surface.	 Among	  the	wreckage,	 the	 dead
floated	to	the	top.
       And	 here	now—the	rosaries,	the	dingy	white	teddy	 bear,	the	photo	albums.
       How	 could	 she	even	begin	 to	separate	her	belongings	 from	 her	mother’s?
Why	had	she	always	counted	on	 her	mother	to	be	here	so	that	Margot	 wouldn’t
have	to	make	any	decisions,	place	any	value	on	the	items	that	were	the	evidence
of	their	lives—not	 just	 of	their	 daily	 activities,	but	 of	what	they	 simply	 couldn’t
bear	to	get	rid	of,	what	they	simply	 couldn’t	 bear	to	lose?
       How	  much	  had	 her	 mother	 been	 carrying?	  How	 much	  had	 she	 been
carrying	for	them	both?
       And	 now	Margot	 would	have	to	bear	it	all	 by	herself.
       Down	  in	 the	 garage—cool	and	 dim	 and	 soundless	except	for	 the	 gentle
knocking	 of	pipes—Margot	 backed	 out	of	 the	spot	behind	 her	mother’s	 car.	A
tall	 figure	 appeared	in	 her	 rearview	 mirror.	 She	 gasped	and	slammed	 on	 the
brakes,	the	man	 scurrying	 out	 of	 the	 way.	 As	she	 pulled	 up	 beside	him,	 she
lowered	the	window	on	her	side.
       “Sorry,”	  she	said.	“You	came	out	of	nowhere.”
       “That’s	   okay.”	  He	 stood	 holding	  a	 broom	  and	 dustpan	 in	 hand.	 She
recognized	him	as	the	landlord	or	maybe	the	janitor—she	couldn’t	 tell	which	 one
—who	had	been	there	the	day	she	found	her	mother’s	body.	He	 was	wearing	the
same	gray	pullover	sweater,	pilling	 and	rubbed	thin	on	the	elbows.	Wrinkled	 and
tanned,	he	 had	 both	  the	 ease	and	 the	  awkwardness	of	  someone	 who	 had
immigrated	decades	ago—a	fluent	English	 speaker	who	had	probably	 grown	up
on	American	  pop	 culture	 but	 for	 whatever	 reason	never	 left	 Koreatown.	  He
seemed	a	bit	lost,	out	of	place.	Margot	could	certainly	relate.
       “Hey,	  I’m	  so	 sorry	 about	your	 mom,”	  he	 said	with	  a	slight	  New	 York
accent.	“She	was	 a	good	 tenant.	Always	  paid	rent	 on	time.”	  He	 coughed	and
turned	to	spit	on	the	ground.

35
       “Thank	  you,”	  Margot	 said.	 It	 struck	 her	 that	he	 might	 have	 known	 her
mother,	seen	her	more	than	Margot	 had	this	 past	year.	Taking	 a	deep	breath	to
steady	herself,	she	asked,	“Do	 you	 remember	the	last	time	 you	 saw	her?	What
she	seemed	like?”
       “Hmm.”	   He	paused.	“It’s	  hard	 to	 say.	She	dropped	 off	 her	 rent	check	 a
couple	days	early.	Last	Friday,	I	think?”
       “Was	 there—I	 don’t	 know—anything	  odd	going	 on?	Anything	 around	 the
apartment	or	.	.	.?”
       Scrunching	 his	brows,	he	ran	his	 fingers	through	wavy	 hair,	bright	 white	 at
the	temples.	“Well,	 last	weekend,	I	 might’ve	 heard	your	 mom	yelling,”	  he	said,
biting	his	 lower	 lip.	“At	  night.	 But	a	lot	 of	people	 fight.	 A	lot	 of	 families	 fight,
you	know.”
       “Yelling?”	   she	asked,	shocked.
       “I	  don’t	  know.	 Maybe	  it	 was	 someone	else	 in	 the	 building.	 A	  Korean
woman.”
       Heart	 pounding,	Margot	asked,	“Do	 you	remember	which	day	that	was?”
       “Not	 really.	 Saturday	or	Sunday.”	He	scratched	his	head,	avoiding	her	eyes.
“It’s	 probably	 a	mistake.	Who	 knows?	My	  apartment	isn’t	 directly	 below	 hers.
But	my	 window	  was	open,	 and	I	 thought	 I	 could	 hear	a	woman	 yelling.”	  He
shrugged.	“I	went	back	to	sleep.”
       “Was	 it	just	my	 mother	yelling?	Was	there	anyone	else	with	her?”
       He	 shook	his	head.	“I’m	 probably	mixed	up,	you	 know?	I	heard	Korean	and
there’s	not	a	lot	of	us	left	 in	the	building,	 so—I	figured	 it	was	your	 mother.	But	I
don’t	know.”
       “Did	  you	tell	anyone?	The	police?”
       “No,	  no,	I	 didn’t.	 Honestly,	 I	 didn’t	 even	remember	this	 until	 now.	 Not	 a
big	deal.	 It	 could’ve	 been	anyone.	I	 mean,	no	need	to	 get	them	 involved	 with
that.	People	fight.	People	get	mad.”
       “Was	 my	mother	usually	 noisy?”
       “No,	  no.	Very	 nice	lady.	 This	 has	always	been	a	safe	building.	 Very	 safe.
No	 problems.”	 He	 dug	 in	 his	 back	 pocket	 and	 produced	a	 Marlboro	  Lights
packet	half-wrapped	 in	plastic.	 Slipping	 a	 cigarette	behind	his	 ear,	he	said,	 “It
could	happen	to	anyone,	you	know?”
       Was	he	being	cagey	or	was	it	 just	her	imagination?	Margot	 asked,	“Are	you
new?”
       “Excuse	 me?”
       “I	 used	to	live	 here,”	she	said.	“I	don’t	 recognize	you.”
       “My	  wife	  owned	 this	building.	  She	died	 a	 few	 years	ago	and	 I’ve	 been
trying	 to	keep	it	 together	 since	then.	You	 have	 no	idea	how	 expensive	it	 is	 to

36
own	a	building	 these	days.	We	used	to	be	the	bad	guys,	you	know?	Now	it’s	like
we	can’t	even	make	a	decent	buck,	you	know,	with	 all	the	big	 companies	buying
everything.	The	 electric	bill	  is	so	expensive	these	days.	Then	 you	have	tenants
complaining	all	 the	time	 about	the	noise.	There’s	crime.	 Is	it	 my	fault?	 I	try	 my
best.	I	fix	  the	security	 door.	 The	next	 step	is	to	 buy	 a	camera,	but	 how	much
more	can	I	put	into	this	 building?	How	 much?	It’s	 never	good	enough.	Everyone
hates	the	landlord.”
       “Well,	  you	own	something,	right?”
       “What	 is	that	supposed	to	mean?”
       “At	   least	now	 that	 my	 mom’s	  dead	you	 can	 raise	the	 rent.”	  Her	 voice
cracked.	“Would	that	help	 pay	for	your	camera?”
       “What	  are	you	trying	 to	say?	I	 wasn’t	complaining	 about	your	 mom.	Your
mom	was	good.	She	was	quiet.	She	had	some	visitors	sometimes	.	.	.	A	man	used
to	come	 around	here.	 A	 boyfriend,	 I	 guess.	Rich	 guy.	 Who	 knows?	 She	had
friends.	She	was	fine.”
       “A	   boyfriend?”	   Margot’s	  mother	  had	  never	 mentioned	  or	  expressed
romantic	interest	 in	 anyone,	even	the	 occasional	shopkeeper	at	the	 swap	meet
who	courted	her.
       “Yeah,	  some	guy,	 I	 don’t	 know.	 I	 don’t	 get	 in	 anyone’s	business	except
when	they’re	parked	too	 close	to	the	driveway	 or	whatnot.	Some	man.	Nice	 car.
Mercedes.	I	always	wanted	a	car	like	that.”
       “Fuck,”	   she	said	 to	 herself.	 “Was	 it	 the	 person	 she	was	 yelling	 at	 that
night?”
       “I	 only	 heard	one	voice	that	night.	The	boyfriend,	 he	hasn’t	been	around	for
a	while.	 Months	maybe.	Who	 knows?	It	 was	in	 the	summer.	I	 don’t	 like	 to	get
involved.	 It’s	 a	safe	 building.	 No	 problems	 here.	I	 don’t	 like	 to	 get	involved,
okay?”
       “You	  could’ve	told	 the	police,”	Margot	 said.	“About	 the	yelling.”
       “What	  for?	 I	 was	 tired	 and	it	 could’ve	  been	anyone.	 I	 don’t	 need	them
snooping	around	here.	Do	 you?	Do	 you	think	 the	neighbors	like	 that?	What	 do
you	think	 the	police	are	going	to	 do	for	you?	 Do	you	think	 they	care	about	your
mother?	Do	you	know	 how	 many	die,	get	robbed,	get	killed	 in	 this	city?	 I	don’t
need	any	more	 problems	around	 here.	Young	 ladies	like	  you	should	 focus	 on
getting	married,	meeting	a	nice	guy,	having	a	family.”
       She	almost	told	 him	to	 go	to	hell	but	 instead	rolled	her	window	 up.	Yes,	he
was	right;	her	mother,	and	women	like	her,	were	an	inconvenience.
       But	 if	 she	allowed	 that	story	to	 continue	to	be	 told,	over	 and	over	again—
that	her	mother	was	a	nobody,	anonymous,	an	immigrant	who	couldn’t	 speak	the
language,	another	immigrant	who	worked	 a	job	that	no	one	else	wanted,	another

37
casualty	of	 more	 important	 things,	 a	casualty	 of	 more	 important	 people—she
would	be	letting	 them	win,	 wouldn’t	 she?	She	would	be	allowing	 them	to	sweep
her	mother	away	like	dirt	 and	dust.
       She	and	her	mother	deserved	better	than	this.	But	how	would	 she	figure	out
what	exactly	happened	to	her	mom?
       If	  only	 she	had	left	 Seattle	earlier,	 bought	 a	plane	 ticket,	 she	could	 have
prevented	her	mother’s	death,	or	at	least	found	 her	soon	after	dying,	 rather	than
allowing	 her	body	 to	remain	alone	 in	that	apartment.	 Why	didn’t	  she	try	to	 get
there	earlier?	Why	did	she	brush	off	 the	fact	that	something	was	weird	 when	her
mother	was	not	answering	the	phone?
       As	 soon	as	she	got	 back	home,	she’d	leave	 Officer	 Choi	 a	message	about
the	landlord	and	the	yelling	 from	 her	mother’s	 apartment,	the	possible	fight	 last
weekend.	She’d	scour	 through	 her	mother’s	 belongings.	 There	might	 be	some
clue	of	who	her	mother	 might’ve	 been	with	last	weekend.	Who	 visited	her?	And
who	was	this	boyfriend	 in	the	summer?	A	 boyfriend.	That	 couldn’t	 be	right.	Her
mother	had	a	single-minded	focus—work	and	their	 survival.
       But	 could	the	boyfriend	 have	returned?	Could	they	have	gotten	into	a	fight?
She’d	have	to	find	him	now.
       As	 the	metal	 gate	of	 the	garage	opened,	chain	squeaking	and	 rattling,	 she
realized	with	  an	 overwhelming,	 enveloping	  sadness	that	a	 small	 part	 of	 her
always	wanted	her	mother	 to	disappear.	Not	 to	die,	 but	to	 leave	her	alone.	She
had	imagined	 that	 kind	 of	  loneliness	as	 freedom,	 but	 instead,	here	 she	was,
treading	water,	without	answers,	without	 any	land	or	any	relief	in	 sight.

38
     Mina

Summer	1987

39
       ON	THE	LOCAL	BUS	THAT	GRUNTED	DOWN	THE	LONG	roads,	Mina	traveled	to
work	 among	a	mix	 of	 people,	 mostly	 Latino,	 Asian,	 Black,	 and	an	occasional
white	 person,	usually	 elderly.	  Mina	 had	 imagined	 America	 to	 be	 filled	  with
white	people	 as	it	was	 in	the	movies—all	  John	Wayne,	Clark	 Gable,	 and	Cary
Grant.	She	had	never	seen	such	a	hodgepodge	of	individuals	in	 one	space.	Who
knew	people	could	exist	in	 quite	this	 way,	and	could	this	project,	 America,	 even
last?
       Still	  unsure	of	 herself,	the	languages,	the	 gestures	around	her,	she	prayed
that	no	one	would	 speak	to	her.	 She	tried	not	 to	make	eye	contact	 but	watched
peripherally,	 observing.	A	 Latina	 mother	 escorted	her	two	 children,	 a	girl	  and
boy	of	 about	eight	or	 nine,	to	 school.	A	 Black	 mechanic,	jumpsuit	 greasy	from
work,	 rested	his	eyes,	his	 arms	folded	 into	his	 body	 like	 a	cocoon.	An	 elderly
woman	with	a	walker,	 who	always	wore	long	dresses	like	a	lady	going	to	church,
nodded	at	Mina.	Smiling	 softly,	Mina	 bowed	her	head	in	return.
       After	  the	 past	 two	  weeks	 of	 stocking	  shelves	at	 the	 supermarket,	 she
learned	that	she	preferred	 the	dry	 goods	aisles,	which	 were	 not	as	busy	 as	the
produce	section	where	customers	zigzagged	around	with	 carts,	asking	questions
on	where	to	find	this	or	that.
       The	 same	cashier	from	 that	first	 time	 she	had	shopped	at	the	supermarket
would	pass,	bowing	his	head,	face	square,	eyes	soft	and	brown.	In	the	aisles,	she
would	 see	him	 once	or	 twice	 per	 day.	 And	 something	 about	the	 fact	 that	he
would	 walk	 by,	 limbs	  lithe,	 acknowledging	 her	 without	  asking	for	  anything,
comforted	her,	put	her	at	ease,	unlike	the	customers	or	the	owner,	Mr.	Park,	who
always	wanted	to	chat.	Perhaps	she	simply	enjoyed	 looking	 at	him—handsome,
energetic—rushing	past,	but	always	stopping	briefly	  to	meet	her	eyes	and	smile.
She	still	didn’t	 know	his	name.
       On	 her	first	day	of	work,	 she	had	showed	up	in	a	white	short-sleeved	blouse
tucked	into	 a	 floral	 skirt	 of	 blues	 and	greens	and	 pinks	 that	reminded	 her	 of
Monet’s	 water	lilies,	 which	 seemed	inappropriate	for	 breaking	down	 boxes	and
stocking	 produce	and	 shelves	of	 dry	 goods	all	  day.	But	 she	 didn’t	 care.	 She
didn’t	 have	much	 to	wear	 and	wanted	to	 look	 good.	Meeting	 strangers	always
made	her	nervous.	Dressing	up	a	little	 and	putting	 on	some	makeup	boosted	the
scant	amount	of	confidence	she	had.
       After	  checking	 in	with	  one	of	 the	cashiers	her	 first	 day,	she	had	 met	the
owner,	Mr.	 Park,	who	was	only	a	few	 years	older	than	her	and	incandescent	like
a	man	who	enjoyed	the	finer	things	in	life—beach	 vacations,	imported	cars,	golf.
Accentuating	his	 tan,	he	wore	 a	polo	shirt	 of	 striped	pastel	colors,	 a	large	gold
watch.
       “You	  sure	you	can	do	this?”	 he	asked,	grinning	in	 a	condescending	way	as

40
if	 observing	a	small	 animal	 who	suddenly	 did	 something	human,	like	 a	mouse
walking	on	rear	legs.
       “Yes,	 I	think	 so,”	she	said.
       “A	  lot	of	lifting.”	  He	sucked	between	his	teeth.
       “I	 can	do	it,”	 she	said	with	resolve,	unable	to	hide	her	annoyance.
       She	spent	half	of	 her	first	 day	in	the	produce	section	alongside	a	man	in	his
early	thirties	 named	Hector.	 Wearing	an	old	 black	 T-shirt,	 sneakers,	and	jeans,
he	walked	with	 a	 small	limp,	 which	 didn’t	  slow	him	 down	 as	he	demonstrated
how	to	stack	the	fruit	so	that	they	wouldn’t	  fall.	He	carted	out	the	boxes	from	the
back,	and	 she	emptied	them	 out,	 apple	after	 apple,	 pear	after	 pear—a	simple
system	that	worked	despite	different	languages	and	backgrounds.
       At	   first,	  the	  job	 hadn’t	   seemed	so	  bad	 in	  its	  mindlessness,	 almost
meditative.	 But	 after	about	 four	 hours,	 exhausted	and	drinking	  a	7-Up	 in	 the
back	of	the	store,	sitting,	waiting	 for	 her	next	task,	she	felt	utterly	 dismantled,	as
if	she	had	been	one	of	 those	cardboard	boxes,	unloaded	and	broken	 down.	Her
white	blouse	had	become	dirty	 and	wrinkled.	 She	tried	not	to	 think	at	 all,	tilting
her	head	back	and	feeling	 the	 fizzy	 drink	 fill	  her	mouth.	 But	a	 part	of	 her,	no
matter	how	 hard	she	tried,	wanted	 to	cry.	 She	felt	 like	 an	idiot	 for	 abandoning
her	comfortable	  desk	job	  where	she	 spent	most	 of	  her	hours	 sketching	 and
designing—yes,	boring,	 but	at	 least	accessible—clothes.	She	missed	the	coffee
and	tea	breaks	and	lunches	with	her	coworkers.
       But	 it	was	only	 day	one.	She	had	to	keep	trying.	She	couldn’t	 go	back	now.
She	closed	her	eyes	and	prayed	silently,	Please,	God.	Please	help	me.	Please	let
me	know	that	it	will	 be	okay.	Please.
       After	   her	 ten-minute	 break,	 she	 stocked	 shelves	 with	  instant	 noodles,
ramen,	and	moved	on	to	 condiments,	soup	bases,	soy	sauce,	and	doenjang.	She
sweat	as	she	got	up	and	down	on	her	knees	to	replenish	the	bottom	shelves.	Her
skirt	became	filthy,	 streaked	with	dirt	 over	the	once-pretty	pastels.	She	felt	like	a
fool	now	 for	caring	 so	much	about	how	she	looked.	What	 did	it	 matter	when	all
she	saw	were	bottles	of	sauce,	vegetables?
       She	should	get	used	to	the	nothingness.	It	 was	so	much	better	than	being	at
home	in	 Seoul,	her	empty	 apartment,	all	 those	reminders	 of	the	 past.	She	was
free	now.	She	was	free.
       Mr.	 Park	mentioned	that	 eventually	she	could	move	to	the	cash	registers	up
front.	But	 she	preferred	the	lack	of	 social	interaction,	 the	invisibility	  of	working
in	the	back	or	 stocking	shelves.	In	 the	aisles,	she	could	hide,	blur	 into	a	wall	 of
doenjang.	She	could	 disappear	 in	 a	vacuum	 of	 condiments,	 bottles,	 and	jars.
Only	the	occasional	glance	of	the	handsome	Korean	man	mattered.	The	fact	that
he	appeared	younger	than	her,	in	a	way,	made	her	attraction	feel	safe.	It	was	silly

41
and	harmless.
       Yet	 she	also	knew	that	she	could	not	do	this	work	 forever.	How	 many	years
could	she	spend	lifting	  and	kneeling?	She	was	 only	forty-one,	  but	still	 she	felt
day	by	day	her	body	getting	older,	hurting	 microscopically	 more	and	more.
       Her	  body	 had	 changed	dramatically	  in	 her	 thirties	 from	  caring	 for	  her
daughter.	She	had	become	strong,	but	now	all	she	had	were	food	items	to	lift,	  to
raise.	Now	all	she	had	was	food.	If	she	thought	about	it	too	 much	while	working,
she	started	to	cry.	So	she	worked	harder	and	faster	to	kill	the	pain,	the	thoughts.
       Once,	 in	the	back	 of	the	store,	 she	had	been	lifting	 boxes	of	 soy	sauce	off
the	ground	 onto	a	 rolling	 cart.	 A	 door	 squeaked	open,	a	 slant	of	 light	 on	 the
floor.	 Adjusting	 his	 waistband,	Mr.	 Park	 emerged	from	 his	office	 with	  a	large
black	canvas	bag	in	hand.	The	wooden	grip	of	a	pistol	gleamed	at	his	belt.
       “Are	  you	sure	you	 can	do	this?”	 He	 winked	 almost	imperceptibly	 as	if	 he
had	dust	in	his	eye.
       “Yes,	 I’m	 fine.	Thank	 you.”	She	tried	not	to	look	 at	him.
       “How	  are	you	liking	 America?”
       “It’s	  okay.	I’m	 getting	by.”
       “Tough,	 ha?”	He	 dropped	the	bag	with	a	dull	 thud	by	his	feet.	Mina	 had	the
impression	that	it	was	filled	 with	cash.	He	was	on	his	way	to	the	bank.	The	gun.
       Bending	 his	 knees,	he	 loaded	one	 of	 her	boxes	 onto	 the	cart.	 “Well,	  no
matter	how	hard	it	is,	you	got	to	keep	going.	Keep	trying.”
       “Yeah.”
       “I	  worked	hard,	very	 hard.	And	now,	 I’m	 the	owner.	 I	own	 all	of	 this.”	 He
gestured	toward	the	 entire	building,	  the	entire	 universe	as	if	 it	 all	 belonged	to
him,	too.	He	grinned	so	widely	 she	could	see	the	gold	tooth	in	his	mouth.
       Aware	 of	the	gun	at	his	side,	she	stepped	back.	“That’s	nice.”
       “Yeah,	 I’ve	 been	here	for—what,	let	me	think	 .	.	.	1962.”
       “That’s	 a	long	time.”
       “Yeah,	 but	you	see	what	happens	when	you	work	hard?”
       “Sure,	 I	guess.”
       “It	  pays	off.”	  He	 lifted	 his	 brows	and	 bent	down	 to	 pick	 the	bag	 off	 the
ground.
       She	wanted	 to	say,	Really?	She	didn’t	 buy	 any	of	 that.	Not	 exactly.	It	 was
impossible	to	 believe	 in	a	 meritocracy	 when	everyone	 around	her,	the	 women
she	lived	with	 and	 the	people	she	worked	 with	 at	the	store,	could	 never	own	 a
supermarket	no	matter	how	 hard	they	worked.	 They’d	 be	lucky	 enough	to	 own
anything	ever.	Like	 her,	 they’d	 be	renting	rooms	 in	houses.	Everything	 in	 their
lives	would	  be	hand-me-downs.	Who	 did	 this	 smarmy	man	 think	 he	was?	He
probably	 thought	 she	was	 some	lonely	 woman	 he	 could	 tease	and	would	  be

42
grateful	for	his	attention,	any	attention.
       She	remembered	her	 husband	always	had	so	much	 faith	 in	 her.	He	would
never	speak	to	 anyone	this	 way.	He	 treated	her	 like	 an	equal.	 That	may	 have
been	unconventional,	but	that	was	why	she	loved	him	so	much.
       “Yes,	 work	 hard,	make	money.	All	goes	somewhere.	Not	a	waste	at	all.”
       “Okay,”	  she	said,	trying	not	 to	roll	 her	eyes.	Bending	her	knees,	she	picked
up	a	box	from	the	floor.	 He	grabbed	the	cart,	stabilizing	it.
       Using	 her	foot,	she	pulled	the	cart	back	from	 his	grip.	 “I	 got	it.”	 She	hauled
the	box	on	top	and	pushed	it	through	the	strip	door	out	into	 the	aisles,	relieved	to
get	away	from	him.

43
       MINA	DIDN’T	KNOW	THE	OTHER	RENTER’S	NAME,	BUT	that	didn’t	matter	much.
She	referred	to	 her	 as	female	friends	 do	 in	 Korea—unnie,	 “older	 sister.”	 The
other	renter	spoke	English	 well,	 with	 even	 a	bit	 of	a	Southern	 accent,	a	twang
that	sounded	out	of	the	Westerns	Mina’s	husband	had	watched.	Unnie	helped	her
set	up	her	first	 phone	 account	and	shared	all	 her	maps	and	bus	information	  so
that	Mina	could	get	around	town	more	easily.
       Unnie	 loved	Asian	pears	and	tangerines	so	Mina	would	carry	home	a	few	of
those,	as	well	as	something	 refreshing	and	cold,	 such	as	sikhye—a	 malted	rice
drink—which	  happened	to	 have	 been	her	 daughter’s	 favorite,	 too.	 On	 a	 hot
night,	Mina	 could	 drink	 a	gallon	of	 sikhye	 in	a	single	 sitting,	 but	she	restricted
herself	to	 a	glass	 after	dinner	 when	 she’d	rest	 sometimes	in	 the	dining	  nook,
damp	with	 sweat,	 listening	 to	the	 crickets	 through	 the	open	windows	  and	the
landlady	watching	the	Korean	news.
       Because	unnie	often	 worked	at	night,	 only	 if	their	 schedules	permitted,	she
and	Mina	 sat	down	 to	 eat	together,	once	 or	twice	 per	 week.	 They	would	 talk
about	 the	 day	 usually,	  or	 America	  in	 general,	 or	  unnie	 would	  translate	 a
document,	a	billing	 statement	for	her,	and	that	was	it.	 They	would	 never	go	into
each	other’s	rooms	where	unnie	read	large	English	novels	or	listened	to	classical
music	that,	 even	 muffled	 through	 her	 door,	 elevated	 the	entire	 house—notes
connected	and	smooth.
       One	 night	in	 late	July	about	 a	month	after	she	had	arrived	 in	Los	 Angeles,
Mina	 went	 into	 the	kitchen,	 which	 smelled	 of	 onions	 and	doenjang	 jjigae,	 to
prepare	something	simple	for	dinner,	 enough	to	fill	 her	stomach	so	she	could	go
back	to	bed	and	fall	  asleep	to	the	sound	of	 the	crickets	playing	 their	 wings.	 At
the	stove,	unnie	stirred	a	large	stainless	steel	pot.
       “How’s	  work?”	 she	asked.
       Mina	 opened	their	refrigerator.	 “Oh,	 it	 was	okay.	It’s	 not	so	bad—could	be
worse,	I	guess.	How’s	work	at	the	restaurant?”
       “Eh,	  everything’s	 the	same.”	 She	glanced	at	 the	egg	 in	Mina’s	  hand	and
smiled.	“I’m	 making	 some	more	jjigae.	Would	you	like	 some?”
       “That’s	 okay,	 you’ve	been	too	nice	to	me	already.”
       “Don’t	  worry	 about	it.	 You	look	 tired.	 Let’s	eat	together.”	 She	grabbed	the
egg	from	Mina’s	 hand	before	opening	the	fridge	and	placing	it	 back	in	its	carton.
“Just	have	a	seat.	I’ll	take	care	of	this.”
       Mina	 arranged	paper	napkins	on	the	vinyl	place	mats	along	with	 spoons	and
chopsticks.	Who	 did	this	 woman	remind	 her	of?	 Maybe	 one	of	the	 nuns	at	the
orphanage?	So	many	of	those	years,	and	the	people	within	 them,	had	all	 been	a
blur	 that	she	 had	blocked	 out	 of	 her	mind—first	  through	 work,	  then	through
marriage	and	family.

44
       After	 eating	together	for	 several	minutes	in	silence,	Mina	asked,	“How	 long
have	you	been	living	here?”
       “A	  couple	years.”
       “In	 America?”
       Unnie	 laughed.	 “No,	 just	 in	this	 house.	I’ve	 been	in	 America	 longer	 than
that.	I	used	to	live	in	Texas.	Do	you	know	 Texas?”
       “I’ve	  heard	of	it.	Yes.”
       Unnie	 wiped	her	mouth.	“Why	 did	 you	come	to	LA?”
       “My	  friend,	 a	coworker	 from	Seoul,	lives	 here	now.	I	 haven’t	 been	able	to
meet	up	with	her	yet.	She’s	always	 at	her	dry-cleaning	shop.”	 She	tried	to	smile.
“But	I’ll	  see	her	this	Sunday	at	church.	She’s	going	to	pick	me	up.”	The	prospect
of	reuniting	 soon	 with	 Mrs.	 Shin,	 whom	she	hadn’t	 seen	in	 years,	had	been	a
bright	spot	in	her	life.
       “I	 see.	That’s	good	you	have	a	church.”
       “What	 about	you?	Do	you	go	to	 church?”
       “No.”
       The	 silence	 engulfed	 them	again	 until	 the	 end	of	 their	 meal	 when	 Mina
stood	to	wash	the	dishes,	eager	to	surrender	to	her	bed.
       And	  as	 the	 weeks	 passed,	Mina	  could	 understand	 why	  unnie	 avoided
church.
       Although	 mostly	 well-meaning,	the	women	there	asked	Mina	about	whether
or	not	she	had	a	husband,	kids,	as	if	they	had	forgotten	 her	vague	response	from
the	week	 before.	She	wanted	 to	 lie	 and	say	 that	she	never	 had	either,	 just	 to
avoid	talking	  with	 them,	but	 the	women,	 without	 being	 explicit,	  looked	down
upon	those	who	couldn’t	 marry.	 How	 could	an	attractive	 woman	who	had	lived
all	her	life	 in	Korea,	a	country	 full	 of	Korean	 men,	not	meet	anyone?	Something
must	be	wrong	with	her.	But	what?
       One	Sunday,	Mina	 and	her	friend	Mrs.	Shin	sat	with	 the	other	women	in	the
dim	downstairs	 dining	 area	of	 the	church	 after	 service	for	 a	lunch	 of	 gimbap,
room-temperature	 japchae,	 and	 kimchi.	  After	   bearing	 their	  usual	 prodding
questions,	Mina	finally	  became	fed	up	with	 trying	 to	avoid	 the	stigma.	She	told
them	the	truth.
       “They’re	  dead,”	she	said.	She	said	it	again,	louder.	“They’re	dead.”
       The	women	 froze,	some	with	their	chopsticks	raised	midair.
       “All	  of	them?”	 the	nosiest	one	asked,	food	stuck	in	her	teeth.
       “Yes,	 all	 of	 them.”	 Mina	 paused.	“All	  two	hundred	 of	them.”	 She	smiled.
“An	 entire	cult.	They	were	all	mine.”
       The	women	 gasped.	Beside	her,	Mrs.	Shin	choked	on	a	laugh.	The	nosy	one
shot	her	a	dirty	 look	and	raised	her	eyebrows	 at	the	other	women,	who	 fidgeted

45
in	their	plastic	folding	 chairs.
       Mrs.	 Shin	 said,	“Her	 daughter	and	husband	are	dead.	Are	all	of	 you	happy
now?	Really?”
       After	  that	day,	 the	women	avoided	 her.	Perhaps	they	didn’t	  know	 how	to
identify	 with	 Mina,	 a	relatively	  young	woman	 without	 a	family,	 or	 they	 didn’t
like	 that	joke	 about	the	cult.	 She	at	least	 still	 had	Mrs.	 Shin,	who	 had	been	in
America	for	 a	few	years	already.	She	was	always	busy	with	work,	a	dry-cleaning
business	on	 Vermont	  Avenue,	 but	 after	  service,	 they	 would	  have	 lunch	 at
church,	or	she	would	 invite	 Mina	 over	 to	her	house	where	 Mina	 would	 admire
her	family,	 her	life.	  She	lived	in	 a	large	 two-bedroom	 apartment	in	Koreatown
with	a	funny	and	kind	 husband	and	two	awkward	teenage	kids.
       When	 they	sat	together	eating	lunch	on	Sundays,	Mina	wanted	to	tell	her	all
about	work	but	 didn’t.	 She	wanted	to	tell	 her	how	 tired	she	was,	how	she	hated
the	boss,	but	she	didn’t.	Instead,	they	ate	mostly	 in	silence.	 She	asked	questions
about	the	kids.	But	they	always	avoided	talking	 about	Mina’s	life.
       Mrs.	 Shin	 hadn’t	known	 Mina’s	 husband	and	daughter	well,	 but	enough	to
imagine	what	it	 had	been	like	 to	lose	them.	Yet	 no	one	knew	 how	to	 talk	about
death.	As	a	culture	 and	country,	 they	had	so	many	tragedies	from	 wars	 already
that	they	persisted	in	a	kind	of	 silent	pragmatism	that	reflected	both	gratitude	 for
what	 they	had	 now	 and	 an	unquenchable,	 persistent	sadness	that	 manifested
itself	 differently	  in	 each	person.	Some	 had	become	 drunks,	surviving	  off	 the
tenacity	 of	 their	 families	  in	 denial.	 Some	 had	 become	obsessed	with	  status
symbols—luxury	 cars,	designer	clothes,	and	watches.	Others	worked	 diligently,
a	form	of	numbing	 the	pain	that	at	least	had	some	kind	of	productive	 outcome—
money	in	the	bank,	a	roof	over	their	heads,	food	on	the	table.
       Mrs.	 Shin	 tried	 to	fill	  the	silence	 between	them	with	  gossip	about	people
who	lived	in	 her	building,	about	women	at	church.	She	told	Mina	 about	a	woman
in	her	forties	who	cheated	on	her	husband	with	a	younger	man.
       “She’s	 nuts,”	Mrs.	 Shin	said.	“He’s,	 what,	ten	years	younger	than	her?”
       “Ten	 years?”
       “And	  she’s	saving	up	money	to	run	away	with	him.”
       They	 laughed.
       “She’s	  crazy,”	 Mrs.	 Shin	 continued.	 “She’ll	  end	 up	 pregnant.	And	  then
what?”

46
Margot

Fall	2014

47
       THE	FOLLOWING	EVENING,	MARGOT	HAD	RETURNED	to	the	apartment	alone	after
touring	apartments	for	 Miguel,	 close	enough	 to	his	new	 job	 in	Burbank,	 which
he’d	begin	next	Monday.	He	had	gone	out	for	 a	drink	with	 a	man	that	he	had	met
online	after	 Margot	assured	him	 she	would	be	okay	 by	herself.	 He	promised	 to
meet	her	back	at	the	hotel	 tonight,	the	 same	hotel	where	they	had	been	at	since
finding	her	mother.
       They	 considered	moving	to	Margot’s	 mother’s	 apartment	in	the	next	couple
days	to	save	money.	 Once	Miguel	 found	 a	permanent	place	this	 week,	Margot
would	then	stay	at	her	mother’s	alone	until	she	could	finish	 cleaning	and	packing
or	donating	their	 belongings.	Her	 mother	had	already	covered	the	month’s	 rent,
and	Margot’s	supervisor	in	Seattle	had	approved	extended	time	off—unpaid.
       According	  to	the	landlord,	 her	mother	 had	a	boyfriend,	 a	man	who	 visited
her	often	 during	 the	summer.	Could	 he	 be	the	same	person	that	 she	had	been
yelling	 at	last	weekend,	the	same	weekend	that	she	had	died?	Although	 Margot
couldn’t	quite	 trust	the	landlord,	he	had	no	reason	to	lie.	She	needed	to	figure	out
who	her	mother	 was	with,	 if	 anyone,	that	 night.	Officer	  Choi	had	 yet	to	 return
her	phone	call,	but	she	didn’t	 have	any	more	 time.	She	couldn’t	 wait	 for	him	 or
anyone	anymore.	Her	mother’s	body	was	proof	that	sometimes	there	was	not	one
more	hour,	one	more	day,	one	more	week	in	this	life.	Sometimes,	all	you	 had	left
was	right	now—the	seconds	ticking	away.
       Margot	  switched	  on	 the	 overhead	 light	  inside	  her	 mother’s	  bedroom.
Despite	the	sharpness	of	the	evening	 air,	she	had	left	 all	 the	windows	 open	for
the	past	four	 days	 to	 release	the	smell	 of	 death	that	 lingered	 in	 her	mother’s
apartment,	their	apartment,	the	one	they	had	shared	for	as	long	 as	Margot	could
remember.	She	paused	to	parse	through	what	she	could	sense	outside—a	rich	red
pork	 pozole	 next	 door,	 a	 skateboard	rattling	  over	 cracks	 in	 the	 sidewalk,	 a
woman	speaking	rapidly	 on	the	phone,	the	exhaust	from	 a	choking	 diesel	car—
both	familiar	 and	 strange.	This	neighborhood	 had	both	changed	and	stayed	the
same.
       Many	  of	 the	Koreans	 that	she	 had	known	 as	a	 child	 had	moved	 out	 for
homes	in	  the	 suburbs	 once	they	  had	 saved	enough,	 and	 now	  most	 of	 the
neighbors	were	Latino.	 Yet	 they	 all	 lived	 here	to	 survive,	while	  longing	 to	be
somewhere	else.	How	did	the	world	 become	a	place	where	jobs	and	wealth	were
so	concentrated?	Why	 did	borders	 define	opportunity?	 Was	 it	that	 bad	for	 her
mother	in	Korea?	Was	she	more	trapped	there	than	here?
       Parting	  the	 white	 curtains,	  Margot	 looked	  down	 at	 the	 alley	  with	  the
garbage	bins	where	the	neighborhood	kids	played	soccer	and	handball	up	against
the	side	of	 the	 building	  after	school	 and	at	 night.	 She	then	 looked	 inside	the
closet	where	 her	mother’s	  clothes	hung	 neatly,	 unlike	 Margot’s	  own	 back	in

48
Seattle	where	every	sweater	or	pair	 of	 pants	seemed	to	already	be	on	the	floor.
Her	mother	had	accumulated	and	saved	so	much	through	 the	years—nothing	 of
real	value	but	had	still	 meant	something	 to	her—a	dated	leather	jacket	 from	the
’80s,	a	cobalt	 blue	dress	with	 large	shoulder	pads,	a	simple	 black	 sheath,	some
knee-length	skirts	from	 Korea	 that	hadn’t	 fit	 her	for	 years.	Margot	dug	 through
the	pockets	 of	 the	pants	and	 jackets,	finding	  coins,	 faded	receipts,	 a	lipstick,
small	bills.
       A	 pair	of	 black	tennis	shoes,	covered	in	a	fine	 rust-colored	dust,	smelled	of
mineral	and	sage.
       Margot	  was	again	 reminded	of	 that	 long	 drive	 to	Vegas	 once	years	ago,
more	vividly	   this	 time.	 How	 the	 hot	 air	 whipped	 her	 skin	 through	 the	open
windows,	caking	 her	face	and	arms	 with	 a	fine	powder	 like	 konggaru	on	tteok,
which	 she	 could	 taste	 inside	 her	 mouth,	 dry	  and	 grainy.	 Big	  white	 clouds
hovered	above	as	the	world—clay	and	ocher,	brittle	and	burnt—streaked	by.	 Her
mother’s	eyes,	hard	 as	stones,	focused	on	 the	road.	 Sweat	streamed	down	 the
sides	of	her	face	and	neck.
       “Where	 are	we	going?”	Margot	 had	asked	from	the	back.
       “Somewhere	 very	special,”	her	mother	said.
       “Will	  there	be	ice	cream?”
       “I	 hope	so,”	she	said,	eyes	softening.	“Yes.”
       “Why	  are	we	driving	  so	far	for	 ice	cream?”	 Margot	 asked	in	English.	 She
laughed.
       “It’s	  not	just	for	ice	cream,”	 her	mother	said	in	Korean.
       “It	 must	be	the	best	ice	cream	in	the	world.	The	biggest	ice	cream.”
       Her	 mother	 adjusted	her	 collar,	 cleared	her	 throat.	 She	fidgeted	 with	 the
radio	dial	 for	 a	minute,	 frustrated	with	 the	 shrill	 sounds,	the	waves	of	 static,	a
news	reporter’s	voice,	snippets	of	classical	music.
       “If	  you	 behave	well,	 I’ll	   buy	you	 ice	 cream.	Any	 flavor	  you	 want.”	 Her
mother	glanced	at	her	in	 the	rearview	mirror.	 A	 car	behind	them	 honked.	As	he
passed	on	the	left,	the	driver	yelled,	“Go	back	to	Chinatown,	 bitch.”
       Margot	 flinched	 as	if	 a	stranger	had	thrown	 a	rock	 at	them.	She	could	 see
her	mother’s	 hands	gripping	 the	wheel,	 knuckles	whitening.	 But	 she	drove	 on,
still	dipping	 below	the	speed	limit.
       “Do	 you	 want	some	water?”	her	mother	 asked	an	hour	or	two	later.	Margot
had	fallen	asleep.
       She	was	thirsty,	but	 she	responded,	“No.	I’m	fine.”
       “We	  might	.	 .	.	we	 might	 meet	someone	special	in	Las	 Vegas.”	Her	 voice
cracked.	“Someone	I	haven’t	seen	in	a	long	while.”
       Her	 mother	was	trying	 hard	not	to	cry.	 Daytime	had	turned	to	 dusk,	a	wash

49
of	hot-pink	 streaks	and	a	purple	horizon.
       “I	  wonder	if	  this	is	 the	right	 thing	 to	do—bringing	  you	 here,	on	this	 trip.
But	I	had	no	one	to	 watch	you.”	 It	was	as	if	 her	mother	was	talking	 to	herself	or
another	adult,	rather	than	attempting	to	reason	with	 a	six-year-old,	but	 only	later
did	 Margot	 realize	 that	 as	 much	 as	she	resented	 her	 mother	 for	 leaning	 on
Margot,	her	mother	was	deeply	and	unimaginably	alone.
       The	 only	people	who	 did	not	 judge	her	were	God	 and	perhaps	Margot	as	a
child.
       As	 they	approached	the	city	limits,	 they	stopped	at	a	fast-food	restaurant	for
dinner	where	they	 devoured	cheeseburgers	and	fries,	much	to	Margot’s	 delight.
When	they	reached	the	hotel,	her	mother	collapsed	on	the	 bed	and	fell	asleep.	It
was	Margot’s	 first	time	 in	 a	hotel,	and	she	stayed	awake	all	night	 as	if	to	 guard
her	mother,	taking	in	the	new	sights	and	smells.	The	sheets	had	a	chemical	floral
scent	that	was	foreign	 to	 her.	The	 carpet	was	extra	 nubby	under	 her	toes.	The
television	appeared	huge	compared	to	the	one	they	had	at	home.
       After	  waiting	 for	an	entire	 day	in	their	 hotel	room,	 her	mother	had	seemed
so	defeated,	 deflated	 the	next	 night.	  Her	 face	 and	throat	  were	flushed	  with
humiliation.	 They	 ordered	Chinese	food	 and	ate	greasy	noodles	 and	fried	 rice,
barbecue	pork	out	of	the	takeout	boxes	in	silence.	Afterward,	 her	mother	 left	the
bathroom	door	 ajar	 and	ran	 the	 hottest	water	 in	 the	 tub	 that	she	 could	 bear,
steaming	all	the	windows,	mirrors,	 glass.	She	dropped	her	clothes	onto	the	floor,
submerged	herself	in	the	tub,	her	bob	tied	into	a	tiny	 tail,	and	sweat,	glowing	 red
as	if	 preparing	herself	 for	 a	scrub.	She	lay	 back,	 tilted	 her	head,	exposing	 her
neck,	and	closed	her	eyes.
       Margot	 had	been	too	frightened	to	approach	her	mother.	She	yearned	to	ask
for	 whom	 they	 were	waiting,	  why	 she	 was	so	 sad,	if	 she	 wanted	Margot	  to
scratch	her	back.	Margot	 wondered	 what	she	had	 done	wrong,	 and	where	was
the	ice	cream	her	mother	had	promised	her?
       Instead	she	perched	on	the	edge	of	 the	couch	and	watched	a	PBS	 show	on
painting,	a	bearded	man	with	 curly	 brown	 hair,	dome-shaped,	swiftly	 conjuring
the	curves	and	shadows	of	a	dramatic	alpine	mountain,	 sublime	and	white.	How
foreign,	how	 odd	that	this	 landscape,	so	unlike	the	 one	outside	their	hotel—dry
and	arid,	flame-like	 on	the	flesh	during	the	day	while	 sizzling	with	 electric	 lights
at	night—could	 exist	 on	one	planet.	 She	fell	 asleep	on	the	couch,	 dreaming	of
the	snow,	which	 she	had	never	experienced	in	 real	life,	 splashing	her	face	with
the	icy	water	in	the	clear	lake	that	reflected	the	peaks	above.
       The	 next	 day,	 her	 mother,	 who	 wore	 sunglasses	because	her	eyes	were
swollen	from	 crying,	 packed	up	the	car	and	drove	 Margot	to	 a	Baskin-Robbins,
the	first	time	 she	had	ever	been	to	an	ice-cream	shop.	After	perusing	 the	marvel

50
of	creamy	 colors—chocolates	 and	pecans	and	swirls	 of	 caramel—she	selected
one	scoop	of	 cookies	 and	cream	 that	dripped	 down	 the	 cone	onto	 her	hands,
while	 her	mother	 ordered	the	 strawberry	 flavor	 for	 herself.	She	 had	smiled	 at
Margot’s	delight.
       Now,	 with	 her	mother’s	 dust-covered	tennis	shoes	in	hand,	Margot	went	 to
the	living	  room	 and	picked	 up	 one	of	 the	travel	 brochures	 with	 a	 photo	of	 a
breathtaking	 dusky	  Grand	  Canyon—all	  rusty	  striated	  peaks	 and	 dramatic
shadows—that	remained	on	the	coffee	table.	The	 dust	on	the	shoes	matched	the
specific	color	 of	 that	landscape.	Could	 she	have	worn	 these	same	shoes	at	the
Grand	Canyon	 or	a	 national	park?	 But	 her	mother	 never	would	 have	 gone	by
herself.
       Margot	 would	 leave	 a	voice	mail	 for	 the	tour	 company.	She	didn’t	 expect
anyone	to	pick	up	on	a	Sunday	night.
       But	 a	young	woman	answered.	Her	voice	was	tired	and	gravelly.
       “My	  mom	 might	have	contacted	you	 about	a	tour?”	 Margot	 asked.	“And	 I
wanted	to	see	if	you	 had	any	information	 on	whether	 she	was	with	anyone	or,	 I
don’t	know,	 if	she	went	to	your	office?”
       “Uh,	 I’m	 not	sure	we	can	do	that,”	the	woman	said,	clearing	her	throat.
       “Could	 you	 please	look	into	your	records?	Her	name	was	Mina,	Mina	 Lee.”
Margot	closed	 her	eyes.	“She’s	dead	now.”	  Her	voice	 cracked.	“And	 I	 want	 to
know—”
       “Oh,	  God,	I’m	  so	sorry	.	 .	.	 Hold	 on.”	 The	 woman	put	 her	on	 hold	for	 a
minute	before	coming	back	on	the	line.
       “So,	 it	 looks	 like	 she	took	 a	 tour	with	  us	on	 September	12	to	 the	Grand
Canyon.”
       Shocked,	Margot	 asked,	“How	many	days	was	she	there?”
       “Three	 days	and	two	nights.”
       “Was	 she	.	.	.	alone?”
       “No.	 She	had	a	guest.”
       “A	  guest?”
       “We	 don’t	 have	a	registered	name.	She	booked	a	double	occupancy	room.”
       “Is	 there	any	way—I	 don’t	 know—is	 there	any	way	 I	could	 talk	to	 the	tour
guide	about	this?	Maybe	someone	had	seen	her?”
       “How	  about	I	take	your	number?	Is	it	okay	if	 he	calls	you	back?”
       Her	 mother	 must	have	 worn	these	black	 shoes	at	the	 Grand	Canyon.	 But
with	 whom	 had	her	 mother	been	 traveling?	Was	 it	 a	man	 or	 a	woman?	Why
hadn’t	her	mother	 told	her?	Had	 she	gotten	into	a	fight	 of	 some	sort	before	 she
died?	Why	had	she	been	yelling?
       Margot	 felt	 abandoned	and	deceived	by	her	mother	like	never	before.	What

51
else	was	her	mother	hiding?	On	her	hands	and	knees,	Margot	searched	under	her
mother’s	bed,	pushing	 aside	shoeboxes	full	 of	 buttons	and	spools	of	 thread.	In
the	corner,	something	shiny	flashed.	She	pulled	the	wheeled	mattress	away	from
the	wall,	 climbed	 on	 top,	and	recognized	 a	condom	 wrapper.	She	jumped	 and
shoved	the	bed	back.
       Sitting	 on	the	floor,	 she	buried	her	head	in	her	arms	crossed	over	her	knees.
With	an	urge	to	scour,	to	purge	everything,	 she	stood	up,	wanting	to	scream.	The
tacky	teddy	bear,	white	 but	dingy	 with	 age,	paws	sewn	into	holding	 a	red	heart,
rested	on	her	mother’s	bed.	She	could	tear	his	head	off.
       Gathering	  her	 resolve,	 she	continued	 to	 search	 the	 apartment.	Inside	  a
slouchy	 brown	 leather	bag,	 Margot	 found	 sticks	 of	 gum,	 church	 handouts,	a
small	lime-green	notebook	 with	some	addresses	written	inside	of	 it.	Most	 of	 the
names	were	written	in	Korean	 and	it	would	 take	too	much	effort	 to	read	through
and	try	to	recognize	any	of	them.
       She	 entered	the	second	bedroom,	once	 hers,	where	her	 mother	kept	 bills,
paperwork,	 store	receipts,	 and	records.	 Margot’s	 old	  clothes	remained	 in	 the
single	dresser	up	 against	 the	wall.	  She	needed	paper	 and	a	 pen.	She	 needed
somehow	to	organize	now.
       In	 her	worn	 desk	that	she	had	purchased	in	high	school	at	a	thrift	 store,	she
found	a	 plastic	tray	 full	  of	pencils,	 color	 and	charcoal,	 fancy	 German	erasers,
sharpeners	that	Margot	had	collected	and	saved,	unused,	for	whatever	reason.	It
was	as	if	she	had	accumulated	all	these	supplies	for	the	sake	of	knowing	that	she
would	 one	day	use	them	 rather	than	enjoy	 them	at	 the	time.	 But	 what	kind	 of
future	had	 she	been	saving	for—the	 future	 that	she	was	 living	 in	 now	 without
any	art?	She	had	so	many	 ideas	that	she	had	 never	pursued,	so	many	 sketches
she	had	made	but	abandoned	throughout	the	years.	She	realized	 the	part	of	 her
that	 dreamed	had	 died	 somewhere,	 too,	 snuffed	 by	  a	 need	for	  practicality,
stability,	 a	sense	of	value	 in	 this	world,	 which	 always	 seemed	to	measure	you
with	fixed	 numbers	that	had	been	created	for	whom,	by	whom?	Not	 her.	Not	her
mother.
       She	pulled	 the	tray	 out	of	 the	drawer,	 stuck	half-open,	 for	 a	better	look	 at
what	she	should	take.
       Underneath	 the	tray	 was	a	 business-size	envelope	with	 a	black-and-white
obituary	dated	in	 October,	cut	from	 the	local	 Korean	newspaper	inside.	The	ink
of	the	 Korean,	which	 Margot	 could	 somewhat	read	but	not	 understand,	rubbed
off	 onto	her	 hands.	She	struggled,	 her	mind	 like	 the	 fishing	 net,	 to	catch	 any
word	that	she	could	find:	cancer,	supermarket,	wife,	 Calabasas,	church.
       Even	 though	she	had	never	 met	him,	 she	knew	 him	in	 her	own	 face—the
squareness	of	the	jaw,	maybe	even	a	bit	of	her	own	nose	and	cheekbones.	It	was

52
like	catching	a	glimpse	of	herself	in	 a	mirror.
       Kim	 Chang-hee.
       Here	  he	 was	 finally.	  Tiny	  in	 a	 black-and-white	  photo,	  a	stranger	 she
could’ve	passed	on	the	street.
       The	stranger	was	now	dead.	Could	he	have	been	Margot’s	father?
       She	screamed,	shocking	herself	with	the	sound	that	burst	from	her	throat.

53
     Mina

Summer	1987

54
       AFTER	A	MONTH	AND	A	HALF	OF	STOCKING	SHELVES	and	carrying	produce	at
the	supermarket,	Mina	felt	 strong	again,	the	 strongest	she	had	been	since	losing
her	 husband	 and	 daughter	 in	 Seoul.	 She	 felt	  almost	  powerful.	  She	 didn’t
necessarily	like	 the	 way	 she	looked,	 but	 she	 didn’t	 mind.	 She	 didn’t	  need	a
boyfriend.	All	  she	needed	were	the	things	she	had,	enough	money	to	get	by	and
save	for	the	future	 and	her	health,	until	 it	 was	time	for	 her	to	 die	and	rise	up	to
meet	her	family	again.	That’s	 what	heaven	was,	she	thought:	the	presence	of	her
husband	and	daughter,	the	few	nuns	who	had	been	kind	to	her	 at	the	orphanage,
her	parents	from	whom	she	had	been	separated	in	the	war.
       She	remembered	vaguely	 her	parents’	 faces,	her	mother’s	 smile.	 The	way
she	would	chase	after	 her	around	the	 house	where	she’d	 hide	behind	 the	large
dark	pillars.	 The	elegant	 curved	roofline.	 The	 warmth	 of	the	 ondol,	 the	heated
floors	in	 the	 winter.	 The	gardens	where	her	 mother	tended	to	 the	cabbage	and
mu.	She	remembered	the	 smell	 of	doenjang	 jjigae,	 anchovy	 stock	boiling,	  the
happiness	of	 a	sweet	red	 bean	porridge.	 She	 remembered	her	mother’s	 voice
singing	along	 with	 music,	 something	vaguely	 operatic,	old.	 But	 she	had	never
been	able	to	find	 that	 song	again.	Sometimes	 she	would	 stop	and	listen	 to	 the
radio,	waiting	again	to	hear	that	song,	but	she	never	did.
       At	  the	supermarket,	 she	had	made	 a	few	 friends,	 both	 men	and	 women,
mostly	Latinos	with	 whom	she	could	hardly	 hold	a	conversation.	But	she	learned
some	Spanish	from	them,	which	 made	her	happy.	She	laughed	with	 them	at	her
inability	 to	pronounce	and	remember	some	of	 the	most	basic	things.	 She	hadn’t
felt	that	silly	 since	her	husband	and	daughter	had	died	last	October.
       Hector,	 who	 had	 been	helping	 her	 since	day	 one,	 and	Consuela,	a	 stout
woman	with	a	thin	 ponytail,	would	 ask,	“¿Cómo	estás,	amiga?”	to	Mina,	and	she
would	respond,	“¿Bueno,	y	tú?”
       “Bien,”	  they	would	 correct	her.	And	they’d	 all	laugh.
       They	 taught	her	the	names	of	produce—naranja,	limón,	las	uvas.
       She	had	trouble	 with	 the	letters	l	 and	v.	But	she	recited	 these	words	as	she
displayed	the	fruit,	 careful	not	 to	let	them	 bruise.	It	felt	 good	to	 not	take	herself
too	seriously,	to	see	herself	through	the	eyes	of	someone	else.
       She	 tried	to	 reciprocate	 by	teaching	 them	Korean,	 but	 they	already	 knew
most	of	 the	words	 that	would	 be	 useful	to	 their	 work.	 They	 knew	how	 to	 say
hello	and	 thank	you.	 They	 knew	all	 the	 numbers	(hana,	dul,	 set	.	 .	.	 ),	all	 the
names	of	different	 produce,	the	 food.	She	couldn’t	 get	 over	the	sight	 of	 seeing
someone	who	wasn’t	Asian	speaking	her	language.
       She	couldn’t	 get	over	America.
       On	 a	Friday	morning,	 two	months	after	she	had	arrived	in	 Los	Angeles,	she
stood	at	a	cart,	wiping	sweat	from	 her	face	before	stocking	shelves	of	soft	drinks

55
—7-Up,	 Pepsi,	Coca-Cola,	 fruit-flavored	  beverages	in	 obscene	colors	that	 did
not	 exist	 in	  nature.	 She	couldn’t	  believe	  how	 much	 soda	 people	 drank	 in
America.	She	occasionally	 had	a	7-Up	when	 she	had	a	stomachache,	but	by	the
looks	of	it,	Americans	 drank	the	liquid	 as	frequently	as	water.
       The	 supermarket	owner,	 Mr.	 Park,	wearing	 his	usual	 white	polo	 shirt	 and
khakis,	approached	her	slowly	 with	 a	smile	 as	if	 he	had	a	little	  secret	to	share.
Her	spine	tingled	 with	fear	 as	she	froze	in	place,	resisting	the	urge	 to	run	away.
He	had	never	 done	anything	 untoward,	 but	 she	hated	how	 he	looked	 at	 her	a
shade	too	long—as	if	he	owned	her,	too.
       “How	  are	you	doing?”	he	asked.
       “Fine.”	  The	walls	 of	 aluminum	 cans	glistened	like	 rounds	of	 ammunition,
the	bottles	like	missile	shells.
       “Making	  friends?”
       “Kind	  of,”	 she	said.
       “I	 heard	you’re	 making	friends	with	 the	Mexicans.”
       She	didn’t	 like	 those	words	in	his	mouth.
       “Hector,	 Consuela,”	he	said.
       “Yes,	 they’re	 very	nice.”	Her	 legs	trembled	beneath	her.
       “They	 work	 hard.”
       “Yes,	 they	do.”
       “They	  can’t	help	 that	they	 don’t,	 you	know	 .	.	 .	have	the	 business	sense.”
He	pointed	to	the	side	of	his	head.
       She	wanted	 to	ask	how	he	would	 know	 that.	Did	 he	ever	talk	 to	them?	He
was	the	idiot,	 creepy	 and	insensitive.	 Hanging	by	 her	side,	 her	hand	tightened
into	a	fist.
       “At	  least	they	work	hard,	you	know?”	 he	repeated.
       “Yes.”	  She	exited	her	body,	a	shell,	as	his	eyes	meandered	down.	She	fixed
her	eyes	on	the	linoleum	 floor,	 speckled	like	 birds’	eggs.	Mina	 had	been	hiding
in	 the	storeroom	 and	the	 aisles	among	 the	boxes	 and	bottles	 and	jars,	 but	 in
reality,	pinned	down	by	 his	gaze,	she	had	been	exposed	here,	too.
       “Anyway,	   I	thought	 this	 would	 be	 a	good	 time	to	 move	 you	 to	the	 cash
registers.”	He	smiled.	“One	of	 our	workers	is	retiring.”
       She	might	 be	safer	surrounded	by	more	people.
       “That—that	 would	 be	great,”	she	said.
       “Want	 to	start	next	week?”	 he	asked.
       “Sure.”	 Overcome	with	 relief,	 her	eyes	grew	wet.
       “Just	 come	in	 and	ask	 one	of	 the	cashiers	for	 Mr.	 Kim,	  okay?	He’ll	  help
you.”	He	winked.
       “Mr.	  Kim?	Okay.”

56
       “Good	 job.”	 Those	words	were	like	hands	trying	 to	touch	her.
       As	 soon	as	he	walked	away,	tears	fell	down	 her	cheeks.	She	could	taste	the
salt,	like	the	ocean.	Hastily,	she	wiped	her	face.
       Although	  she	enjoyed	the	company	 of	 Hector	and	Consuela	and	 the	other
workers	who	greeted	her	with	a	smile,	a	wave,	or	a	nod	every	day,	she	would	get
paid	more	 as	a	cashier,	a	 job	that	 would	 also	be	 easier	on	her	 body.	She	was
getting	older	after	all.	Her	 stiff	joints	 and	muscles	reminded	her	of	this	daily.
       Later	 that	 afternoon,	she	joined	 Hector	 in	 restocking	the	 produce	section,
which	 had	 become	 quickly	  depleted	earlier	 that	  day.	 As	 they	 worked	 (him
grabbing	and	delivering	 carts	stocked	with	leafy	 greens	and	root	vegetables,	and
her	neatly	piling	 them),	she	thought	 that	maybe	she	should	she	tell	him	 that	she
was	leaving	the	floor.	Maybe	 he	would	think	 it	would	 be	strange	if	she	didn’t	tell
him,	and	 one	day	he	 found	 out	that	 she	was	working	 at	 the	registers.	But	 she
didn’t	 know	  how.	 She	wasn’t	 sure	 about	 the	words,	 and	 she	didn’t	  want	 to
offend	him.
       “I	 .	.	.	Monday	 .	.	.	I	go	at	cash	register,”	she	said	in	English.
       “You?”	  he	said.
       “Yes,	 me.”
       “Oh,	  good,	good.”	 He	 smiled	with	  warmth,	as	if	  patting	her	 on	the	 back.
“Good.	You	 do	a	good	job,	okay?”
       “Okay.”
       He	 stacked	the	floppy	 red	leaf	 lettuce	with	 her	in	 silence.	She	could	 sense
his	resignation.	Hector	and	Consuela	had	been	in	their	jobs	forever.
       Dealing	  with	  Korean	 customers	 directly	 required	  the	Korean	  language,
sure,	but	at	the	same	time,	 Hector	and	Consuela	already	 knew	a	lot	 of	 Korean,
and	would	 learn	more	 if	 they	 thought	it	 would	  make	their	 lives	 easier.	It	 was
obvious	why	she	was	getting	promoted	over	them.
       She	 wanted	 to	explain	 to	 him,	  to	make	 him	 feel	 better,	 that	 she	wasn’t
strong	enough	to	do	this	 job,	but	 both	of	them	 knew	that	was	not	 the	truth.	The
truth	was	 something	that	 would	 make	them	 both	 uncomfortable	 and	sad.	This
was	already	  his	 expectation.	 This	 was	 already	 his	  experience.	So	 she	 said
nothing	until	 the	end	of	her	shift.
       “Hasta	 luego.”	She	tried	to	smile.
       “Hasta	 luego,”	he	said,	without	 quite	meeting	her	eyes.

57
       ON	MONDAY,	MINA	MET	MR.	KIM,	THE	SAME	MAN	WHO	occasionally	greeted	her
in	the	aisles,	for	 training.	He	 was	indeed	a	few	years	younger	than	 her,	with	 his
smooth	dark	 skin,	square	face,	 high	cheekbones,	a	shy	 smile	 that	was	slightly
lopsided	on	the	right.	He	was	not	tall,	about	the	same	height	as	Mina,	so	when	he
spoke	to	 her,	 he	 looked	 her	 straight	 in	 the	 eyes,	which	  made	her	 feel	 self-
conscious.	She	felt	 dowdy	  in	her	 slacks	and	 pink	 polo	 shirt,	 her	 worn	 tennis
shoes.
       As	 he	showed	her	the	buttons	on	the	register	and	the	form	to	 fill	 out	for	 the
reports,	recording	the	exact	change	in	the	register	at	the	beginning	and	end	of	her
shifts,	she	couldn’t	 help	 but	stare	at	his	 arms—thin	 but	muscular,	 covered	in	 a
pale	down.	She	always	liked	 arms.	And	it	 gave	her	something	to	look	 at	besides
his	face.
       On	 her	first	 day	at	the	register,	she	was	a	little	 slow	 with	 the	cash,	and	the
customers	grew	impatient,	 eyeing	her,	too	 busy	with	 their	 own	lives,	 their	 own
worries	to	recognize	that	she	was	new	and	trying	to	learn	as	quickly	as	possible.
       “That’s	 a	twenty.	 Give	me	back	$3.15.”
       “Okay.”
       “No,	 here.	Let	me	make	this	easier	for	you.	I	 have	exact	change.”
       She	was	still	 getting	used	to	the	dollar,	 the	denominations,	the	feel	of	it,	 the
way	each	bill	appeared	the	same	but	different,	the	sizes	of	the	coins.	Fortunately,
the	bagger	whom	she	worked	with,	Mario,	 with	 his	spiky	hair	but	 soft	demeanor,
was	patient.	 He	  helped	her	 with	  the	 breakdown	 of	 the	 cash	 or	 smiled	 and
apologized	in	 Korean	to	 the	customers	as	she	stood	there,	perplexed,	having	 to
use	a	part	of	the	brain	that	had	grown	 rusty	over	the	years	with	 disuse.	He	spent
his	time	between	customers	helping	Mr.	Kim	 or	the	other	cashiers	lift	large	sacks
of	rice	or	boxes	of	produce	onto	carts.
       After	  a	few	 hours,	 she	understood	the	subtleties	 of	 the	bar-code	scanner.
She	memorized	some	of	 the	codes	for	 the	more	popular	 produce.	She	received
and	doled	out	money	automatically.
       Although	  the	 job	was	 less	physically	  demanding,	the	 presence	of	 all	 the
customers	waiting	 in	 line	  for	 her	to	 do	 her	 job	 quickly	  while	 being	 friendly
exhausted	her.	All	 those	eyes.	The	 nervousness	she	experienced	as	a	customer
watched	her	scan	each	item,	ensuring	that	she	was	charging	them	correctly.	Sure,
she	would	 get	 used	 to	 it.	 Eventually,	  the	 customers	would	  become	like	  the
bottles	of	 soy	sauce	that	she	stocked	on	the	shelves,	just	 another	component	of
the	repetitive,	ultimately	 unfeeling	nature	of	her	job.
       Spinach.	 Doenjang.	 Thin	 rice	 noodles.	Large	 sack	 of	rice.	 Garlic.	  Bean-
flavored	popsicles.	Two	oranges.	A	bag	of	ginger.
       A	 six-pack	of	Hite.	A	bag	of	potato	chips.	A	bundle	of	 green	onion.

58
       At	 the	end	of	the	shift,	Mr.	 Kim,	 harried	and	rushed,	came	by	to	check	in	on
her.	Sweat	ran	down	the	sides	of	his	face.	Nonetheless,	he	tried	to	be	as	generous
and	gentle	with	her	as	possible.	He	asked	her	if	 she	had	any	questions,	checking
the	remaining	cash	in	her	register	 up	against	what	she	had	logged	in	 her	binder.
He	wiped	 his	forehead	with	  his	bare	arm.	 She	handed	him	a	 paper	napkin	 she
had	in	her	pocket.
       “Thank	 you,”	 he	said	in	English,	smiling.
       “No	  .	.	.	problem?”	 She	laughed,	realizing	 she	still	 couldn’t	 pronounce	the
letter	L.
       “Good	 job	today.”
       “Thank	 you!”	 Their	 eyes	met,	and	she	returned	his	smile.
       On	  the	way	  home,	 she	sat	 at	 the	 front	 of	  the	 bus,	staring	 into	  space,
transfixed,	her	mind	 numb.	She	wanted	to	go	home,	shower,	and	close	her	eyes.
She	wished	she	had	a	television	to	distract	 herself	from	 the	sadness	that	she	felt
rising	 within	 her.	Had	 she	made	a	 mistake?	Would	 she	be	able	 to	survive	 the
glares,	the	impatience	of	the	customers?	Would	 she	be	able	to	handle	the	steady
flow	of	 interaction	when	all	 she	wanted	to	do	was	to	be	left	alone,	to	not	think	or
feel,	with	only	 the	physical	pain	of	work	 transcending	to	numbness	like	a	drug?
       She	understood	how	 delicious	and	 easy	it	was	to	become	an	addict.	 A	few
times,	she	had	drunk	 herself	unconscious	after	 her	husband	and	daughter	 died.
After	burying	 them,	she	wanted	to	throw	 herself	in	that	same	ground.	She	would
drink	 and	 end	 up	 with	  a	 splitting	  headache	the	  next	 day,	 crawling	  to	 the
bathroom	and	vomiting.
       But	 she	couldn’t	have	gone	on	that	way.	The	most	important	 thing	now	 was
to	be	good,	to	work	hard,	to	make	it	to	heaven,	where	she	would	be	reunited	with
them	someday.	That	 was	all	 that	mattered	now.	 Not	 even	Mr.	 Park,	 his	words
like	hands	lingering	too	long,	 could	stop	her.
       Sitting	 at	the	 front	of	 the	bus,	swaying	 with	 its	movement,	she	told	 herself
that	she’d	be	fine.	She’d	get	used	to	the	registers,	the	cash,	the	people,	and	if	not,
she	could	  always	 ask	 to	 move	 back	  to	 stocking	 shelves,	 or	 she	 could	  go
somewhere	else.	She	could	find	another	job.	And	 once	she	felt	a	bit	 more	stable
financially,	  she	could	 find	 a	 lawyer	 that	 would	  help	her	 stay	 in	 the	 country
permanently.	Thinking	 of	 the	darkness	of	her	days	in	 Seoul,	that	apartment,	the
streets	her	husband	and	daughter	once	walked	upon,	she	could	never	go	back	to
Korea.
       The	place	had	become	a	graveyard.
       She	looked	 up	at	the	bus	driver,	 a	Black	woman	 about	her	age	with	a	short
bob	curled	inward.	 This	 woman	had	 spent	her	hours	within	 the	 confines	of	 the
bus,	trying	to	do	her	job,	navigating	 through	traffic,	 yet	also	having	to	respond	to

59
the	steady	needs	of	riders	on	 the	bus,	who	 could	be	either	 kind	 and	friendly	 or
harried	and	rude.	The	woman	had	the	responsibility	of	driving	 all	 these	people	to
their	homes	or	jobs	every	day.
       The	driver	 glanced	back	at	Mina.
       “You	  doin’	all	 right?”
       “Me?”
       “You	  all	right?”
       “Yes,	 thank	you.”
       Mina	 wanted	to	say	something	else.	But	she	didn’t	know	 what	or	how.
       Should	 she	ask	how	she	was	doing?	No,	that	would	be	awkward.
       Was	the	bus	driver	 concerned	about	her?	Or	had	Mina	been	staring	too	long
at	her,	making	her	uncomfortable?
       Mina	  got	 off	 the	bus	 as	quickly	  as	possible	and	 walked	 less	than	half	 a
block	 to	 the	 house.	 Inside,	 she	unlocked	  her	room	  where	 she	gathered	 her
pajamas	and	 a	 towel	 so	 that	 she	 could	 shower,	 rinse	 the	 day	 off	  (all	  that
currency,	the	counting,	 the	impatient	 customers,	Mr.	 Kim’s	  English	 thank	you,
his	smile).	She	needed	to	clear	her	head,	relax.
       As	 she	touched	the	knob	to	 open	her	door,	she	overheard	the	landlady	say,
“Mrs.	Baek,”	 down	the	hall	 toward	the	other	renter’s	room.
       That	 was	unnie’s	name.

60
Margot

Fall	2014

61
       ACROSS	FROM	HER	MOTHER’S	GATED-UP	SHOP	WAS	THE	children’s	clothing	store
of	 her	mother’s	 friend	  Alma—likely	  one	 of	 the	 last	people	 to	 have	seen	her
mother.	Perhaps	 Alma	 had	 noticed	 something	 or	 someone	suspicious	 at	that
time.
       Margot	 and	Miguel	 stepped	into	Alma’s	  booth,	empty	of	 people.	Baby	and
children’s	clothes	hung	from	 fixtures	 along	the	walls	 and	on	rounders	and	racks.
Little	 superhero	sweater	sets	for	boys,	and	princess	and	pony	ones	for	girls.
       “Maybe	 she’s	in	 the	bathroom.”	 Margot	exited	 the	shop,	ducking	beneath	a
tiny	white	 dress	wrapped	in	plastic.	Miguel	followed.
       “Should	 we	wait	 a	little?”	 he	asked.
       “Let’s	  open	my	mom’s	store	and	see	if	we	can	find	anything	 there.	We’ll	 be
able	to	see	if	she	comes	back.”
       Margot’s	 mother	 worked	in	 a	swap	meet	called	Mercado	de	la	Raza,	an	old
warehouse	with	 a	tin	 roof,	high	 ceilings,	 and	concrete	floors	 filled	  to	the	 brim
with	 stores.	It	 was	located	 southeast	of	LA—a	  dusty	 landscape	of	 dilapidated
factories	and	fruit	 vendors	gripping	 bags	of	 oranges	on	street	corners—where	a
mostly	 working-class	 Latino	  population	 flourished,	  carving	 a	 community	 for
themselves	among	the	ruins	of	the	defense	and	manufacturing	industries.
       Locals	 gathered	 on	the	 weekends	at	swap	 meets	that	 bumped	banda	and
norteño	music.	Men	 with	 face	and	 neck	tattoos	roamed	the	 walkways	 in	peace
with	their	 children.	Families	and	churches	rented	a	covered	corner	of	the	parking
lot	of	 the	 swap	meet	 as	a	staging	 area	for	 performances,	religious	 gatherings,
quinceañeras.
       In	 this	 topography	intersected	by	 railroad	 tracks,	where	garbage	and	large
objects	(mattresses,	used	 furniture,	 broken	 shopping	 carts)	 once	 destined	for
landfills	  disintegrated,	Margot’s	  mother,	 Mina,	  and	 other	Korean	  Americans
made	a	  living	  because	of	  the	 relatively	  cheap	 rent	  for	 their	  stores.	 Even
Koreatown	proved	too	 competitive	and	too	 expensive,	so	they	found	themselves
adrift	  in	 South	  Central	 or	  Bell	  or	 Huntington	   Park,	 working	  long	  hours,
sometimes	seven	days	per	week,	behind	counters	in	places	that	felt	continentally
far	from	both	literal	 and	figurative	 homes.
       Margot	 had	detested	following	 her	mother	to	the	store	on	the	weekends	and
weekdays	during	summer	and	winter	breaks	when	she	imagined	children	all	over
the	world	enjoying	 their	middle-class	 vacations,	tumbling	in	 white	sand	or	green
grass.	Instead,	she	had	spent	her	days	off	from	school	in	the	store	among	plastic
hangers	and	clothing	smelling	 of	the	 factories	from	 which	they	 came,	while	 her
mother,	in	her	exhaustion,	sometimes	even	yelled	at	customers.
       Amiga!	 Amiga!	 she	would	holler	in	her	Korean	accent	to	shoppers	after	they
had	perused	some	of	the	items	 on	the	racks	 and	walked	away.	 That	image	 and

62
sound	had	been	seared	into	Margot’s	 memory—the	 sight	 of	 women’s	 backs	in
departure	while	 her	mother	 tried	 to	 speak	in	 their	 language.	Amiga!	 Amiga!	 I
show	you	something.	The	sadness,	no,	maybe	the	courage	of	the	unheard.	Amiga!
Amiga!	 To	women	 who	 didn’t	 need	another	 friend.	 The	pitch	 and	tone	 of	 her
mother’s	voice,	during	 some	of	their	 most	desperate	moments,	when	her	mother
hadn’t	been	sure	if	 she	could	pay	the	 rent	or	buy	 groceries,	resembled	that	of	 a
woman	 thrown	 overboard,	 treading	 water,	 calling	  out	 to	  other	 women	 who
drifted	by	on	rowboats.
       As	 Margot	 navigated	the	swap	meet	now,	 the	dirtiness	of	 the	surroundings
settled	into	her.	 She	was	terrified	 that	Miguel—someone	 from	 her	middle-class
life	 in	 Seattle	of	 dishwashers,	fleece,	and	 stainless	steel	water	 bottles—would
finally	 see	this	other	side	of	her	life,	how	she	grew	up.	She	had	been	ashamed	for
so	long	of	her	home,	her	mother’s	work,	her	life.	 But	why?
       Perhaps	 sprawling	  lawns	 and	 shopping	 malls	 were	 one	 version	 of	  the
American	dream,	but	this	was	another.	She	could	see	that	now.	Maybe	it	was	not
mainstream,	maybe	 it	 was	 not	 seen	 with	 any	 compassion	 or	 complexity	  on
television	 or	in	 the	movies,	 because	it	 represented	all	that	 middle-	 and	upper-
class	people,	 including	  Margot,	  feared	 and	 therefore	 despised:	a	 seemingly
inescapable,	cyclical	poverty.	 But	 in	actuality	 this	 was	the	American	 dream	for
which	people	toiled	 day	and	night.	People	had	left	their	homelands	to	be	here,	to
build	 and	 grow	 what	 they	 loved—family,	  friendship,	  community,	 a	 sense	of
belonging.	This	was	their	version	of	 the	dream.
       Margot	 unlocked	 the	rusted	accordion	 gate	with	 the	lump	 of	 keys	she	had
found	in	 her	mother’s	 purse,	jerking	it	 open	enough	for	 them	to	 slide	inside—a
women’s	 version	 of	 Alma’s	  store,	jam-packed	 with	  clothing.	 Slinky	  cocktail
dresses,	tight	tops	with	shoulder	cutouts,	and	conservative,	 embroidered	blouses
for	 older	 women	 hung	 on	display	 from	  the	walls,	  along	 with	 jeans	that	 had
safety-pinned	signs,	handmade	from	 colored	 construction	paper	and	 permanent
marker:	sale	$20.
       On	 the	dusty	glass	counter,	a	ceramic	 Virgin	 Mary,	 a	twin	 to	 the	fractured
one	in	her	mother’s	living	 room,	stood	by	the	cash	register.	Its	drawer	was	empty
and	open—the	sad	broken	 lip.	 Her	mother	 had	always	 left	the	 machine	ajar	 to
ward	off	thieves,	as	if	to	say,	Nothing	 here.	Please	go	away.
       Margot	  searched	her	mother’s	 usual	hiding	  spot	for	 the	 cash	change	she
kept,	underneath	a	bunch	of	free	holiday	calendars	in	one	of	her	display	cases	for
costume	jewelry—rhinestone	  necklace	 and	 earring	 sets,	large	 beaded	hoops,
plastic	bangles—accessories	that	she	hoped	customers	would	buy	to	go	with	 the
clothing	they	had	purchased.	Margot	found	 a	roll	of	 ones,	fives,	and	tens	rubber-
banded	together.

63
       “Well,	  the	money’s	all	 here,”	she	said,	standing	up	from	 behind	the	display
case,	only	to	see	that	Miguel	hadn’t	followed	 her	into	the	shop.
       In	 the	center	of	the	walkway	 between	stores,	Miguel	was	speaking	to	Alma,
who	was	crying	 and	blotting	 her	 eyes	with	a	 wad	of	 tissue.	Margot	stashed	the
cash	in	her	cross-body	purse	and	joined	 them.	Alma	 reached	out	her	arms	for	 a
hug,	and	Margot	fell	into	 them.
       She	had	known	 Alma	 for	 about	twenty	 years,	since	after	the	LA	  riots—all
that	shattered	 glass	and	 black	 smoke—that	 had	 destroyed	 her	mother’s	  first
store,	a	 couple	  miles	 away	 in	  another,	 much	 tidier	  swap	 meet,	 where	 the
individual	 shops	each	had	proper	walls	and	rollup	steel	gates.	Alma	had	watched
Margot	grow	 up	across	the	aisle	between	their	stores—an	aisle	both	narrow	with
the	merchandise	racks	that	overflowed,	 and	 immeasurably	wide	 because	of	the
different	 languages	 and	cultures	 between	 them,	 oceanic	 in	 distance.	 Alma’s
round	face	and	plump	 skin	 hardly	seemed	to	age	as	Margot	 went	 through	each
awkward	stage	of	her	own	development—a	shy	only	 child	 with	pigtails	 or	a	neat
bob,	a	preteen	who	 bleached	and	dyed	her	 hair	navy	 blue	in	 the	middle	 of	 the
night	and	smoked	cigarettes	after	school,	and	a	much	more	 conservative	college
student	who	understood	that	getting	a	degree	might	be	the	only	 way	of	 escaping
this	life.
       Tears	spilled	 from	 Margot’s	 eyes.	Alma	 pulled	away	 and	put	her	hands	on
Margot’s	cheeks	and	said,	“Pobrecita,”	hugging	 her	again.
       “When	 was	the	last	time	you	saw	her?”	Miguel	 asked	in	Spanish.
       “The	 last	time	 I	saw	her	was	.	 .	.	about	two	 weeks	ago,”	Alma	 said	as	they
parted.	“Before	Thanksgiving.	 Maybe	the	weekend	before	Thanksgiving.”
       Wiping	  her	eyes,	Margot	could	 understand	most	of	the	Spanish	in	 a	casual
context,	but	as	with	her	Korean,	she	struggled	with	putting	 words	together	on	the
spot.	Her	fear	of	 sounding	silly	 or	being	misunderstood	acted	as	a	sieve	through
which	 all	 language	had	to	 pass.	Any	 speaking,	 even	in	 English,	 often	 proved
difficult	 for	 this	 reason,	but	foreign	 languages	had	a	more	gelatinous	texture	 in
her	mind,	flowing	 even	more	slowly	to	 and	from	her	mouth.
       “She	 took	 the	 entire	 weekend	off?”	  Margot	 asked	 in	 English	 to	 herself.
“That	doesn’t	make	sense.”	Margot’s	 mother	worked	on	every	holiday,	 including
Thanksgiving	and	Christmas,	 when	she	closed	the	store	a	few	hours	earlier	than
usual.	On	Thanksgiving	 Day,	they’d	 sometimes	order	chicken	from	 KFC—extra
crispy	drumsticks	 and	thighs	that	 they’d	 dip	in	 hot	sauce.	And	 Wednesday	was
the	only	day	that	the	entire	 swap	meet	closed	on	a	regular	basis.	This	meant	that
Alma	 must’ve	  seen	her	 mother	 last	 on	 the	 Tuesday	before	 the	 Saturday	 or
Sunday	when	her	mother	died.
       “Did	  you	notice	anything	strange	or	different	 about	her?”	Miguel	 asked.

64
       “She	 did	seem	sad	these	past	couple	months,”	Alma	said.	“Very	sad.”
       “Do	 you	know	 why?”	 Margot	asked.
       “At	  first,	 I	 thought	 maybe	something	 happened	to	you,	 but	when	 I	 asked
her,	she	said	you	were	fine,	that	you	had	a	good	job,	you	liked	 Seattle	a	lot.”	She
blew	 her	 nose.	“Then	  I	 thought	 maybe	 .	 .	 .	 she	 was	 having	 some	kind	  of
emergency,	like	a	family	  emergency	or	a	death,	in	 Korea,	and	that’s	 why	 she’s
been	gone	so	long.”	She	motioned	for	Margot	 and	Miguel	to	 wait	as	she	grabbed
a	box	 of	tissues	from	 her	 store.	“I	  thought	she	was	 in	 Korea	this	 whole	 time.
Maybe	someone	in	 her	family	 had	 died,	or	 someone	was	sick.	I	 could	 tell	that
she	was	very	sad	about	something	or	someone.”
       The	 obituary	 that	Margot	 had	found	 last	night:	 cancer,	 supermarket,	wife,
Calabasas,	church.	 Seeing	the	photograph,	 tiny	 and	black-and-white,	 was	 like
staring	at	a	ghost	of	herself.	 She	could	feel	herself	 sinking	under	the	 waves,	the
salt	of	the	seawater	in	her	mouth.	It	 was	all	too	much—first,	  her	mother’s	death,
an	accident;	then,	a	 potential	murder;	 and	now,	 a	possible	father	 gone	forever.
Was	her	mother	grieving	 him?	 Was	he	the	same	boyfriend,	 the	visitor	  with	 the
fancy	car,	the	 Mercedes	that	the	 landlord	 had	mentioned	to	 Margot?	Why	 else
would	she	have	saved	his	obituary?	He	had	to	be	important	to	 her	mother.	But	if
he	had	died	in	October,	at	whom	had	her	mother	been	yelling?
       Was	her	mother’s	 death	really	an	accident?
       In	 the	walkway	  made	narrow	by	 the	amount	 of	merchandise	displayed	 by
each	store,	 a	 woman	 who	 sold	 champurrado	 from	 a	 wheeled	 cart	 squeezed
behind	Margot,	 Miguel,	 and	 Alma,	 leaving	 a	trail	 of	 hot	 chocolate,	cinnamon,
and	masa	in	the	air.
       “Did	  she	have	any	visitors?”	Miguel	 asked.	“No,	 not	that	I	 know	of.”	 Alma
paused,	reaching	for	Margot’s	hand.	“Do	you	 want	some	water?”
       “No,	 no,	thank	you.”
       “She	 talked	a	lot	with	 the	Korean	lady	over	there.”	 Alma	 gestured	to	a	store
somewhere	behind	hers.	“Do	you	know	her?	The	one	with	the	sock	shop?”
       “The	 sock	shop?”
       “Yes,	 socks,	underwear,	pajamas,	stuff	like	 that.”	 She	blew	her	nose	again.
“She’s	kind	 of	new,	opened	her	store	earlier	this	year.	They	 became	friends	fast,
or	they	seemed	to	be	friends	already,	very	close.”
       Margot	  asked	Alma	 if	  she	could	 keep	an	 eye	on	 her	 mother’s	 unlocked
store	as	they	left	to	find	 the	sock	shop	owner.	Around	 the	corner,	in	the	maze	of
mostly	 makeshift	 stalls,	each	store	 blasted	its	 own	 genre	of	 Spanish-language
music	(pop,	bachata,	banda),	punctuated	by	 the	distant	 cry	of	 a	caged	pet-shop
bird	or	 a	section	 of	 lullabies	 emitting	 from	 plastic	 toys.	 At	 the	sight	 of	 tiered
displays	on	wheels	with	stacks	of	white	 socks	sold	in	bundles	forming	half	 of	the

65
perimeter	of	a	store,	Margot	and	Miguel	 paused.
       “This	 must	be	the	place,”	she	said.
       Seductive	 lingerie	 hung	above	the	entryways,	 lacy	corsets	and	nightgowns
filled	 with	 the	breasts	of	wire-framed	 hangers	shaped	into	the	torsos	of	women.
One	pair	 of	scarlet	 panties,	which	 came	with	 a	matching	 teddy,	 had	a	cartoon
elephant	face	and	snout	at	the	crotch.
       Under	 the	brash	fluorescent	light,	 the	 store	owner	stood	leaning	 on	a	glass
display	 case	with	 rows	 of	  conservative,	pastel	 cotton	 panties	 stacked	inside.
With	 her	head	bowed	and	a	ballpoint	 pen	in	hand,	she	studied	the	classifieds	of
the	Korean	 newspaper.	She	looked	 up	as	Margot	 and	 Miguel	 walked	 into	 her
shop.
       Margot	 couldn’t	 help	but	start	at	the	sight	 of	her	face—elegant,	long,	out	 of
place.	Although	  perhaps	 in	 her	 sixties,	 she	 wore	 bright	  red	 lipstick,	  which
seemed	tacky	and	beautiful	and	defiant	all	 at	once.	Her	eyebrows	were	perfectly
penciled	crescents,	like	slivers	of	the	moon.	A	 midnight	 blue	fleece	peacoat	with
pills	along	the	sleeves	swaddled	a	slender	dancer’s	frame.
       Margot	 bowed	her	head.	“Uh,	my	 Korean	is	really	bad.”
       “That’s	  okay,”	  the	 woman	 said	 in	 English	 with	  a	 Southern	accent	 that
surprised	Margot.	“Can	I	 help	you?”
       “Did	  you	know	the	owner	of	 the	women’s	clothing	store	over	there?”
       “Yes.	 Yes,	of	course,”	 she	said,	voice	shaking.
       “We	  were	just	 wondering	 when	 the	 last	time	 you	 saw	her	 was,”	 Miguel
said.
       “She—she’s	 been	gone	 for	 a	while.”	  She	squinted,	 laying	 the	pen	 down.
“I’ve	 been	worried	about	her.	Why	do	you	ask?”
       “I’m	  her	daughter,”	Margot	 said.	“This	is	my	 friend	Miguel.”
       The	woman	 widened	her	eyes,	then	squinted,	creasing	the	foundation	on	her
face.
       “Oh,”	  she	said,	as	if	she	had	just	recognized	Margot	somehow.
       But	 Margot	 didn’t	 find	 her	familiar	 at	all.	 She	could	tell	that	 the	sock	lady,
like	 Margot’s	 mother,	might	 have	 been	beautiful	 once.	The	theater	of	 her	face
told	a	 story,	and	a	 rich,	 sad	one	at	that.	Women	 like	 her	 and	her	mother	 were
always	struggling	to	stay	above	water,	their	 faces	floating	on	top	while	 their	legs
treaded	frantically	underneath.	They	might	 wash	up	dead	on	the	shore	one	day—
like	her	mother	on	the	carpet.
       “You’ve	  changed	so	much,”	the	woman	said,	breathless.
       “Excuse	 me?”
       “I	  didn’t	 recognize	you	at	 first.	Your	 hair.	 I	guess	you	wouldn’t	  remember
me.”	The	woman	pointed	to	herself.	“Mrs.	 Baek?”

66
       “No.”	  Margot	shook	her	head.	“I	 don’t	remember	you	at	all.”
       Mrs.	 Baek	 exhaled	with	 a	loud	 puff	 and	smiled	 tenderly.	“We	 all	 lived	 in
the	same	house	together	until	you	were	maybe	three	or	four.”	 Her	eyes	softened,
revealing	  a	 touch	  of	  sentimentality	   that	 surprised	  Margot,	  who	  had	  no
recollection	of	 that	time	 before	the	riots,	 before	the	apartment	that	they	 lived	in
now.	According	 to	 her	mother,	when	 she	had	first	arrived	 in	 Los	Angeles	from
Korea	in	1987,	 she	had	rented	a	room	in	 a	house,	gotten	pregnant	with	Margot,
and	lived	 there	for	 a	 few	 years	until	 the	 landlady	died	 in	 1991.	She	 had	then
purchased	the	landlady’s	 clothing	 store	at	a	discount	 from	 the	landlady’s	 adult
children,	 the	same	shop	that	 would	 be	 mostly	 destroyed	one	year	 later	 in	 the
riots.	 At	 the	 time	 she	had	 purchased	that	 first	 store,	 her	 mother	 had	moved
herself	and	Margot	 to	 their	apartment	 in	Koreatown.	 She	had	never	 mentioned
Mrs.	Baek	or	any	housemates.
       “Your	  mother	 used	to	bring	 you	to	 the	restaurant	that	I	 worked	 at,	Hanok
House.	Do	you	 remember?	It	looked	 like	 an	old	traditional	 house,	lots	 of	wood
everywhere.”
       “I	 don’t	 remember	that,”	Margot	 said,	a	little	embarrassed.
       For	  a	 few	 seconds,	Mrs.	  Baek’s	 face	 shattered	 as	 if	 the	 memory	  had
smashed	something	 open	 that	  she	had	 been	 guarding	  inside.	 Her	  red	 lips
hardened	into	a	line.	 Margot	 could	 sense	Mrs.	Baek	closing	 off	 somehow.	She
had	to	reel	her	back	in.	She	needed	answers.
       “Why	  did	we	stop	going	to	the	restaurant?	Hanok	House?”
       “Your	  mother	became	.	.	.	very	 busy	after	she	opened	her	store.	And	 when
she	lost	that	store	in	the	riots	.	.	.	she	had	to	work	so	much.	It	was	a	very	difficult
time.	A	 lot	of	 people	lost	everything—their	 businesses,	their	jobs.	There	was	no
time	 for	 anything	 but	 trying	 to	 recover,	 to	 survive.	 It	 was	almost	 like	  living
through	the	war	again.”
       Margot	  remembered	 stacks	of	  smoke	 rising,	 blackening	  the	 air	 with	  a
noxious	chemical	 smell.	A	 few	 miles	from	 their	 apartment,	the	world	 had	been
on	fire.	 On	television,	 there	had	been	a	grainy	 black-and-white	 video	 of	 police
officers	beating	 Rodney	King,	 an	unarmed	Black	 man,	who	later	 said,	“It	 made
me	feel	like	I	was	back	in	slavery	 days.”
       There	 were	somber	 white	 men	in	 suits,	an	acquittal.	 Bricks	 thrown,	 glass
smashed,	gates	trampled.	Buildings	ignited	 into	 infernos	that	released	towers	of
smoke	into	the	sky.	 The	National	 Guard	stood	on	 street	corners	in	camouf	 lage
with	large	guns.
       Her	 mother	 cried	 in	 front	 of	 the	 television	 set.	Her	 store,	 too,	 had	been
destroyed.	Owning	 a	 business	where	she	 didn’t	 have	 a	boss	yelling	  at	her,	 a
place	where	she	could	bring	her	child	to	work,	 seemed	too	good	to	be	true.	All	of

67
it	would	 be	 shattered,	too.	Because	their	 life	 would	 be	part	 of	 the	lie	 that	this
country	repeated	to	 live	 with	 itself—that	  fairness	would	 prevail;	 that	 the	laws
protected	everyone	 equally;	 that	this	 land	 wasn’t	 stolen	 from	 Native	 peoples;
that	 this	 wealth	  wasn’t	  built	  by	 Black	  people	 who	  were	 enslaved	 but	 by
industrious	white	men,	“our”	  founders;	that	hardworking	 immigrants	 proved	this
was	a	meritocracy;	that	history	 should	only	 be	told	 from	one	point	 of	 view,	that
of	 those	who	 won	 and	 still	  have	power.	 So	 the	 city	 raged.	 Immolation	 was
always	a	statement.
       Her	 mother’s	 life	 was	just	 one	life	 in	 this	 wreckage.	Margot	 was	there	 to
wade	with	her	in	what	 was	left,	salvaging	together	what	they	could.	 Their	family
of	two	 might’ve	 been	the	smallest	country,	but	it	 was	the	only	 place	where	they
belonged	in	this	world.
       Margot	  wept,	surprising	 herself.	 She	didn’t	 think	 she	 had	any	more	 tears
left	in	her	today.
       “Are	  you	all	right?”	 Mrs.	 Baek	asked,	reaching	out	and	squeezing	Margot’s
hand.	“I	know	 that	was	a	difficult	 time.	That	was	a	very	difficult	  time.”
       Miguel	   wrapped	  his	 arm	  around	  Margot’s	  shoulders.	  She	 had	 been
embarrassed	about	bringing	him	 to	her	 mother’s	store—that	 he	would	 see	how
poor	she	had	been—but	now	she	was	grateful	he	was	there.	He	was	like	her	in	so
many	ways;	they	could	both	cry	or	laugh,	feel	on	a	dime.
       “How’d	  you	end	up	here?”	Margot	 asked,	sniffling.
       Mrs.	 Baek	handed	her	a	napkin.	“I	 got	tired	 of	working	 at	the	restaurant,	so
I	saved	and	bought	this	shop	in	 March	earlier	 this	year.	This	 was	the	only	place
that	I	could	afford.	 It’s	 hard,	but	it’s	 a	little	easier	than	working	 at	the	restaurant.
I’m	 not	 on	my	 feet	 all	 the	 time.”	 She	focused	 again	on	 Margot.	 “Your	  mom
hasn’t	been	around	for	 a	while.	  I	thought	 maybe	she	had	gone	 to	visit	 you,	 or
maybe	she	had	gone	to	Korea.	Is	someone	sick?”
       In	 eight	years,	her	mother	had	never	visited	 Margot	 in	Seattle,	not	even	for
her	graduation,	 and	 couldn’t	  afford	  to	 miss	 more	 than	 a	 day	 off	 work.	  To
Margot’s	 knowledge,	  her	 mother	 hadn’t	 been	 on	 an	 airplane	 since	 she	had
arrived	in	the	US	twenty-seven	years	ago.
       “She’s	 .	.	.	dead,”	Margot	 said,	beating	back	the	images	that	swelled	of	how
tiny	 her	 mother	had	 appeared	on	 the	ground.	 How	  Margot	 had	fallen	  to	 her
knees,	screaming.	“She	died	two	weekends	ago.”
       Mrs.	 Baek	gasped,	covering	 her	mouth	with	 both	 hands,	eyes	welling	with
tears.
       “When	 was	the	last	time	you	saw	her?”	Miguel	 asked.
       “A	  couple	of	weeks	ago,”	she	said,	voice	trembling.	 A	 streak	of	red	lipstick
now	on	her	cheek.	She	cried,	dabbing	under	her	eyes,	pink	and	swollen.	Eyeliner

68
streaked	gray	down	her	face.
       “Did	  anything	seem	off?”	he	asked.
       “Yes,”	  she	said,	 catching	her	 breath.	“She	 .	 .	.	 had	been	depressed	for	 a
while.”	 She	squeezed	the	napkin	in	her	fist.
       “Alma,	  her	friend	 with	 the	 children’s	 clothing	 store,	said	the	same	thing.”
Miguel	glanced	at	Margot.
       “Do	 you	know	 why?”	 Margot	asked.	“Did	 she	mention	anything?”
       Mrs.	 Baek’s	 hands	shook	as	she	smoothed	down	the	crinkled	 pages	of	 the
classifieds	 on	 which	  she	 had	 been	 leaning.	  It	  was	 obvious	  that	 she	 was
considering	 what	 to	 tell	 Margot,	 like	  a	grown-up	  protecting	 a	child.	  Margot
wanted	to	say,	There’s	nothing	 you	need	to	hide	from	me	anymore.	I’m	 an	adult
now.	I	need	to	know.
       “She	 was	struggling.	 We’ve	all	 been	struggling,	 you	know?	There’s	 hardly
any	customers	these	days.	It’s	gotten	so	much	worse.	Nobody	wants	to	come	to	a
swap	meet	 anymore.	You	 should	 see	the	 bathrooms,	how	 dirty	  everything	 is
now.	The	 owner,	 the	 manager—no	one	 cares	about	us	 anymore.”	 Fresh	tears
leaked	out	of	Mrs.	Baek’s	eyes.	She	shook	her	head.	“When	did	she	die?”
       “Over	  Thanksgiving	 weekend,”	 Miguel	  said.	 “We	 were	 driving	 down	 to
LA.	Margot	 found	her	on	Wednesday—”
       Mrs.	 Baek	covered	her	mouth	again.	“Oh	my	God.”
       “She	 had	fallen	down	somehow.	She	hit	her	head.”
       “Oh	 my	God.”	 She	held	her	head	as	if	she	might	faint.
       “The	  landlord	heard	 her	yelling	 at	 someone	over	the	weekend.”	 Margot’s
voice	 trembled,	recalling	  the	conversation	 in	 the	 garage.	“He	 said	 she	had	 a
boyfriend	 of	some	kind,	 a	man	 who	visited	 her	over	 the	summer,	and	maybe	 I
thought	someone	 would	 .	 .	 .	know	  who	 he	is,	 or	 maybe	 if	 he	 was	involved
somehow.”
       Rubbing	 the	space	between	her	brows,	eyes	closed,	Mrs.	Baek	 exhaled	out
loud.
       “Do	 you	know	 him?	Do	you	 know	how	I	 can—”
       “That’s	 why	 she	was	depressed,”	Mrs.	Baek	said.
       “What?”
       “He	 died	in	October.”	 She	wiped	the	corners	of	her	eyes.
       “So	 it	couldn’t	 have	been	him	that	was	with	her	that	night,”	 Miguel	 said.
       “With	 her?”	 Mrs.	Baek	asked.
       “That’s	 what	 we’re	trying	 to	find	 out,”	 Margot	said.	“Who	 was	with	 her	the
night	she	died.”
       “What	 was	his	name?”	Miguel	 asked.
       “I—I	  don’t	 know.”

69
       “Was	 it	Chang-hee	Kim?	Mr.	 Kim?”	 Margot	 asked.
       “Oh,	  yes,	Mr.	 Kim.”	  Mrs.	 Baek	 nodded.	“I	 didn’t	  even	know	 about	him,
their	relationship	 .	 .	.”	 her	 voice	rising	 “.	 .	 .	until	  after	he	 died.”	 She	propped
herself	up,	 elbows	 on	 the	 counter.	 “She	was	 so	 depressed	these	past	couple
months,	I	 kept	pushing	 her	to	 tell	 me	what	 was	wrong.	 Maybe	 something	had
happened	to	you.”	 She	shook	her	 head.	“Finally,	  she	told	 me	about	him.”	  She
wiped	her	nose	with	a	napkin.
       “So,	 she	kept	him	a	secret	from	everyone?”	Margot	asked.
       “She	 was	ashamed,	I	guess.	He	was	 married.”	 Mrs.	Baek’s	 voice	 cracked.
“What	 was	she	thinking?”	 She	sobbed,	grabbing	another	napkin	from	 inside	the
glass	counter	to	wipe	her	face.
       What	 would	 be	 the	chances	of	 this	 lover,	 the	man	 in	the	 obituary,	 being
Margot’s	father?	Maybe	 Margot	 had	deluded	herself	into	thinking	 that	he	would
be	out	 there	somewhere,	that	 he	would	 appear	in	 her	 life	 somehow—dead	 or
alive.	Maybe	 she	only	wanted	to	see	herself	in	 him	to	solidify	  the	mythology	 of
her	life,	 to	 make	it	 real.	But	 the	only	 thing	 real	was	 her	mother’s	 body	on	 the
ground,	and	the	knowledge	that	her	 mother	was	in	a	relationship	 with	 a	married
man,	now	dead	as	well.
       “Could	 she	have	confronted	my	mother?	The	wife.	 Could	the	wife—”
       “I	 don’t	 know.	 Maybe?	Your	 mother	never	said	much	about	her.	I	wouldn’t
know	that.”
       “Why	  would	 she	do	that	if	her	 husband	was	already	dead	though?”	Miguel
asked.	“Why?	What	would	 be	the	point?”
       “I	  don’t	 know,”	  Margot	 said.	“Maybe	 his	 wife	 found	 out	something	 else,
something	that	pissed	her	off	 even	 more.	Or	maybe	 it	took	 a	couple	 months	to
realize,	after	his	death,	that	he	was	cheating	on	her?	So	she	confronted	my	mom.
Maybe	she	wanted	answers.	Either	way,	we	have	to	find	her.”
       Mrs.	  Baek	nodded	 as	she	wept	 again.	Her	 friend,	  Margot’s	 mother,	 was
now	gone.	Her	 makeup	had	become	a	mess—streaks	of	gray	 down	her	 cheeks,
lipstick	 smeared.	 She	coughed	 through	 her	 tears,	 shuddered	with	  a	 specific
loneliness,	one	that	 Margot	 could	 recognize	from	  her	own	 mother.	 It	 was	the
loneliness	of	being	an	outsider.

70
     Mina

Summer	1987

71
       AS	HER	SPEED	AND	CONFIDENCE	ON	THE	REGISTER	grew,	Mina	began	observing
the	different	 customers	and	their	items.	She	tried	 to	piece	together	their	 lives	as
she	scanned	and	entered	in	codes.
       White	  mushrooms.	 Three	 packs	 of	  tofu.	  Green	 onions.	  Garlic.	  Dried
anchovies.	Five	Pink	Lady	apples.	A	bag	of	oranges.	Toothpaste.
       She	even	 invented	little	  games	for	herself,	 estimating	how	 much	 a	bag	of
produce	would	 cost	before	she	weighed	it.	 Or	 guessing	what	a	customer	would
make	with	her	purchased	items.
       Kimchi	 jjigae.	 Braised	mackerel	with	radish.	 Seafood	pancakes.
       Mario,	  who	 must	have	been	 only	 eighteen	or	 nineteen	years	old,	 worked
with	 her	almost	 every	day	 now.	He	 said	hello,	 smiled	 more	often.	 But	 he	still
always	seemed	distracted,	running	 from	 one	task	 to	the	 next.	He	 meticulously
stuffed	purchases	into	plastic	bags,	went	 off	to	 help	lift	 or	 carry	something,	and
appeared	just	in	time	 to	 bag	items	for	 the	next	 person	in	 line.	He	 had	a	whole
system	for	how	he	would	 manage	his	job	most	 efficiently.	 All	 the	other	 baggers
in	 the	other	 aisles,	 whom	 Mina	 had	 met	 several	of,	  seemed	to	 have	similar
routines.	Occasionally,	 they	would	 stop	and	 say	something	to	 each	other,	joke,
but	only	for	 a	few	seconds	before	they	plunged	back	into	work	again.
       During	  the	slower	 hours,	Mario	  spent	his	time	 organizing	 and	 restocking
items	up	front,	 while	 Mina	 restocked	and	tidied	the	smaller	 items	on	display	 by
the	registers—the	drinks	and	candies	and	snacks.	She	sometimes	saw	Hector	and
Consuela,	either	at	the	back	of	the	store	or	 at	the	registers	as	they	came	forward
to	do	go-backs	or	 grab	last-minute	 items	for	 customers.	They	still	 greeted	each
other	with	 a	nod,	a	smile,	or	an	hola,	but	 now	never	spoke	to	each	other	beyond
that.	The	camaraderie	had	been	lost.
       She	 said	hello	 to	 the	 other	 Korean	cashiers	 in	 the	store,	 but	 they	rarely
talked	as	well.	 All	 of	 them	seemed	bored	and	unhappy,	checking	 in	 to	do	their
job	and	checking	 out,	 perhaps	running	home	 to	their	 families.	 Perhaps	her	life
was	easier,	not	having	 to	 run	around	 all	 the	time,	 cooking,	 cleaning,	dropping
kids	off	 at	and	 picking	 them	up	 from	school,	 disciplining	 them,	 hugging	them,
kissing	 them.	 Perhaps	her	life	  was	 easier,	but	 she	couldn’t	  help	 but	 feel	 an
emptiness	as	she	thought	of	the	lives	her	coworkers	might	have.	The	fullness	that
she	missed.
       Whenever	 a	little	 girl	at	the	register	 reminded	her	of	her	own	 lost	daughter,
Mina’s	 body	trembled	with	 a	mix	of	 terror	and	exhilaration.	 Her	eyes	welled	up,
but	she	always	caught	herself	before	she	actually	cried.	Gripping	 the	sides	of	the
counter,	she	steadied	herself	as	much	as	she	possibly	could.	Staring	at	the	stream
of	items	 to	enter,	 the	cash	to	 collect	 and	return,	she	did	 not	 make	eye	contact
with	any	customers.	She	spent	the	rest	of	the	day	trying	not	to	think	or	feel	at	all.

72
       Once,	 a	girl	 about	 her	daughter’s	age	with	  a	father,	who	 looked	 so	much
like	her	husband	with	 his	long	 and	sensitive	face,	arrived	 at	the	checkout	stand.
Was	Mina	 imagining	 this,	or	were	 they	back	again,	like	 specters	from	the	past?
She	almost	ran	around	the	counter	to	 throw	 her	arms	around	them.	Maybe	 God
was	giving	her	one	more	chance.
       But	 as	soon	as	the	little	 girl	 said	 something	to	her	 father	in	 English,	Mina
realized	they	were	nothing	 like	 her	own	family.	  They	were	not	the	 same	people
at	all.	The	 father	was	much	taller	 and	younger	than	her	own	 husband.	The	little
girl	had	a	different	face	entirely.
       During	 her	 bathroom	break,	she	ran	into	 a	stall	 where	she	sat	on	the	toilet
and	cried.	She	tried	 to	be	as	silent	 as	possible	but	 couldn’t	 help	the	 occasional
sob	escaping	from	her	mouth.	She	held	her	face	in	her	hands,	gripping	it	with	 the
pads	of	her	fingers.	She	couldn’t	stop.	She	knew	she	had	to	go	back	up	front,	but
she	couldn’t	 control	 herself.	 The	pain	 in	 her	 stomach	and	chest	overwhelmed
her,	as	if	she	was	being	stabbed	with	sadness	itself.
       After	  blowing	  her	 nose,	she	pressed	her	 palms	 together	 and	whispered,
“Please,	God,	help	me.	Please,	God.	Please.	I’ll	do	anything	you	want.	Anything.
I	promise.	 Please	help	me.	Help	me,	 please.”	She	did	not	 want	to	 admit	this	 to
Him,	but	 secretly	she	was	asking	God	to	keep	her	from	 ending	everything,	from
throwing	herself	 in	front	 of	the	bus,	which	 she	thought	about	sometimes.	As	the
bus	pulled	 to	 a	stop	in	 front	 of	 her,	 she	wondered	 what	would	  happen	if	 she
stepped	out	in	front	of	it.	 Only	the	fear	of	hell	 kept	her	alive.
       Soon	 after	burying	 her	husband	and	daughter,	she	stood	on	the	roof	 of	 her
apartment	building,	 wondering	if	 it	 was	high	 enough	to	die	if	 she	jumped.	As	 a
teenager	at	the	orphanage,	after	 she	had	 been	beaten	by	 one	of	 the	nuns,	 she
thought	of	 all	 the	 places	she	could	 hang	herself.	 But	 she	never	 quite	 had	the
courage	to	do	 it.	 She	was	too	 scared	of	 the	pain	 she	might	 feel	 before	dying.
Wondering	what	it	 would	feel	 like,	she	would	sometimes	grab	a	shirt	or	a	pair	 of
pants,	and	in	the	restroom	that	she	shared	with	the	other	girls,	she’d	try	 to	choke
herself,	but	 she	never	got	close	 enough	to	 blacking	 out.	It	 hurt	 too	much.	 She
couldn’t	stand	the	pain.
       When	 she	was	younger,	 she	didn’t	 even	care	if	  she	had	gone	to	hell.	 But
now	she	cared.	Now	she	wanted	to	survive.	How	 else	could	she	see	her	daughter
again?
       Those	tiny	 fingers.	 That	perfect	 face.	The	high	clear	 voice.	The	near-black
eyes.
       When	 she	emerged	from	 the	restroom	 at	work	 with	 her	face	red	 and	eyes
swollen,	Mr.	  Kim,	 who	 had	taken	 her	place	at	 the	register	 after	 she	had	been
gone	longer	than	usual,	dropped	the	closed	sign	at	her	register.	Mario	 pretended

73
not	to	notice	and	instead	busied	himself	by	preopening	several	of	the	plastic	bags
to	ready	them	for	the	next	customers.
       Mr.	  Kim	  touched	her	 arm,	 pulling	 her	 aside.	“Is	  something	wrong?”	  he
asked.
       “Oh,	 nothing.	Nothing.	 Sorry	I	 was	gone	for	so	long.”
       “Do	 you	need	to	go	home?”
       “No,	 I’m	 okay.”
       “I	 can	take	you	home.	You	don’t	 look	good.”
       Strutting	 by	 in	 his	white	 polo,	 khaki	pants,	and	 visor	as	if	 he	was	coming
from	a	day	of	golf,	 Mr.	Park	asked,	“Something	wrong	 here?”
       “Nothing,	  nothing.	Everything’s	  fine.”	 She	didn’t	 want	Mr.	 Park	to	see	her
face.	At	 the	register,	she	removed	the	sign	 and	waved	at	 a	customer	waiting	 in
another	line.	Mr.	  Kim	 stood	by	 her	side.	As	 soon	as	she	was	done	 ringing	 the
woman	up,	he	asked,	“Can	I	get	you	something?”
       “No,	 no.	Really,	 I’m	 fine.”
       Hours	 later	in	the	back	of	 the	market,	she	went	to	her	storage	basket,	where
she	kept	her	snacks,	jacket,	and	spare	shoes.	Unexpectedly,	she	found	 a	plastic
bag	full	  of	 fruit—bright	   tangerines,	a	 soothing	green	 Granny	 Smith	 apple,	 a
honey-colored	pear—topped	with	 two	packages	of	ramen.	One	of	 the	tangerines
wore	a	little	  leaf	like	 a	hat.	 The	dimpled	 flesh	was	 clean	and	bright	 and	sweet
under	her	nose.
       Who	 had	left	the	bag	for	her?
       She	didn’t	 see	Mr.	Kim	 for	the	rest	of	the	day.
       As	 she	stood	in	front	of	 the	stop	watching	the	bus	approach,	she	recognized
the	driver,	the	woman	 with	 the	round	face	and	neat	bob.	The	bus	slid	 a	few	feet
past	her	with	 a	rush	of	 hot	air,	kicking	  up	dust	and	leaves,	before	it	 halted	to	 a
dramatic	stop.
       Showing	  her	 bus	 pass,	Mina	  asked,	 “You	  all	 .	 .	  .	 right?”	  The	 words
surprised	her	as	if	they	had	fallen	out	of	her	mouth.
       The	driver	 laughed	to	herself.	“Eh.	I’m	 all	 right.	You?”
       The	 exchange	calmed	 Mina.	  She	spent	so	 much	 of	 her	 day	ignored,	 an
anonymous	face	behind	a	cash	register,	a	person	who	handled	items	and	money,
scanned,	punched	in	numbers.
       As	 she	sat	on	the	bench	seat,	she	held	the	bag	of	groceries	with	the	fruit	and
the	ramen	close	to	her.	She	closed	her	eyes,	repeating	the	words	in	her	mind,	You
all	right?	 Are	you	all	 right?
       In	 the	kitchen,	beneath	the	glow	of	 a	single	overhead	light,	yellow	 and	soft,
Mina	 stared	at	the	 shiny	 green	apple,	the	 perfection,	 the	evenness	of	 its	skin.
And	  without	  thinking,	   she	 grabbed	 a	  knife,	  winding	  away	  its	  flesh,	  an

74
undressing.	She	remembered	how,	after	dinner,	she	would	arrange	the	slices	on	a
plate	for	her	daughter,	who	with	 her	small	hands	and	mouth	would	 take	her	time
eating	 each	piece.	  The	 bright	  fruit	  would	  fade	 into	 brown.	  So	 much	 like
everything	in	 nature.	The	color	 of	 the	fallen	 leaves	that	had	died,	curled	 on	the
grass,	sweeping	the	surfaces	of	their	tombstones	in	the	wind.
       Mina	 dropped	the	knife	in	 the	sink,	steadying	herself	on	the	counter.
       She	bit	into	 the	half-peeled	fruit.	 She	filled	a	pot	with	 water.
       Sitting	  in	  the	 breakfast	nook,	  she	slurped	 on	 the	 long	  ramen	 noodles,
comforted	by	 the	salty	broth,	 which	 soothed	her	even	on	a	hot	 day	with	 the	air
stagnant	and	dense.	She	parted	the	curtains	and	opened	the	window	 next	to	 the
nook,	staring	 out	 through	the	 security	 bars	into	 the	darkness.	Would	 she	 ever
forget	her	 husband,	her	daughter?	Would	 they	 wait	 for	 her?	Remember	her	 in
heaven?	What	was	the	point?	 She	wondered	but	felt	 numb	 from	 all	the	 crying.
She	remembered	Mr.	 Kim	 and	imagined	 how	 her	face	must’ve	 looked	 to	him,
red	and	swollen.
       She	cleared	the	table,	 washed	her	dishes,	and	wiped	down	 all	the	surfaces,
trying	to	keep	the	kitchen	as	clean	and	tidy	as	possible.	The	landlady	wasn’t	 neat
herself,	often	leaving	food	 out	accidentally	 or	forgetting	 to	clean	up	spills	on	the
stove.	But	 Mina	 wanted	everything	 to	be	as	clean	 as	this	old	 kitchen,	 with	 the
grease	on	the	walls	and	the	broken	cabinet	doors,	could	possibly	be.
       She	reached	her	arms	above	her	 head	to	stretch	before	 lying	 down	in	 bed,
where	she	stared	at	the	ceiling.	 She	remembered	when	she	had	gotten	the	news
that	her	husband	and	daughter	 had	been	killed	 in	 a	terrible	 accident,	when	 the
police	officers	 had	arrived	at	her	apartment	door.	All	  she	could	imagine	was	the
horror	of	 their	 excruciating	pain.	 The	red	blood	 seeping	from	 their	 bodies	onto
the	street.
       What	 had	she	been	doing	 that	day	at	home?	She	must’ve	 been	cooking	 or
cleaning.	Or	had	she	been	watching	television?	Was	it	 Sunday	or	Saturday?	She
didn’t	 know.	Wearing	 an	apron,	she	had	opened	the	door,	and	seeing	the	men	in
uniform,	 her	heart	fell	 to	the	floor.	  She	wanted	to	scream	but	couldn’t.	 Instead,
crying,	 she	had	 fallen,	 knees	and	 palms	on	 the	 ground,	 begging	 this	life	  for
mercy.

75
Margot

Fall	2014

76
       DOWN	RESIDENTIAL	ROADS,	MOSTLY	FREE	OF	PEDESTRIANS	at	night	with	an
occasional	family	  walking	  or	 children	  playing	 on	 the	 sidewalk,	 Margot	  and
Miguel	 drove	to	 Hanok	House.	Mrs.	 Baek	had	said,	Your	 mother	used	to	 bring
you	to	 the	 restaurant	 that	 I	 worked	 at,	 Hanok	 House.	Do	 you	 remember?	It
looked	like	an	old	traditional	  house,	lots	of	wood	everywhere.
       There	 was	no	reason	not	to	believe	 what	Mrs.	 Baek	had	claimed	about	 her
mother—connecting	her	mother’s	 recent	grief	to	the	death	of	 a	lover,	the	man	in
the	obituary.	But	 Margot	 still	 wanted	to	 scope	the	place	out,	where	she	and	her
mother	spent	time,	a	place	that	 both	her	mother	 and	Mrs.	Baek	 had	left	behind.
And	besides,	after	all	 she	and	Miguel	 had	been	through	these	past	several	days,
they	needed	a	feast	to	reward	themselves.
       Koreatown,	 like	  many	ethnic	 enclaves	in	major	 cities,	 had	been	changing
slowly.	White	 people	who	had	once	fled	now	edged	their	way	back—particularly
youth	hungry	for	 cheaper	rent	with	access	to	supermarkets,	bars,	and	restaurants.
Yet	when	 areas	“improved,”	  did	the	 lives	within	  them	get	 better	also,	or	 were
they	pushed	away	to	somewhere	cheaper	to	make	room	 for	the	 droves,	the	new
blood?	Soon	 developers	would	  follow	  to	 demolish	 and	build	  over	 the	place,
rebranding	 the	 symbols	 and	 the	  signs	 of	 the	 people	  who	 lived	  there	 (the
“kitschy”	  culture	  and	 the	 “foreign”	  architecture,	  the	 novelty	 of	  foods	 once
deemed	disgusting).	Would	 her	mom	have	been	one	of	 those	priced-out	people,
too?	Or	 would	 she	have	clung	 stubbornly,	 maybe	even	found	 a	second	job	 so
that	she	could	stay	in	Koreatown?	With	 her	limited	 English	and	inability	 to	drive
on	the	freeway,	the	choices	would	be	slim.
       In	 a	brave	mood,	Margot	 had	once	asked	her	mother	in	the	best	Korean	she
could	over	 the	 phone,	“Why	  don’t	  you	go	 back	 to	 Korea?	Why	  do	you	 live
here?”	She	had	 always	wondered	 why	 her	mother	 had	chosen	this	 life,	 which
couldn’t	 be	easier	than	living	 in	Korea	where	 she	would	at	least	speak	the	same
language,	possess	the	same	cultural	understanding	and	history	as	everyone	else.
Even	though	Margot	 knew	 very	little	  about	her	mother’s	 Korean	life—that	  she
was	an	orphan	who	mostly	 worked	 in	clothing	 factories	 from	 her	teens	through
her	twenties,	 eventually	  learning	 to	 design	 clothes—she	 couldn’t	 understand
why	she	would	 rather	 be	in	 a	country	 where	she	had	so	little	  power,	such	few
rights.
       Her	 mother	had	paused	for	a	long	while.
       “I	 would	 be	too	far	away	from	 you,”	her	mother	had	said.
       Margot	  pulled	 into	 the	 narrow,	 one-way	 parking	 lot	 of	 Hanok	 House,	 a
stand-alone	restaurant	in	the	style	 of	 a	traditional	 Korean	 residence	with	 rustic
wood	shutters	and	a	sloped,	gray-tiled	roof.	She	had	never	been	to	Korea	herself,
and	although	she	knew	its	cities	 were	full	 of	skyscrapers	and	electronic	 screens,

77
she	often	 imagined	 the	 homes	to	 still	  look	 this	 way—charming,	  earthy,	 and
functional.
       “Did	  you	ever	hear	back	from	Officer	 Choi?”	Miguel	 asked.
       “No,	 not	 yet.”	Margot	 sighed,	pulling	 the	key	out	of	 the	ignition.	 “Mind	 if	 I
give	him	another	try	now	 before	dinner?	Maybe	he’s	still	 at	work.”
       “No	 worries.	 I’ll	 be	managing	my	prolific	 Grindr.”
       Margot	 laughed	while	pressing	the	police	officer’s	 number.
       “Hey,	   Margot,”	  he	 answered.	 “Sorry	  I	  didn’t	  return	  your	  call	 today.
Mondays	are	the	worst.”
       “No	  problem.	Any	 thoughts	 on	the	landlord?	 The	yelling	 from	 my	 mom’s
apartment?”
       “I	  thought	 it	 was	interesting.	 I	mean,	 he	wasn’t	 certain	where	 the	yelling
was	coming	from	and	on	what	day,	right?”
       “He	  thought	 it	 was	my	 mother.	 There	aren’t	 a	lot	 of	 Koreans	 left	 in	 the
building.	 He	wasn’t	 certain,	 but	 it	 seemed	odd	to	me	 since	my	 mother	wasn’t
particularly	 noisy—especially	 after	I	 moved	out	for	 college.	Anyway,	 it	 seemed
suspicious	enough	for	him	to	bring	it	 up,	don’t	you	 think?”
       “Hmm.	  I	can	stop	 by.	I’ll	  try	 to	talk	 to	him	 this	week,	 see	if	I	 can	get	any
more	details.”
       “That	 would	 be	great,”	 she	said,	heart	quickening.	 “Also,	 before	 you	hang
up—I	 know	 this	 might	 sound	 weird,	 but	 last	 night,	 I	 was	going	 through	 my
mother’s	 apartment	and	 found	 this	 obituary	  she	had	 saved.	It	  was	from	  the
Korean	news	paper	back	in	October.	So	today	I	went	to	the	swap	meet	where	my
mom	worked	to	see	if	any	of	the	other	store	owners	had	seen	anything	suspicious
around	the	weekend	she	died.	One	of	my	mother’s	friends,	a	woman	named	Mrs.
Baek,	said	that	the	man	in	the	 obituary	was	.	.	 .	a	man	that	my	mom	 was	seeing
over	the	summer.	They	 were	dating	 and	.	.	 .	he	was	 married,	so	she	didn’t	  tell
anyone.”
       “And	  you	didn’t	 know	about	this	guy?”
       “No.”
       “But	 he’s	dead	now,	right?	Since	October,	almost	two	 months	ago?”
       “Correct,”	  she	said.	“I	 don’t	 know	 if	 you	 could	do	 this	or	 if	 it’s	 related	to
my	 mom’s	  death,	 but	  is	  there	 any	 way	  you	  could	  find	  out	 some	 more
information	  on	 him?	  His	  name	 was	 Chang-hee	 Kim.	  I	  think	  he	 lived	  in
Calabasas.”
       “I	 could	 look	into	 it	.	.	 .	but	let	me	first	 talk	to	the	landlord,	 okay?	I’ll	 try	 to
get	over	there	this	week.”	He	paused.	“But	if	 her	boyfriend	died	 back	in	October,
I’m	not	 sure	what	that	would	have	to	do	with	your	 mother’s	death.”
       “What	 about	his	wife?	 He	was	having	an	affair	with	 my	mom.”

78
       “Hmm,	  that’s	a	good	point.	I	can	look	into	 it.”
       “Great,	 thanks.	 I	would	 .	 .	.	 almost	want	 to	talk	 to	 her	myself?	 Is	there	 a
way	to	get	her	phone	number	or	address?	I	tried	googling	his	name,	but—”
       “I’m	  not	sure	that’s	a	good	idea.”
       “What	 do	you	mean?”
       “To	  be	honest	.	.	.	your	 mother’s	death	was	an	accident.	 There’s	not	much
we	can	do	unless	something	substantial	happens,	some	revelation,	or	we	find	out
for	 whatever	  reason	that	  your	 mother’s	  death	 is	 connected	 to	 some	 other
activity.”
       “What?”
       “And	  what	if	 Mr.	  Kim’s	 wife	 doesn’t	 know	 about	the	affair?	 What	if	 you
revealed	the	affair	 to	his	widow	 by	 contacting	her?	You	 have	no	 proof	that	 she
was	involved	in	your	 mother’s	death,	so	how	would	we	get	any	information	 from
her	without	 revealing	 that	her	 husband	was	cheating	on	 her?	There’s	a	 chance
she	doesn’t	know,	right?”
       “I	 suppose	so,	but—”
       “How	  would	 you	find	 out	whether	or	 not	she	knows?	You	 couldn’t.	 You’d
have	to	ask	 her	outright,	 and	 there	would	 be	no	 reason	to	 ask	her	about	 your
mom	 if	  her	 husband	 wasn’t	  cheating	 in	  her	 mind.	  There’s	  no	 real	 other
connection.	She’s	a	widow.	It’d	 be—”
       “I	 still	 think	 we	should—”
       “I	  know	 this	is	a	lot,	 Margot.	 You’re	 .	 .	.	finding	  out	a	lot	 of	 things	about
your	mother,	things	 that	she	kept	from	you	 for	a	reason,	right?	Sometimes	those
things	are	hard	to	accept,	and	you	want	them	to	 be	connected	to	the	hardest	fact
of	all—that	 she’s	gone.	I	get	that.”
       “You	  can	believe	 whatever	you	 want,	 Officer	 Choi.”	 Her	 voice	 rose.	She
could	feel	 Miguel’s	 eyes	on	 her.	“But	 I	 absolutely	refuse	 to	settle	for	 anything
but	the	truth.	I	need	to	know	what	happened	that	night	and	why—”
       “Margot—”
       “You	  might	 think	 we’re	 some	kind	  of	burden	 on	 your	workload,	  but	my
mother	worked	 her	ass	off,	 and	she	paid	 taxes	like	 everyone	else.	 She	was	an
honest	person.	She	was	kind.”	 Her	voice	 cracked.	“Maybe	 she	wasn’t	 a	perfect
mother	or	 person,	but	 she	tried	 her	best	 to	do	 what	 was	right	 for	 me	 and	for
everyone	else—except	 herself.	 People	like	  my	 mother	 hold	 up	 this	 sham	 as
much	as	you.”
       “Yikes,”	  Miguel	 whispered.
       “That’s	 not	 it,	Margot.	That’s	 not	what—”
       “She	 deserved	to	 live	 like	 everyone	 else.	You	of	 all	 people	 should	know
better.	‘To	protect	and	to	serve’?”

79
       Margot’s	  ears	pulsed.	 Tears	filled	  her	eyes.	She	 could	hear	 both	 Officer
Choi	and	 Miguel	 breathing,	 startled	by	 her	voice.	 Now	 was	the	 last	chance	to
stand	up	for	her	mother,	whom	she	had	been	ashamed	of	for	so	long.	She	tried	to
muffle	her	crying.
       “I’ll	   try	 to	 get	 you	 some	more	 information,	  Margot,”	 Officer	  Choi	 said,
resigned.	“I’ll	  talk	 to	the	landlord.	 I’ll	  see	what	I	can	find	 out	 about	Mr.	 Kim.”
He	paused.	“I	know	 you	don’t	 think	 I	do,	but	I	 understand	more	than	you	would
know.	I	get	it.	 I’m	just	 trying	to	be	realistic	 here.	I	am	sorry	about	your	loss.”
       “Lord,”	  Miguel	 said	after	she	hung	up	the	phone.
       “Am	  I	crazy?”	She	wiped	the	sweat	from	her	forehead,	catching	her	breath.
       “Honestly,	  I	 think	  you	are	 right.	 Everyone	 else	has	lost	 it,	 Margot.”	  He
turned	his	head	as	if	just	 noticing	the	 sky—a	smoldering	 tangerine	and	hot-pink
fire.	“The	 world	is	fucked.	 But	we	deserve	the	truth.”	He	 unbuckled	his	seat	belt.
“Can	we	eat	now?”
       Margot	 and	Miguel	 exited	the	car	under	the	last	of	 the	day’s	light.	 She	took
a	deep	breath.	She	always	loved	seeing	Los	Angeles	plated	in	gold	by	a	receding
sun,	the	 outlines	 of	  palm	 trees.	 For	 a	 few	 quiet	 moments,	 you	 might	  hear
birdsong	instead	of	car	honks	and	alarms	and	trick	 yourself	into	 believing	it	 was
paradise.
       Entering	  the	 restaurant,	she	 could	 smell	 the	 meat	 grilling	  over	 the	 gas
burners—fat	sizzling	 while	 flames	 licked	 sesame,	soy	sauce,	sugar,	onion,	and
garlic.	Nothing	 could	quite	connect	people	like	food.
       The	 hostess	seated	them	at	a	table	 of	 glazed	wood	 with	 raw	edges.	After
ordering	 beef	short	 ribs	 and	pork	 belly,	  Margot	 showed	 the	waitress—a	 thin
middle-aged	woman	with	 pale	powdered	 skin	and	a	short	bob,	 tidy	 black	apron
and	skirt—the	framed	 image	of	her	and	her	mother	 on	the	day	of	 Margot’s	 high
school	graduation,	the	most	recent	photo	that	Margot	 could	 find.	“Do	 you	 know
this	woman?”
       “Yes,	 I	think	 so,”	the	waitress	said.	“But	 from	a	long	time	 ago.”
       “Do	 you	mean	years?”
       “Let	 me	ask	the	owner.”
       She	 fetched	an	older	 Korean	 man	in	 his	seventies,	with	  bright	 silver	 hair
and	dressed	in	 an	olive	 green	sweater-vest	 and	khakis.	 A	 gold	 watch	 glinted.
With	new	dentures,	he	smiled	like	a	false	sun.
       “We’re	  just	 wondering	 if	 you	 knew	my	 mother.”	 Margot	 handed	him	 the
photo.
       He	 nodded,	lifting	  his	 brows.	“Looks	  familiar.”	  His	 eyes	then	considered
Margot	a	shade	too	long.
       She	made	an	effort	 not	 to	turn	her	 gaze	away.	She	immediately	didn’t	  like

80
him	and	she	wanted	him	to	know	it.
       “When	 was	the	last	time	you	saw	her?”	Margot	 asked.
       He	 scratched	his	 head.	“I	  don’t	 know.	 So	many	 customers.”	 His	 nostrils
flared.	 “All	  look	 almost	 same.”	 He	 grinned—those	 Paul-Bunyan-statue	teeth,
cold	and	white,	clinical.	 “Almost	  same.	Excuse	me.”	Bowing	his	head,	he	turned
to	another	 table	 where	 he	greeted	 a	group	 of	  boisterous	guests—regulars	 or
friends.
       “That	 was	shady,”	Miguel	 said.
       “Maybe	 he’s	just	confused.”
       “He	 doesn’t	seem	that	old.”
       The	  waitress	 returned	 with	  a	 tray	 full	  of	  banchan,	small	  white	 plates
glowing.
       Margot	 decided	to	switch	 tactics.	“Do	 you	remember	a	woman	named	Mrs.
Baek?	She	used	to	work	here.	Red	lipstick?”
       The	waitress	smirked.	 “Oh,	yes,	very	red.”
       “When	 did	she	stop	working	 here?”	Margot	asked.
       The	 waitress	 glanced	 behind	 her	 shoulder.	 “Earlier	  this	 year.	 Spring,	 I
think.”
       After	 switching	 on	the	tabletop	grill’s	 gas	burner	with	 a	click	and	a	hiss,	the
waitress	hurried	  away,	 empty	 tray	 in	 hand.	 Around	  the	 low	 blue	 fire,	  they
munched	on	banchan—seaweed	salad,	mak	kimchi	and	kkakdugi,	lightly	 pickled
mu,	seasoned	spinach,	potato	salad.	A	feast	for	the	senses.
       “Well,”	   Margot	 said.	 “At	 least	 we	know	 Mrs.	 Baek	 was	telling	  the	truth
about	opening	her	store	in	March.”
       Elbows	 on	 the	table,	Miguel	  played	with	 his	chopsticks	 as	if	 pinching	 the
air	in	front	 of	his	face.	“After	 the	riots,	what	did	 your	mom	do?”
       “What	 do	 you	mean?”	Margot	 tasted	the	kkakdugi,	perfectly	 crunchy	and	a
little	sweet.	Her	face	tingled,	 hot	from	the	flames	in	the	center	of	the	table.
       “Your	  mom	 stopped	 talking	 with	 Mrs.	  Baek	then.	 She	was	 busy.	But	 it
seems	kind	of	pivotal,	 right?	 That	they	 stopped	talking,	 and	now	suddenly,	just
this	year,	they	became	friends	again?	Seems	coincidental.”
       “After	  the	riots,	I	 think	 my	mom	worked	 at	some	fast-food	restaurants.	She
took	on	random	jobs	until	 she	could	save	enough—a	couple	years	later—to	start
a	business	again.”	 The	 seasoned	spinach	smelled	 of	 fresh	 sesame	oil,	 which
melted	in	her	 mouth.	“I	 just	 remember	it	 was	very	rough.	 She	was	able	to	save
some	of	the	merchandise	and	hangers	and	stuff	from	her	old	 store,	and	we	lived
with	 those	clothes	in	boxes	 in	the	 apartment	since	we	didn’t	  have	any	place	to
store	it.	  We	 ate	 government	  food—like	  canned	 pork,	 powdered	  milk.	  The
Salvation	Army	 gave	us	toothbrushes.”

81
       She	tasted	the	seaweed	salad,	one	of	her	favorites,	 which	 suppressed	some
of	the	sadness	she	could	feel	rising	 inside	of	 her.	Its	delicate	 gelatinous	acidity,
its	 brininess	 satisfied	 her.	 How	 she	 yearned	for	  the	 ocean	right	  now.	 As	 a
teenager,	she	would	 ride	 the	 bus	 on	 her	own	  to	 the	beach	 and	spend	 hours
walking	 or	sitting	 on	a	 bench,	reading	and	watching	 the	water.	 “It	 was	hard.	It
was	really	hard	back	then.”
       The	 waitress	 returned	 to	 the	 table	 with	 a	 platter	 full	  of	 raw	 meat—the
marinated	short	ribs	 and	pork—to	 grill.	 Soy	 sauce	and	sugar,	ginger	and	garlic
caramelized,	dripping	  fat	 into	 the	 fire.	  With	 an	 intense	 feeling	 of	 gratitude,
Margot	moved	 the	galbi	 and	slices	of	 pork	belly	 to	 keep	them	from	 sticking	 to
the	 grill.	  How	  joyful,	  how	 abundant	 life	  could	  sometimes	 be—despite	 the
disappointments,	the	tragedy.	 Every	 meal,	even	 a	somber	one	 like	 this,	was	 a
celebration	of	what	we	had	left,	 what	remained	on	this	earth	to	taste	and	feel	and
see.
       She	imagined	 her	mother	 at	the	 Grand	Canyon,	the	 dark	shadows	pressed
against	red-	and	 sand-colored	rock	 striated	over	 billions	 of	 years	by	 wind	 and
water.	 She	thought	 of	  Las	 Vegas,	her	 mother’s	  hands	gripping	  the	 steering
wheel,	the	open	windows,	and	the	fine	powder	that	caked	their	faces	and	arms.
       “During	  that	time	was	when	my	mother	drove	us	to	Vegas.”
       “Vegas?	 I	thought	your	mom	 didn’t	go	anywhere?”
       “It	  was	just	once.	I	was	probably	 about	six	years	old.	 She	had	never	driven
on	the	freeway	before,	I	don’t	 think.	She	was	really	slow.”	 Margot	 laughed.	“I’m
surprised	we	 were	never	 pulled	over.	 Anyway,	  we	were	 supposed	to	meet	 up
with	 someone	there.	I	 think	 this	 was	right	 before	 my	 mother	opened	 her	new
store,	the	last	one,	in	the	swap	meet.”
       “Interesting.”	  He	finished	 the	last	of	the	seaweed	salad.	“I	guess	it	could’ve
been	anyone	that	she	was	meeting	up	with?	She	didn’t	 have	any	family,	 though,
right?”
       “No,”	  Margot	 said.	“But	  .	.	.	 I	don’t	 think	 any	of	 this	 has	to	do	with	 Mrs.
Baek.	I	mean,	I	 believe	Mrs.	 Baek	now,	 but	it	 is	 odd	that	my	 mother	would’ve
just	cut	her	off	that	way,	right?”
       “Well,	   it	 probably	 wasn’t	  intentional,”	  Miguel	  said.	“Sometimes	 people
grow	apart,	or	 maybe	your	mom	 just	didn’t	 have	time	 for	 friends—only	 church
and	you,	I	guess.	She	was	trying	to	survive,	right?”
       Once	the	meat	had	browned,	 Margot	laid	 pieces	on	Miguel’s	 plate,	like	 her
mother	would’ve	 done,	before	serving	herself.	A	heaviness	gathered	in	her	chest.
She	wrapped	a	bite	 of	warm	 white	 rice,	soft	 pork	 belly,	 and	ssamjang	in	a	 red
lettuce	leaf,	still	wet,	 and	crammed	it	into	her	mouth.
       As	 a	 teenager	in	 restaurants,	she	had	 often	glanced	 around	 her	at	 larger

82
groups	in	their	booths,	envying	 the	volume	 of	people,	the	generations	that	could
be	brought	into	 a	single	 period	 of	 time	and	space,	the	 architecture	of	 a	family
over	shared	 food.	 There	 was	 a	kind	  of	 rigid	  hierarchy	 between	parents	 and
children,	 older	  and	younger	  siblings.	 But	  the	 politics	  protected	 a	 sense	of
togetherness	and	place,	a	statement	that	read	in	the	silence	of	subtle	gestures	(the
pouring	of	 another’s	glass,	the	use	of	two	hands,	the	serving	of	 others	first):	 We
will	always	 protect	each	other.
       Yet	 despite	those	gestures,	those	fragile	 attempts	to	express	their	 feelings,
she	and	her	mother	couldn’t	  get	along,	relax.	 Were	they	 too	foreign	 from	 each
other?
       Or	 was	 it	 the	intensity	  of	two	  women	alone,	 two	 women	 who	would	  be
mirrors	 for	each	other,	 for	 each	other’s	 sadness,	disappointments,	rage?	If	one
would	experience	joy,	 the	other	would	 feel	not	 her	own	joy	 rising	but	 a	pang	of
jealousy	rooted	in	a	fear	of	 abandonment	that	would	cause	her	to	strike	the	other
down.	And	  where	did	 this	 fear	of	 loneliness	 come	 from?	Was	 it	 universal	 or
specific	to	her	mother?	Or	maybe	even	specific	to	being	Korean?
       Her	 mother,	as	a	child	 of	the	 war,	would	 have	surely	died	 alone	if	 she	had
not	been	found.	And	 the	 whole	world	 told	 women	every	 day,	If	 you	are	 alone,
you	are	no	one.	A	woman	alone	is	no	one	at	all.
       Miguel	 had	only	 spent	a	few	days	in	LA	 here	and	there	on	vacation,	so	they
decided	to	  see	the	 city	  after	 dinner.	  They	 could	 use	 a	 break,	 a	 diversion.
Anything	 to	get	 her	out	of	 her	own	 head	and	heart,	which	 by	now	 had	become
flooded	with	 details	 of	her	mother’s	 life.	 She	did	 everything	 for	so	long	 within
her	power	to	avoid	the	reality,	 the	pain	of	 her	mother,	and	now	it	 came	down	on
her	in	 a	deluge	of	 confusing	 facts,	images,	and	emotions.	 The	sock	 lady,	Mrs.
Baek,	red	 lips	 smeared.	 The	obituary	  of	 her	 mother’s	 lover,	 who	 resembled
Margot	  as	 well—the	   squareness	of	  the	  jaw,	  maybe	  even	 the	  eyes,	 the
cheekbones.	The	restaurant	owner’s	brand-new	smile.	 Her	mother	 facedown	on
the	carpet.	The	dark	 smell.	A	 gas.	The	smell	 she	could	 not	get	out	 of	her	 nose
and	mouth.
       “Let’s	  drive	  to	the	 ocean,”	 Margot	 said,	 starting	 the	car.	 “We	 can	 walk
around	the	pier	a	little,	then	we	can	come	back	and	go	to	a	bar,	or	there’s	this	old
salsa	club	downtown.	We	should	check	it	out.”
       “Hell	  yeah,”	said	Miguel.
       Fifteen	  minutes	later	 they	 reached	Pico	 Boulevard,	  named	after	 the	 last
governor	of	 California	  under	 Mexican	 rule,	 which	 stretched	all	 the	 way	 west
from	Los	 Angeles	 to	Santa	Monica,	 getting	 richer,	 cleaner,	and	quieter	toward
the	coast.
       Although	   chilly	  and	 damp	 from	  the	 ocean,	 Margot	  cracked	 open	 the

83
window	 for	some	air.	She	had	always	loved	 coming	 to	the	beach,	oftentimes	by
herself	so	that	 she	could	plop	 down	 on	the	 sand,	bury	her	 toes,	and	watch	 the
waves	crash,	or	walk	along	the	old	creaky	pier	 and	play	Galaga	at	the	arcade.	As
a	teenager,	she	would	ride	 a	local	 line	to	 Rimpau	station	 where	she	hopped	on
the	Blue	Bus	for	an	easy,	hour-long	commute	to	Santa	Monica.
       She	had	been	mesmerized	by	the	smell	 and	the	sound	of	the	waves	and	the
vast	expanse	of	murky	blue	that	was	not	only	 a	moving	 color	but	actually	 a	well
of	 living	  organisms—fish	 and	 algae	 and	 octopuses	and	 whales—all	 moving
through	their	 lives	unaware	of	 the	terrestrial	 world	 above	it.	 Knowing	 also	that
somewhere	at	 the	end	 of	 the	 ocean	an	 entirely	 different	  continent	 of	 people
stared	into	 the	 same	abyss	of	 water	 and	distance	 and	time	 comforted	 her.	 A
universal	aloneness	and	yearning.
       “I	 would	 be	too	far	away	from	 you,”	her	mother	had	said.
       And	 now	she	was	gone	forever.
       On	 Ocean	Avenue,	they	parked	beside	the	bluff	with	 well-maintained	 grass,
robust	palm	 trees,	 and	 a	recreational	 area	for	  a	retirement	 center.	 Homeless
people	lay	down	in	their	bundles	on	the	benches.
       “Do	 you	want	 to	walk	around	a	little?”	 she	asked.
       They	  opened	their	 car	 doors	 and	flung	  themselves	into	 the	 cold,	 biting
wind.	 Already	  pitch-black	 outside,	 carnival	  lights	 danced	on	 the	 pier	 where
floodlights	  touched	 the	 surface	 of	  the	 ocean	 with	 a	  mottled	 yellow	  glow.
Walking	  to	 the	 pier,	 tourists	 bundled	  up	 in	 coats	 and	 sweaters,	filling	   the
darkness	with	   a	 cacophony	 of	  voices	 and	  languages—accents,	tones,	 and
rhythms	from	 across	continents.	 The	cheerful	 crowd	 floated	 like	 a	diaspora	of
desire,	seeking	 the	thrill	  of	 new	 experiences,	the	 satisfaction	 of	 hunger	 with
funnel	 cakes,	hotdogs,	 hamburgers,	 and	 fries.	 Arms	 outstretched	 for	 selfies.
Local	couples	 and	families	 moved	at	 a	slower,	more	 contemplative	 pace;	they,
like	Margot,	 had	come	here	for	comfort,	for	the	familiar	 sights	and	sounds,	a	part
of	 the	patchwork	 of	 memories	 that	 we	 touched	when	 life	  and	the	 future	 felt
uncertain.
       Margot	 zipped	 up	her	jacket	as	the	wind	 cut	their	 faces	and	ears.	Stopping
at	the	bottom	of	 the	stairs	that	took	 them	to	the	beach	itself,	 they	removed	their
shoes.	The	soft,	cold	 sand	swallowed	 their	 feet.	She	rolled	 up	 her	jeans.	They
stomped	arm	 in	 arm	 through	  sand,	shivering	 as	 they	 pressed	their	 sides	 up
against	one	another.	The	wind	whipped	Margot’s	 hair	in	 her	face,	clinging	to	 the
balm	on	her	 lips.	As	 they	stood	 twenty	 feet	or	so	 from	where	 the	ocean	licked
the	shore,	Margot	released	a	great	big	sigh.
       “Isn’t	  it	beautiful?”	 she	asked.	“It’s	 freezing,	but	.	 .	.	yes,	there’s	something
magical	here.”

84
       Her	 cell	phone	rang.	She	flinched.	An	unknown	 number.
       “Hi,	  this	is	Tom	from	 Ko-America	 tours.”
       “Oh,	 yes?”
       “You	   wanted	 some	 information?	  About	  Mina	  Lee.	  September,	Grand
Canyon?”
       “Yes,	 do	you	know	 who	my	 mother	was	with	 during	that	trip?	Do	 you	have
any	information	on	her	or	him?”
       “Yes,	  um,	I	 have	 his	 emergency	form.	 Hmm,	 no	 phone	number,	 but	 the
name	is	Kim	Chang-hee.	I	have	address	only,	in	Calabasas.”
       Margot	 remembered	the	 black	tennis	 shoes	she	had	found	in	 her	mother’s
closet,	covered	in	a	fine	rust-colored	dust,	the	smell	of	mineral	 and	sage.	She	had
finally	 made	it	to	one	of	the	national	 parks,	after	all	these	years	of	work,	and	she
had	not	been	alone,	but	with	a	lover.
       “Could	 you	 give	me	the	address?	Or	any	other	information.”
       “Uh	 .	.	.	who	 are	you	again?”
       “I’m	   her	daughter.	I’m	  Mina	 Lee’s	 daughter.”	The	 words	 carved	into	 the
heaviness	inside	her	chest,	which	being	by	the	ocean	had	only	partially	 relieved.
Was	she	still	a	daughter	if	her	mother	was	dead?	“She	died	a	week	or	so	ago	and
.	.	.	I	 wanted	to	get	in	touch	 with	 him	to	let	 him	know.	 I	thought	 he	would	want
to	know.”
       “Oh,	 I’m	 so	sorry	about	that.”
       “Could	 you	 text	me	his	address?	Will	you	do	that	now?	I	 don’t	have	a	lot	 of
time.	I	 have	to	leave	soon,”	 she	lied.	“I	 live	 in	 Seattle	and	I	have	to	 go	back	to
work.”
       As	 soon	 as	she	received	the	text	 with	 the	 Calabasas	address,	she	jumped
with	excitement.
       “He	 sent	it,”	 Margot	said.	“What	 next?”
       “No	 phone	number,	right?”	 Shivering,	Miguel	 danced	his	feet	in	place.
       Margot	 shook	her	head.	“We	could	drive	 there	maybe?”
       “Yeah,	  this	 week	 for	 sure.	 I	 gotta	 go	 to	 the	 Valley	 anyway	 to	 look	  at
apartments.	But	would	we	just	knock?	We	can’t	 do	that,	right?”
       “What	 if	 Officer	 Choi	is	right	 and	she	doesn’t	know	about	the	affair,	or	who
my	mother	is?”
       “I	  think	 we	should	go	 check	it	out	 anyway.	I	 mean,	we’ll	 be	in	 the	Valley
already.	We	don’t	need	to	knock,	 just	kind	of	 scope	it	out.	I	mean	.	.	.	this	would
be	the	former	residence	of	your	 mom’s	boyfriend.	 And	 .	.	.	 do	you	still	 think	 he
could	be	your	dad?”
       “Maybe,	  but	it	 just	all	 seems	too	coincidental	at	this	 point.”	 She	shrugged.
“But	 I	think	 there’s	something	there.	My	 mom	never	ever	had	a	boyfriend	to	 my

85
knowledge	while	 I	was	growing	 up.	What	 would	 she	be	doing	with	this	 specific
man?	A	married	man	.	.	.	with	cancer.	It	was	doomed.”
       “And	  the	wife—she	had	to	know,	right?	 I	mean,	c’mon.”
       “Yeah,	 he	went	on	a	goddamn	recreational	tour	with	 my	mother.	She	had	to
know.”
       “We’ll	  figure	 it	out.”
       “I’m	  just	 glad.	 It’s	 weird,	 but	I’m	  happy	that	 she	went	on	 that	trip.”	  The
ocean	rippled	  under	 the	 full	  silver	  moonlight.	  “I	  never	 saw	 her	 on	 a	 real
vacation.	Ever.	I’m	 relieved	she	got	to	do	that	before	she	died.”
       For	 the	first	  time	since	 discovering	 her	mother’s	 body	 last	week,	 she	felt
hopeful—as	 if	  somehow,	 slowly,	  her	 persistence	might	  be	 paying	 off.	  She
dropped	her	shoes	to	the	ground	and	ran	toward	the	ocean,	which	appeared	calm
and	placid.	The	cold	 air	rushed	in	 and	out	of	her	 lungs,	whipped	her	 hair	out	of
her	 bun,	 all	 over	  her	 face.	 She	had	 felt	  so	 trapped	 her	 entire	 life	  in	 that
apartment,	at	that	swap	meet,	inside	her	mother’s	life.	And	temporarily	 she	could
free	herself	here,	right	now;	there	was	so	much	space	and	hardly	anyone	around.
       Her	 feet	splashed	into	the	icy	 water.	She	screamed,	then	laughed,	realizing
she	had	chosen	this	for	herself.	With	her	teeth	chattering,	she	ran	out	and	back	in
again,	deeper,	up	to	her	knees.	A	dip	in	this	water	was	a	kind	of	insanity.	 But	she
felt	free.
       She	had	always	been	a	little	 scared	of	the	water,	 of	getting	 in	too	 deep	and
being	swept	away.	 She	never	learned	 how	to	 swim.	 There	were	 no	swimming
pools	where	 she	had	grown	 up,	no	 extracurricular	 classes	for	kids.	 Water	 was
always	something	she	walked	in	and	feared	for	its	power.
       On	 the	pier,	roller-coaster	riders	screamed.	Red	and	white	lights	danced	in	a
black	sky.	The	 salt	air	 smelled	like	 safety,	the	longest	sigh	 of	relief.	 The	 Ferris
wheel	spun	 and	blinked,	  throbbing	 lightheartedly,	  its	 spokes	like	 many	 arms
outstretched	in	the	night.
       As	 she	stood	knee-deep	in	the	water,	a	tangle	of	weeds	wrapped	around	her
ankles,	tickling	 the	skin.	She	could	trip	 and	fall	into	 the	dark	foaming	water,	and
the	strands	would	 wind	 around	her,	 squeezing	the	last	 breath	out	of	 her	 body,
until	she	belonged	to	no	one,	not	even	herself.	She	would	 belong	to	the	sea.	In	a
panic,	she	lifted	 her	 feet	in	 a	dance,	retreating	toward	 the	sand,	to	 free	herself
from	what	was,	upon	closer	inspection,	not	actually	 seaweed,	but	a	thin	rope,	no,
a	net,	a	piece	of	 fishing	 net,	 gummy	and	 laced	with	 kelp	 leaves	and	pearl-like
polyps.	Maintaining	 her	balance,	she	dragged	the	net	out	of	the	water	and	picked
it	clean	as	she	walked	toward	Miguel.	Her	 nose	ran	from	the	cold,	and	she	wiped
her	face	on	her	sleeve.
       “Are	 you	 okay?”	Miguel	 asked.

86
       “This	 thing	 wrapped	around	my	legs.”
       Margot	 held	a	corner	of	net	out	to	the	sky,	 up	against	the	shape	of	the	Ferris
wheel	 on	 the	pier	  in	 the	 distance—blinking	  in	 black,	 many-spoked,	 turning
slowly,	aglow.	 She	imagined	all	the	tiny	 silver	 fish	that	would	 swim	 through	the
weave—like	her	 mother’s	words,	 no,	her	mother	herself,	shimmering,	 liquefied,
slipping	through	every	hole.

87
  Mina

Fall	1987

88
       WHEN	SHE	FINISHED	HER	SHIFT	ON	MOST	DAYS,	SHE	found	something	small
waiting	among	her	belongings—two	 bananas,	a	pack	of	gum,	a	head	of	lettuce,	a
small	box	of	 chocolates.	It	was	hard	to	tell	 what	the	logic	 of	each	selection	was,
or	if	 there	was	 any	at	 all.	Depending	 on	 her	mood,	each	item	 seemed	entirely
thoughtful	 or	utterly	 meaningless.	She	looked	forward	 to	 seeing	what	had	been
placed	in	her	 bin,	and	 on	the	days	when	 she	didn’t	 receive	 anything,	she	went
home	sullenly	disappointed,	 as	if	that	was	the	inevitable	 end	to	a	streak	of	 good
fortune.	But	 then	the	 next	day,	she	would	 find	 something	 again—a	package	of
ramen,	a	small	container	of	 doenjang,	the	most	exquisite	 Korean	pear,	perfectly
shaped	and	freckled—and	 the	 world	 seemed	to	open	 up	a	 little	 once	 more,	a
crack	of	light	 seeping	into	darkness.
       She	knew	 it	was	Mr.	 Kim.	 He	 had	seen	her	that	day,	after	she	had	rung	up
the	father	and	daughter	who	reminded	her	so	much	of	her	own,	after	 she	had	run
to	the	bathroom	 and	emerged	with	 her	face	red	 and	swollen.	 He	had	given	 her
that	look,	silently	 acknowledging	 her	pain,	and	later	that	day,	she	had	discovered
the	fruit,	 that	beautiful	 green	apple,	and	the	ramen	in	 her	bin.	 Since	then	it	 had
been	clear	 in	  their	 quiet	  and	polite	  exchanges	that	  he	 wanted	 to	 help	 her
somehow,	that	somehow	in	her	loneliness,	her	despair,	he	recognized	something.
Maybe	a	bit	of	himself.
       A	  part	of	 her	 wanted	 to	 reject	everything,	  to	confront	  him	 and	ask	 him
politely	  to	 not	 leave	 her	  anything	 anymore.	 She	 didn’t	  need	 or	 want	  any
sympathy.	 And	 it	  confused	 her.	 What	 was	 the	 point	 of	  these	gestures	that
couldn’t	lead	anywhere	for	 her?
       At	  the	 same	time,	 the	 idea	of	 not	 receiving	 the	 little	  gifts,	 which	 often
served	as	the	highlight	of	her	entire	day,	terrified	 her.	Maybe	it	 was	the	tiniest	of
things,	at	 times,	on	 a	consistent	basis,	that	 kept	us	 alive,	 and	if	 she	could	 not
create	such	kindnesses	for	herself,	couldn’t	 she	allow	someone	else	to	do	so	for
her?
       After	 a	couple	 weeks	of	the	monotony,	 the	accretive	familiarity	  of	the	cash
and	the	 coins	 in	 her	hand,	 the	 dull	 flashes	 of	 courtesy	 between	her	 and	the
customers,	punctuated	only	 by	 the	gifts	 she	received	 at	the	end	 of	 most	days,
Mario	disappeared.
       On	 a	 crisp	autumn	 day,	Mina	  approached	her	register,	 where	a	 teenager,
maybe	eighteen	or	nineteen	years	old,	was	working	  with	 Mr.	 Kim	 on	the	front-
of-store	tasks	that	 Mario	 usually	 did	on	 his	own.	 As	 soon	as	Mr.	 Kim	 noticed
Mina,	he	tried	 to	smile	and	walked	away	 to	the	back	of	the	store.	She	said	hello,
acting	as	natural	as	possible	with	 the	new	 employee	who	introduced	 himself	 as
Daniel.
       Where	 was	Mario?	Perhaps	he	had	the	day	off,	which,	 for	whatever	reason,

89
seemed	odd	to	her.	He	had	quietly	guided	her	through	many	of	her	more	difficult
days	as	a	 cashier.	Something	 about	 the	whole	  scene	seemed	askew.	But	 she
reminded	herself	that	he	could	be	sick	or	on	vacation.	Who	knew?
       Daniel	 learned	 quickly,	 had	certainly	 worked	 in	 a	supermarket	or	 grocery
store	before.	 During	 the	 slower	hours,	 he	would	  ask	if	 she	 needed	help	with
anything,	 which	 she	 didn’t.	 She	 went	 around	 tidying	  the	registers,	 trying	  to
ignore	him	  because	she	couldn’t	 quite	 think	  of	 anything	 else	for	  him	 to	 do.
Mario	 always	 kept	 himself	 busy.	 She	looked	 around	 to	 see	if	  Mr.	 Kim	  was
anywhere,	but	she	didn’t	 see	him,	nor	the	 owner,	Mr.	 Park,	at	all	 for	 the	rest	of
the	day.
       At	  the	end	 of	 her	 shift,	 a	Korean	 pear	 wrapped	in	 its	 Styrofoam	 sleeve
waited	 in	 her	 storage	bin.	  She	inhaled	 the	 dappled	 skin	 of	 the	 fruit,	  which
smelled	of	fall,	 crisp	and	sweet.	She	cradled	the	pear	in	her	two	hands	and,	for	a
second,	pressed	it	to	her	chest.
       Mina	 had	come	out	 of	the	 restroom	and	gone	down	the	soft	 drinks	 aisle	to
pick	something	up	for	 herself	when	she	noticed	Mr.	 Kim,	 who	had	seemed	to	be
avoiding	her,	walking	 away	toward	the	other	end	of	the	aisle.	Finally	 she	had	the
chance	to	ask	him	about	Mario.	For	a	second,	she	thought	to	proceed	slowly;	she
didn’t	 want	to	run	 into	him,	 but	at	the	same	time,	she	was	tired	of	 not	knowing,
and	something	about	his	 avoidance	pained	her,	 made	her	question	the	items	 in
her	bin,	 and	 whether	or	 not	 she	had	 mistaken	 his	politeness,	 his	 kind	 nature
toward	everyone	for	something	else.
       “Mr.	  Kim,”	 she	called.
       He	 turned	around.	His	face	was	haggard,	tired	around	the	eyes.
       She	 walked	  closer	 to	 him	  but	 stayed	 far	 enough	 away	  to	 not	 appear
suspicious	to	anyone	passing	by.
       “Is	 he	sick?”	she	asked.
       “Who?”
       “Mario.”
       “Oh.	  No,	he	 .	.	 .”	 He	turned	 his	 head	to	see	if	 anyone	was	 coming	 from
behind.	“He	got	sent	back.	To	Mexico.”
       At	   that	 moment,	  she	 felt	  the	  distance	 between	 them—cold	  like	   the
aluminum	 can	in	her	 hand.	She	had	the	 sudden	urge	to	throw	 it	 and	break	 the
cruel,	fluorescent	light.
       “Why?”	  Her	voice	cracked	as	she	fully	 realized	what	he	meant.	They	would
probably	never	see	Mario	again.
       “I	  don’t	 know.	 I	 tried	to	 .	.	 .	When	 I	 found	 out,	I	 thought	maybe	 I	 could
send	him	some	money	for	a	lawyer.”
       “How	  could	he	get	sent	back?”

90
       “He	didn’t	have	his	papers.	I	don’t	know.”
       “Oh.”	 Her	 eyes	dropped	to	the	floor.	Could	Mr.	 Kim	 tell	 that	she,	too,
didn’t	have	her	papers,	or	at	least	not	yet?	Was	it	obvious	to	others?	Or	had
Mario	somehow	gotten	himself	in	trouble,	and	in	the	process	been	caught?
       “His	 mother	 and	 his	brother	 and	sisters	 are	still	  here.	They	 all	 live
together.”
       “So,	that’s	it?	He	just	gets	taken	away.”
       “It’s	 happened	before.	I	don’t	know	why,	what	triggered	it.”
       “But	he’s	been	here	all	this	time,	right?”
       “Yes.	It	doesn’t	matter,	though.”
       “But	.	.	.	there	has	to	be	something.	How	could	he	disappear	like	that?”
       “I	 spoke	to	his	mom.	That’s	how	I	found	out.	He	just	didn’t	show	up,	so	I
knew	something	was	wrong.	I	think	he	was	the	only	one	supporting	his	family.
His	father	had	been	killed	going	home	one	day.	Shot	out	of	nowhere.”	Tears
welled	up	in	Mr.	Kim’s	eyes.	“It’s	not	all	right.”
       “Is	there	anything	we	can	do	for	them?”
       “I’m	 not	sure,	but	I	think	 I’m	going	to	 start	collecting	some	money.”	Mr.
Kim	slipped	a	pack	of	cigarettes	out	of	his	shirt	pocket.	He	had	never	given	off
any	indication	that	he	smoked	before.	“I	went	by	last	night	with	some	groceries.
There	was	a	little	baby,	a	couple	girls,	a	boy.	She	has	some	family,	I	think.	A
church.	But	I’m	gonna	start	collecting	some	money	here.	I	haven’t	told	anyone
else	yet.”
       “Okay,	let	me	know,”	she	said.	“I	want	to	help.”
       He	tapped	out	a	cigarette,	holding	it	softly	in	his	hand.
       She	wanted	to	hold	that	hand	now.

91
       ONE	WEEK	LATER	OUTSIDE	OF	THE	SUPERMARK	ET,	Mina	wrapped	her	sweater
around	her	body	 before	climbing	  into	 the	passenger	seat	of	a	large	 white	 van,
which	 smelled	of	 exhaust,	damp	 cardboard,	and	overripe	 fruit.	  In	 the	driver’s
seat,	Mr.	Kim	 switched	 on	the	radio	to	 a	sudden	blast	of	pop	music.	 He	flipped
through	different	 stations	until	 he	found	some	oldies—the	 Shirelles’	 “Dedicated
to	the	One	I	Love.”	 After	 turning	onto	the	street,	he	eased	into	the	steady	flow	of
early	 Saturday	 night	  traffic,	  bopping	  his	 hand	  on	 the	 steering	 wheel	  and
mouthing	  the	 words	  with	  the	  enthusiasm	 of	  someone	 younger,	  someone
unharmed	by	life.
       She	 smiled	  at	 this	 morsel	 of	  joy,	  despite	the	  heaviness	of	  their	 task.
Swaying	a	 little	 to	 the	 music,	she	stared	out	 the	 window	 as	they	 drove	 south
through	unfamiliar	  neighborhoods.	 She	tried	 not	 to	 look	 at	 him.	 It	 made	 her
nervous	to	sit	 so	close	to	 him.	She	could	 reach	out	and	 touch	him,	 and	no	one
would	see.	No	one	would	know.
       In	  front	 of	 a	 two-story	  apartment	building,	  windows	  barred	 and	cracks
crawling	 up	the	stucco	like	 vines,	 Mr.	 Kim	 unloaded	the	 bags	of	donated	food
from	the	van	and	carried	them	 to	the	top	of	the	steps.	He	pressed	one	of	the	unit
numbers	on	the	intercom,	 and	when	a	woman	answered,	he	introduced	 himself.
For	 a	 second,	Mina	  wasn’t	  sure	 if	  she	would	  open	 the	 door	 until	  a	 loud
obnoxious	buzz	let	them	inside.
       Mario’s	   mother	  stood	 in	  front	  of	 her	  apartment	 door	 like	  a	  woman
accustomed	to	bad	news.	 Her	orangish	 blond	hair,	 dark	 at	the	 roots,	had	been
pulled	 into	 a	 loose,	high	  bun	above	 a	 heavy	face	 with	  vertical	 lines	 carved
between	her	brows.	Her	black	T-shirt	 was	stretched	at	the	neck,	revealing	fragile
collarbones.
       “Hola,	  Lupe,”	 Mr.	 Kim	  said.	“Uh,	 tenemos	comida,	 uh	.	 .	.	fideos,	 leche,
jugos	.	.	.	para	ustedes.”
       Lupe	 clapped	 her	palms	 in	 response.	She	reached	to	help	 Mina	 with	  the
bags,	but	Mina	  refused	as	Lupe	 guided	 them	inside	 of	 her	apartment.	 On	the
sunken	couch	sat	three	ebullient	 children	 of	 different	 ages	glued	to	 a	Spanish-
language	game	show	on	TV,	 erupting	 into	 squeals	of	laughter	 at	every	 joke	or
wacky	 stunt.	The	 oldest,	 a	girl	  of	 about	ten	 or	 eleven,	held	 a	 baby	 with	 the
downiest	brown	 hair	on	 her	lap.	 The	baby	sputtered,	and	she	wiped	 the	baby’s
mouth	with	a	cloth.
       Mina	  smiled	 thinking	 of	 her	 own	 daughter	at	 that	 baby’s	 age—her	pink
face,	the	little	  closed	eyes,	the	nose,	the	tiniest	 fingers	 and	toes,	the	 creamiest
folds	of	skin,	and	that	smell,	that	sweetest	of	smells,	soft	and	powdery.
       “¿Quieren	 algo	de	beber?”	Lupe	asked,	gesturing	for	them	to	sit.
       Mr.	 Kim	 rested	the	bags	on	a	round	dining	 table	and	slid	two	 chairs	out	for

92
themselves	while	 Lupe	 poured	glasses	of	 orange	juice.	 Thirstier	 than	 she	had
thought,	 Mina	 sipped	 gratefully	 as	 Lupe	 sat	down	  with	 them,	 observing	 the
children	watching	television,	 laughing.	The	eldest	daughter	lowered	the	volume.
       “No	 saben	lo	que	le	pasó	a	Mario,”	Lupe	whispered.	“No	 sé	cómo	decirles.”
       Mina	 recognized	 enough	words	to	piece	together	 that	Lupe	hadn’t	 told	 the
children	about	what	had	happened	to	Mario.
       “¿Cuándo	fue	la	 última	vez	que	.	.	.	escuchaste	de	él?”	Mr.	Kim	asked.
       Tears	spilled	 out	of	 Lupe’s	 eyes.	Mr.	Kim	 pulled	 a	handkerchief	out	 of	his
shirt	 pocket.	 The	 second	girl,	  without	 the	 baby,	 and	 the	boy	 rushed	 to	 her,
putting	their	faces	on	her	back,	their	arms	around	her	shoulders.
       Unsure	 of	 what	to	 do	next,	 Mr.	 Kim	  and	Mina	 stared	at	the	 dining	 room
table.	 When	 Mina	  glanced	up	  to	 see	the	 mother	 and	 children	  holding	 and
comforting	each	other,	she	could	feel	her	heart,	which	she	had	worked	so	hard	to
ignore,	tear	in	two.
       “Lo	  siento,”	Mina	 said.	“Lo	 siento.”	One	of	the	expressions	she	had	learned
from	Hector	and	Consuela.
       When	 Lupe	 finished	 blotting	  the	tears	from	 her	 face,	she	 inhaled	deeply
through	her	mouth.	 Her	 daughter	wiped	 away	the	hair	 sticking	 to	her	 face	and
kissed	her	mother	on	the	forehead	with	such	tenderness	that	Mina	felt	a	heat	rise
from	her	chest	and	she	couldn’t	help	 but	cry.	Mr.	 Kim’s	 eyes	rested	on	Mina—a
shade	too	long.
       He	 now	 knew.	 This	was	 her	sadness,	too.	She	was	mourning	 someone,	a
family.
       The	 following	  week,	Mina	 and	 Mr.	 Kim	 sat	side	by	 side	on	 the	couch	 as
Lupe	 served	 leftover	  chocolate	 cake	 on	 paper	 plates	 printed	 with	  rainbow
confetti.	Yesterday	had	been	her	eldest	daughter’s	birthday.	 The	two	girls	 ran	in
circles	 around	the	 small	 living	  room,	  bopping	 each	other	 with	  helium-filled
balloons,	while	the	little	 boy,	five	 or	six	years	old,	held	the	baby.
       Lupe	 had	 received	a	 phone	call	 from	  Mario	 at	 a	detention	 center	in	 the
morning.	 Describing	  the	conversation,	 she	 clapped	 her	 hands,	eyes	 upward,
thankful	to	 God.	Tears	leaked	out	of	 her	eyes.	Having	 heard	stories	of	briberies
and	beatings,	even	murders,	she	only	needed	to	know	that	he	was	still	alive.
       Mina	 could	 sense	Lupe’s	guilt,	 the	guilt	 that	 perhaps	all	parents	feel	when
somehow	they	lose	their	child,	 no	matter	the	age	or	the	circumstance.	That	 guilt
was	a	vertical	and	endless	wall	 made	smooth	from	 hands	and	feet	attempting	to
climb	 it.	 Occasionally	 a	memory	 together—the	 laughter,	the	 squeaky	voice,	 a
kiss	on	the	cheek—would	serve	as	a	kind	of	ridge	on	which	 to	hoist	yourself,	 but
still	you’d	 fall	 somehow.	There	was	no	way	to	rest.
       As	 they	 left	 the	 party,	Mina	  pulled	herself	 into	 the	 van	beside	Mr.	  Kim.

93
“Does	 she	know	 yet	 how	 long	 he’ll	 be	 there,	in	 the	 detention	center?”	 Mina
asked	him.
       “No.	 But	 could	be	weeks,	months.”	 He	turned	the	ignition	 a	few	times.	The
engine	choked.	“I	spoke	to	Mr.	 Park	about	getting	her	a	job	at	the	market.”
       “Oh,	 that’s	good,”	 she	said.
       “She	 has	 a	neighbor,	 a	nephew	 who’ll	  help	 her	with	  the	kids	 while	  she
works.”	 He	tried	 again.	This	time,	 the	engine	groaned	to	life.	 “It’ll	   be	hard,	but
it’s	not	hopeless.”
       “What	 about	her?	Is	she	or	the	kids	at	any	risk?	Of	being	deported?”
       “Yes,	 of	course.”
       Outside	 the	car	windows,	 men	cruised	 on	low	 bikes.	Tires	 glinted	 like	 the
steady	throb	 of	 lighthouses	in	 the	 dark.	 Mina	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 wonder	 what
each	person	living	 in	this	 city	 did	to	 get	by.	 How	 many	of	 them	lived	 like	 her,
underground,	and	how	 many	had	stories	like	 hers?	How	 many	risks	 did	people
take,	on	and	off	 paper,	to	 survive	the	brutalities	 of	 what	they	 could	 not	change
about	their	lives?	America,	to	 many	abroad,	represented	the	only	way	out—not	a
solution	but	a	chance	to	keep	hope	alive	and	burning.
       But	 some	days	she	felt	like	she	was	living	inside	of	 a	lie.
       “Do	 you	 want	me	to	take	you	home?”	Mr.	 Kim	 asked,	breaking	through	her
thoughts.	“Or	back	to	the	store?”
       “Oh.	 Are	you	 going	back	to	the	store?”
       “I	 don’t	 have	to,	I	can	also	just	go	home.	I	can	drop	you	off.”
       “Okay,	 well	 .	.	.”
       “It’s	  not	a	big	deal.”
       “If	  .	.	.	if	 you	could	take	me	home,	that	would	 be	nice.”	 She	was	hesitant	to
tell	him	where	she	lived.	 She	didn’t	know	 why.	“I	 live	 near	Wilton	and	Olympic.
Is	that	out	of	your	way?”
       “No,	 not	at	all.”
       “I	 can	take	the	bus.”
       “No.	 It’s	 fine.”
       She	 asked	him	 to	turn	 right	 onto	 the	dark,	 tree-lined	 street	on	which	  she
lived.	She	became	self-conscious	 of	being	 in	this	 car	alone	 with	 him,	a	 man—
concerned	that	either	the	landlady	or	Mrs.	 Baek	might	see	her	and	get	the	wrong
idea.
       But	 what	 was	the	wrong	 idea?	What	 would	 be	so	shameful	about	 her	and
Mr.	 Kim	 or	any	 man	for	 that	matter?	She	was	an	adult.	 She	could	take	 care	of
herself,	make	choices	about	her	body.	But	 still	 her	heart	raced.	Perhaps	she	was
simply	 terrified	 of	 wanting	 more	from	 this	 life—more	 feeling,	 more	 joy,	more
pleasure—knowing	that	 it	could	 all	 be	taken	away	at	any	 moment	and	that	still

94
she’d	have	to	survive.	Was	she	strong	enough?
       “A	  couple	blocks	on	the	left,”	 she	said,	pointing.	“Right	 there.”
       He	 pulled	up	 in	front	 of	 the	house,	which	had	all	 the	lights	 off	 inside.	The
landlady	must	have	already	gone	to	bed.
       “Thank	 you,”	 she	said.
       “No	  problem.”	  His	 hands	 remained	 on	 the	steering	 wheel	 as	 he	 stared
through	the	windshield.	He	gulped.	Was	he	sweating?
       As	 she	opened	her	 door,	Mr.	 Kim	  said,	“Do	 you	 .	.	 .	do	 you	 want	to	 get
dinner	sometime?”
       “Oh.	 No.	No,	 thank	you.”	She	smiled,	hopping	out	 of	the	van.
       “You’re	  not	married,	are	you?”
       “No.	 I	 just—”
       “Just	 thought	I’d	 ask.”	He	nodded,	lips	pursed.	“Have	a	good	night.”
       She	shut	the	van	door	and	waved	goodbye	through	the	window.	 She	walked
up	the	broken	driveway	to	the	house,	afraid	to	look	 behind	her	because	she	knew
he	was	still	 in	 his	car,	making	 sure	she	got	 inside	safely.	 She	opened	the	front
door	and	rushed	toward	her	bedroom.
       She	switched	on	her	lamp	and	lay	down,	face	pressed	against	the	pillow.
       She	liked	 Mr.	Kim.	 His	polite,	 big-hearted	demeanor.	His	warm	smile.
       The	smooth	skin	 of	his	arms.	The	thick	black	 hair	on	his	head.
       But	  why	 would	 anyone	want	 to	 be	with	  her,	a	 widow	 who	 had	 lost	 her
child?	She	was	damaged	goods,	as	far	 as	she	could	 tell.	It	 would	 be	too	 much
work	to	 get	involved	 with	 anyone	now.	 Besides,	she	could	never	afford	 to	 lose
anyone	again.
       She	 couldn’t	 sleep	at	 all	 that	 night,	 thinking	 about	 him,	 about	Lupe,	 her
children,	Mario,	 and	then	 about	Mr.	 Kim	 again.	Her	 mind,	 like	 the	streetlights,
let	off	 a	steady	beam	until	 the	morning,	 when	she	could	 hear	the	birds	singing,
and	the	sky	turned	purple	and	yellow,	 like	a	fresh	bruise	outside.	That	 was	when
she	finally	closed	her	eyes.
       Mina	  caught	glimpses	 of	 Lupe	 in	 the	 store,	stocking	 items	 as	Mina	 had
done	when	she	began	working	at	the	supermarket.	They’d	 wave	at	each	other	or
smile	 and	say	 hello	 with	  a	silent	  understanding	that	 they	 shared	something,
something	 that	 might	 be	 too	 significant,	  even	dangerous	 to	 speak	of.	  Mina
yearned	to	ask	her	about	Mario	but	didn’t	quite	 know	how.
       She	had	wanted	to	 learn	Spanish	for	many	 reasons	and	now	for	this	 one	in
particular.	How	  would	 the	shape	of	 her	feelings,	 thoughts	change	if	 she	could
say	them	  out	 loud?	 If	  she	 could	 hear	 them?	 If	  someone	else,	 who	  might
understand,	could	hear	them,	too?	By	 only	speaking	Korean,	 her	world,	 and	the
world	 of	what	 was	inside	 her,	felt	 limited	 to	 the	few	 people	she	spoke	to	 each

95
day,	or	the	people	whom	she	couldn’t	 quite	trust	at	church.	How	 could	the	shape
of	her	life	change	if	 she	had	more	people	that	she	could	reach	with	words?
       She’d	 have	to	learn	on	 her	own.	She	could	get	 a	book.	But,	 no,	she	should
learn	English	first.
       But	 why	 should	she	learn	 English	when	 no	one	around	her	 used	it?	Every
single	person	at	the	supermarket	spoke	Spanish	or	Korean	 or	both.	Perhaps	Mr.
Kim	 and	Mr.	Park,	the	owner,	 spoke	English,	but	that	 was	it.	In	 Koreatown,	she
managed	to	do	 almost	 everything	 in	 Korean.	 And	 since	 she	rented	her	 room
under	the	table,	 completed	all	 her	transactions	in	 cash,	she	didn’t	  even	need	a
bank	account	yet.	Even	if	 she	did	open	one	eventually,	there	would	 be	a	Korean
bank	to	help	her,	a	Korean	accountant.
       At	  the	end	of	 her	shift,	 she	walked	 to	 a	bookstore	a	 few	blocks	 from	 the
supermarket,	where	she	picked	up	a	Spanish	language	book.	Standing	at	the	bus
stop,	she	flipped	through	the	text,	trying	to	 decipher	the	diagrams.
       Dorothy	 swims	in	the	lake.	/	Dorothy	 nada	en	el	lago.
       Dorothy	 drinks	 orange	juice.	/	Dorothy	 bebe	zumo	de	naranja.
       A	 sudden	gust	of	wind,	speckled	with	 dust	and	dirt,	devoured	her	as	the	bus
approached.	Mina	showed	her	pass	to	the	woman	with	the	round	face	and	perfect
bob.
       “Aren’t	  you	cold?”	 the	driver	asked.
       “No,	 no.	It’s	 okay.”
       “It’s	  freezing	 out	there.”	 She	mimed	 shivering,	 crossing	her	 arms	to	keep
herself	warm.
       Mina	 smiled,	making	 her	way	to	the	back	where	she	could	study	her	book.
       “It’s	  freezing	out	there,”	she	repeated	to	herself.
       Once	 she	got	home,	she	reheated	a	pot	of	doenjang	 jjigae	while	 skimming
the	text	and	 flipping	 through	 the	lesson	plans.	It	 seemed	that	with	 about	 thirty
minutes	per	day,	 she	could	 get	through	 at	least	half	 of	 the	book	 over	the	 next
month,	completing	all	 the	exercises	and	assignments	along	the	way.
       In	 the	 dining	 nook,	 she	closed	the	book	 and	 blew	on	 a	spoonful	 of	 soup
before	taking	a	bite	 and	realizing	 then	how	cold	 she	actually	was	 in	that	house.
She	needed	to	put	on	a	sweater	but	felt	too	lazy	and	hungry	to	move.
       Mrs.	  Baek	emerged	 from	 her	 bedroom	in	 a	 drab	 gray	 T-shirt	 and	loose
matching	pajama	pants,	yawning	 as	if	she	had	just	woken	 up.	The	night	 before,
she	had	probably	worked	the	graveyard	 shift	at	the	restaurant	where	she	cooked
for	 late-night	  diners	 and	 partiers	 who	 had	 been	out	  drinking	  and	 craved	a
comforting	bowl	 of	soondubu	jjigae	or	 a	cast-iron	platter	of	bulgogi.
       “I	  haven’t	 seen	you	in	a	 while,”	 Mina	 said.	“I	  made	dinner	already,	 some
doenjang	jjigae.	Do	you	want	to	join	 me?”

96
       “Sure,	 let	me	take	out	some	more	banchan.”
       Mina	  ladled	her	 some	soup	and	 scooped	rice	while	  Mrs.	 Baek	laid	 out	 a
stack	 of	 little	   bowls—gosari	  namul,	 kkakdugi,	  panfried	  dried	  anchovies—
covered	in	Saran	wrap	from	the	fridge.
       “I	 make	these	every	day	at	work,”	 Mrs.	 Baek	said,	unwrapping	the	banchan
and	releasing	the	rich,	 comforting	  scents	of	sesame,	onion,	and	 garlic.	 She	sat
across	from	Mina	 as	if	she	were	on	the	floor,	 lifting	  one	of	her	legs	and	placing
the	bottom	of	 her	foot	 on	the	bench.	Unlike	 so	many	 women,	Mrs.	 Baek	didn’t
seem	to	mind	taking	 up	time	and	space,	spreading	herself	out,	which	 both	irked
and	fascinated	Mina.
       “I’m	  so	thirsty,”	 Mrs.	Baek	said,	chewing.	“I	 don’t	 know	why.”
       “Let	 me	get	you	 some	water.”	Mina	 ran	the	faucet,	trying	to	 remember	how
many	years	Mrs.	Baek	had	lived	in	America.	 Five,	ten,	twenty?
       Mrs.	  Baek	 flipped	 through	  the	Spanish	 textbook	 absent-mindedly,	 as	 if
strolling	 through	 the	 glossy	pages	 of	 a	women’s	 magazine.	 “You’re	  learning
Spanish?”
       “Trying.	  I	figure	 it’d	 be	easier	to,	you	know,	talk	 to	people.”	 Mina	laughed.
“I	 guess	I	should	learn	English	 one	of	these	days,	too.	I	can’t	 always	depend	on
you.”
       “Oh,	 you’ll	 learn	eventually.”	 Mrs.	 Baek	smiled.	“It	 takes	time.”
       “How	  long	have	you	been	here,	in	America?”
       “Many	  years.	Almost	twenty.”
       “No	 wonder	your	 English	is	so	great.”	Mina	 mixed	rice	into	 her	jjigae.
       “Yes,	 yes.	I	 read	a	lot,	 too.	I	 was	also	an	English	 literature	major.	 Do	 you
like	to	read?”
       “To	 be	honest,	I	hate	reading.”	Mina	 smiled.	“I	 was	never	a	good	student.”
       “You	  can	watch	television	or	movies	 then.	I	think	 if	you	 take	in	the	culture,
it’s	easier,	you	know?”
       Mrs.	 Baek	impressed	Mina	 with	 her	college	degree,	her	English	 skills,	 and
her	cooking,	yet	 something	about	her	was	also	deeply	unsettling.	 Mina	 couldn’t
quite	understand	how	this	 woman	would’ve	 ended	up	in	 the	same	house	as	her,
at	a	restaurant	cooking	food,	when	she	could	get	a	higher	paying	job	 in	an	office
somewhere.	Was	she	running	from	something	or	someone?
       She	 couldn’t	 ask	that.	 Still,	 she	had	a	sneaking	 suspicion	that	 Mrs.	Baek,
like	her,	was	hiding	from	 the	world.	But	 from	whom?

97
       IN	THE	BACK	OF	THE	STORE	AT	A	LONG	FOLDING	TABLE,	Mina	nibbled	on	her
packed	lunch,	a	bento	of	 leftovers—rice,	 seasoned	spinach,	kimchi,	 a	few	 bites
of	bulgogi.	 She	thought	 about	the	Spanish	words	 she	had	learned	from	 Daniel,
words	about	 the	weather—nublado,	 viento,	 soleado—which	 sounded	beautiful
out	of	 his	mouth	but	 funny	 and	garbled	out	 of	hers.	She	still	 couldn’t	 quite	 get
the	sound	of	the	letter	L.
       As	 she	formed	 her	tongue	and	 lips,	trying	  to	find	 the	shape	of	 that	sound
—L	 .	.	 .	L	 .	.	 .	L—Mr.	  Kim	 entered	 the	break	area,	stopping	 to	bow	 his	 head
toward	 Mina	 before	 heading	 to	 the	restroom.	 Now	  that	 Lupe	 worked	 at	 the
supermarket,	Mina	 and	 Mr.	 Kim	  no	longer	 had	 a	reason	to	 visit	 her	 and	her
children.	 He	still	  left	 food	 items	for	 Mina	  in	her	 storage	bin,	 but	 as	the	days
passed,	she	saw	him	less	and	less.	Perhaps	he	now	felt	embarrassed	after	asking
her	out	to	dinner	a	couple	weeks	ago.	Who	could	blame	him?
       He	 exited	the	restroom,	turning	away.
       “Mr.	  Kim,”	 she	said,	not	knowing	why	 or	what	she	would	say.
       He	 stopped	in	his	tracks.	“Yes?”	His	 voice	was	tired	and	gravelly.
       “I’ve	  never	thanked	you	.	.	.”	She	cleared	her	throat.	“For	the	things	 you	put
in	my	basket.”
       “Oh.”	   He	 turned	 around,	staring	 at	 the	 floor	  a	few	  feet	 ahead	of	 him,
waving	 dismissively.	 “No	 big	 deal.	 Sometimes,	we	have	 these	leftovers,	can’t
sell	them	or	anything,	so	.	.	.	no	big	 deal.”	He	lifted	 his	hand	to	acknowledge	her
words	before	turning	again.
       “Mr.	  Kim.”
       “Yes?”
       “Is	 something	wrong?”
       “No,	  nothing.	Everything	 is	 fine.”	 He	glanced	 at	his	watch.	 “I	 have	to	run
now.	But	thank	you.”
       For	 the	rest	of	the	day,	she	thought	about	his	downturned	face.	The	tenuous
bridge	between	them	was	eroding.	 She	imagined	herself	shouting	 for	 him	as	he
walked	away,	 but	 she	didn’t	 know	  what	she	would	  say.	She	couldn’t	  explain
how	frightened	 she	had	become	of	life,	knowing	 that	 at	any	moment	it	 could	be
taken	away	and	 that	there	were	 no	lessons,	no	 meaning	that	 she	had	found	 in
loss,	only	pain.	How	could	 she	explain	this	to	him?
       At	    her	  register,	   she	  scanned	  and	  punched	  the	   numbers,	  barely
acknowledging	the	customers,	anyone	around	her.
       “¿Qué	pasó?”	Daniel	 asked.
       She	feigned	a	smile.	“Nada.”
       But	 she	couldn’t	 stop	thinking	 about	him.	 She	wished	there	was	something
she	could	do	for	 him,	 leave	something	in	 his	office.	 But	 what?	What	 would	 he

98
need?	How	would	she	know?	 Maybe	it	 didn’t	 matter.	Maybe	any	 gesture	would
count.
       At	 the	end	of	her	shift,	 she	grabbed	an	Asian	pear	from	the	produce	section,
paid	for	 it,	and	rushed	toward	 the	back	 of	the	store.	She	placed	the	 fruit	 on	his
desk	in	his	 tiny	 office,	 which	 she	had	never	entered	before	 and	smelled	musty
and	slightly	 sweet	from	paper	and	ink.	 She	heard	a	noise	behind	her	and	turned
around.	He	stood	at	the	door.
       “Is	 that	for	 me?”	His	brown	eyes	softened.
       “Yes.”	  She	caught	her	breath.	“I	  just	thought—sorry,	 I	 probably	 shouldn’t
be	in	here.”
       “That’s	 nice	of	 you.	You	don’t	 have	to	do	anything	for	 me.”
       “You	  just	looked	.	.	.	tired.”
       His	 gaze	dropped	toward	 the	ground	as	his	mind	 seemed	to	calculate	what
and	how	much	to	say.	“A	lot	 going	on	around	here.”
       A	 pair	 of	feet	 shuffled	behind	 him	as	the	store	owner	 walked	over.	 Facing
them	both,	Mr.	Park	said,	“Hello,	  hello.	Am	 I	interrupting	 something?”	 He	lifted
his	eyebrows.
       Mina	 cringed	inside.	The	office	 seemed	to	shrink	in	size.
       “No,	 Mrs.	 Lee	wanted	to	talk	about	her	schedule.”
       “Oh,	 any	problems?”	 Mr.	Park	craned	his	neck,	trying	 to	catch	a	glimpse	of
her	behind	Mr.	Kim.	 “You’re	  not	in	 any	kind	of	 trouble,	are	you,	Mrs.	 Lee?”	He
winked,	almost	imperceptibly.
       “No,	 everything	 is	fine,”	 she	said	in	a	steely	voice.	“I	just	 wanted	to	.	.	.	talk
to	him	about	my	hours.	I’d	 like	to	work	 more	hours.”
       “Oh,	  I	  see,”	 he	 said,	 grinning	 at	 Mr.	  Kim	  before	 patting	  him	 on	  the
shoulder.	Walking	  away,	 Mr.	 Park	 added,	“By	 the	 way,	 good	 job,	 Mrs.	 Lee.
You’ve	been	doing	a	good	job.”
       “Thank	 you.”
       Mr.	 Park	went	out	the	back	door,	either	to	smoke	or	leave	for	the	day.
       Mr.	  Kim	 faced	her	again.	 “Well,	 thank	 you	 for	the	 apple,”	 he	said	with	 a
smile.
       “It’s	  a	pear.”
       “Oh,	 that’s	right.”
       “Um	  .	.	.”	 She	touched	 the	corner	of	 the	desk	with	 the	tips	 of	 her	fingers,
steadying	herself.	“Do	you	still	 want	to	have	dinner?”

99
Margot

Fall	2014

100
       LAST	NIGHT	HAD	BEEN	MARGOT	AND	MIGUEL’S	FIRST	night	sleeping	in	the
apartment,	about	a	week	 after	they	 had	discovered	 her	mother’s	 body.	Margot
had	slept	in	her	mother’s	room	while	 Miguel	 stayed	in	Margot’s.	After	 brewing	a
cup	of	 coffee	with	  a	French	press	that	she	had	 bought	her	 mother	many	 years
ago,	Margot	sat	at	the	dining	room	 table,	staring	out	the	window	 at	the	alley	that
separated	their	building	 from	 the	 next.	Her	 mother	 had	never	used	the	 French
press,	preferring	instead	the	packets	of	 instant	coffee,	 premixed	with	 sugar	and
creamer	from	the	Korean	supermarket.	Her	mother	 had	even	kept	it	in	 its	box	as
if	preserving	it	 for	someone.
       How	 many	times	had	Margot	gazed	out	that	window?
       She	 and	 her	mother	 would	  sit	 at	 that	table,	 at	 breakfast,	 at	dinnertime,
silent.	How	she	had	wished	her	mother	would	 ask	her	how	she	was	feeling	more
often.	How	 she	had	 longed	for	 her	 mother	to	 ask	her	what	 had	happened	that
day,	if	it	was	good	or	bad,	or	if	 something	about	it	had	surprised	her.
       But	  maybe	the	 questions	themselves	frightened	 her	 mother.	 Not	 because
she	didn’t	care	about	Margot,	 but	because	the	questions	were	the	same	ones	that
she	was	never	willing	 to	ask	or	 answer	about	herself.	It	 hurt	too	much	 to	know.
How	are	you	doing?	How	do	you	feel?
       Margot	 finished	what	 was	left	in	her	mug,	chewing	the	crystals	of	 sugar	that
hadn’t	yet	dissolved.
       Wearing	  a	white	  undershirt	 and	 black	 jeans,	Miguel	  emerged	 from	 the
bathroom	with	  a	hand	 towel,	 drying	 his	 wet	 hair.	 She	 realized	then	 that	 she
hadn’t	 taken	a	 shower	herself	 in	 days,	not	 even	 after	she	 had	walked	 on	 the
beach	and	submerged	herself	in	the	ice-cold	 water.	She	placed	the	kettle	 on	the
stove	top	 now	 to	brew	 Miguel	  a	cup	 of	 coffee,	 too.	The	 electric	 coil	 glowed
orange,	deepening	to	red.
       Miguel	  grabbed	a	 razor	from	 his	 overnight	 bag	 and	closed	the	 bathroom
door.	Her	phone	rang.
       “Oh,	  hi,”	  Officer	  Choi	  said.	She	 could	 hear	 background	 noise	 of	  him
rummaging	through	papers,	folders.	“Hope	 it’s	not	 too	early?	I’ve	 got	some	stuff
for	you.”
       “Is	 it	 .	.	.	good?”
       “Well,	  couple	 things,”	 he	said.	 “I	 finally	  reached	the	landlord.	 I	 spoke	to
him	yesterday	afternoon.”
       “Oh,	 great.”
       “Unfortunately,	    he	 said	 he	  didn’t	  remember	 anything	  odd	  about	 the
weekend	that	 your	 mother	 died.	He	 said	 that	he	 had	no	 idea	 what	 you	were
talking	about,	the	yelling,	 your	mother’s	voice—”
       “What?”

101
       “He	 said	it	 was	just	like	 any	other	 weekend.	Your	mother	 had	been	a	quiet
tenant.”
       “I	 know	 I’m	 not	imagining	 what	he	said.”
       “So	 I	tried	knocking	 on	some	of	the	doors	of	your	neighbors.”
       “And?”	  She	paced	back	and	forth	in	the	kitchen.
       “Only	  one	of	them	answered.	And	 she	said	she	wasn’t	home	at	all	over	 the
weekend.	She’s	lived	in	the	building	 for	 a	few	years	and	your	mother	has	always
been	very	quiet.”
       “God,	 I	 can’t	believe	this,”	 she	said	to	herself.	“I	 swear,	he	told	 me	.	.	.	We
were	in	the	parking	 lot,	the	 garage.	I	know	what	 he	said.	I	have	no	 idea	why	he
wouldn’t	 tell	you	.	.	.”
       But	 she	remembered	the	 landlord’s	 words	 after	she	confronted	 him	 about
not	talking	 to	 the	police:	 What	for?	 I	 was	tired	 and	it	 could’ve	 been	anyone.	I
don’t	need	them	snooping	around	here.	Do	you?	Do	 you	think	the	neighbors	like
that?	What	do	 you	think	 the	police	 are	going	 to	do	for	 you?	 Do	you	think	 they
care	about	your	mother?
       “Damn	 it.	 I’ll	 have	to	talk	to	him	 again,”	she	said.	“It’s	 bullshit.”
       “I’m	  not	sure	what	else	we	can	do,	Margot.”
       “There	 had	to	 have	been	someone	else	around.”	She	gritted	 her	teeth.	Her
eyes	darted	toward	the	 electric	coil—red	  and	hot.	She	could	 hear	the	bubbling
inside	of	the	kettle	now.
       “I	 looked	 into	the	obituary,	too.”
       “You	  did?”	she	said,	somewhat	relieved.
       “Your	  mother’s	 boyfriend,	  Kim	 Chang-hee,	 was	a	pretty	 big	 deal	 in	 the
Valley.	 Rich.	Donated	a	lot	 to	the	church.	 He	had	this	small	 supermarket	chain,
Super	San.	Ever	heard	of	it?”
       “No,”	  she	said,	leaning	on	the	edge	of	the	counter	next	to	the	stove.	“I	guess
I	just	don’t	 know	the	Valley.”
       “Wife.	  No	kids.”	 He	paused.	“Pancreatic	cancer.	He	died	in	October.”
       “I	 see.”	Should	she	tell	 him	that	she	saw	a	resemblance	between	herself	and
Mr.	Kim?	 No.	It	 was	silly	wishful	 thinking.
       “His	 widow	 lives	 in	Calabasas.	They	have	a	home	there.”
       She	knew.	The	tour	operator	had	given	her	the	address.
       “I	 don’t	 really	 see	a	connection	to	your	mother	or	her	death,”	he	said.	“You
found	this	obituary	at	home	without	 any	explanation?”
       “Yes,	 I	.	.	.	I	 found	it	in	 a	drawer	that	I	was	going	through.”
       “I	 mean—”
       “What	 was	her	name?	The	widow’s	name?”
       “Mary	  Kim.”

102
       “Do	 you	have	a	phone	number?”
       “I	 really	 don’t	think	 we	should	go	down	this	route.”
       “What	 do	you	mean?”
       She	 could	 hear	men’s	 voices	in	 the	 background.	 “Your	 mother.”	  Officer
Choi	lowered	his	 voice.	“She	had	a	lover.	 He	died.	And	 then—later,	she	died	as
well.”	 He	paused.	“It’s	 terrible	 and	sad,	but	there	isn’t	a	point	 in	hurting	 anyone
else,	right?	I	mean,	none	of	this	information	 will	 bring	your	mom	 back.”
       “Hurting	  anyone	else?”
       “The	 widow.	 Mr.	 Kim’s	 wife.	 Why	 bring	her	into	 this?	She	might	not	 even
know	about	the	affair.”
       “But	 what	 if	she	does?”
       “How	  are	we	going	 to	figure	 that	out?	Ask	 her?	Why	 would	 we	be	asking
questions	about	your	mother?	We’d	 have	to	tell	 her.”	 He	sighed.	“I	 don’t	 really
see	what	else	I	can	do	here,	Margot.	As	far	as	your	 mother’s	death	goes—which
was	terrible,	  I’m	 sorry—it’s	   an	open-and-shut	 case.	It	 was	 an	 accident,	and
there’s	not	much	more	I	can—”
       She	hung	up	the	phone.	The	kettle	screamed.
       She	turned	 off	the	 burner	as	Miguel	 reemerged	from	the	bathroom,	 freshly
shaven,	clean	and	minty,	and	strolled	into	the	kitchen.
       “Did	  you	 hear	any	of	 that?”	Margot	 asked,	pouring	 the	hot	 water	into	 the
French	press.
       “Yeah,	 I	did.”	 He	shook	his	head.	“So	the	landlord	is	 now	just	acting	like	 he
didn’t	hear	anything.	Of	 course.”
       After	 stirring	 the	grounds	in	the	water,	she	said,	“I’m	 gonna	talk	 to	him.	I’ll
try	this	afternoon.”
       “The	 landlord?”	 Miguel	 leaned	on	the	kitchen	counter.	“Do	 you	want	 me	to
go	with	you?	Do	you	 feel	safe?”
       “I’ll	   be	okay,	I	think.”	 She	pressed	the	grounds	down	and	poured	the	coffee
into	a	mug.	 “You	 have	errands	to	run.	 I’ll	 try	 him	 today,	and	we	can	still	 go	 to
Calabasas	this	week,	right?”
       “Sure,	 how	about	tomorrow?	Or	 Friday?”
       “Sounds	  good,”	 she	 said.	“I	  can’t	  believe	 the	landlord	  lied.	 This	 is	 so
frustrating.”
       “Maybe	  you	should	go	 down	there	now?	 I’ll	 go	 with	 you.	Or	 do	you	have
his	number?”
       “Yeah,	 I	do.”	 She	grabbed	her	phone	again.	“I	should,	or	actually—it’s	  here
on	the	fridge,	I	 think.”	 Her	mother	 had	taped	up	a	piece	of	paper	with	the	phone
numbers	of	  important	 people—Margot,	  the	 landlord,	  her	 church,	 Alma,	  the
manager	of	the	swap	meet—in	case	of	an	emergency.

103
       She	  dialed.	 When	  the	 answering	  machine	 picked	  up	  with	  a	 generic
recording,	she	didn’t	 bother	to	leave	a	message.	She	had	a	feeling	that	he	would
be	avoiding	her	now.
       “Maybe	   take	 a	  break?”	 Miguel	   said.	 “I	   have	 some	 appointments	  at
apartments	today.	How	about	we	 do	that	and	then	go	 out	to	eat	something?	We
could	drive	around	Burbank	for	 a	bit,	get	away	from	this	place.”
       She	nodded	and	said,	“I’m	 just	so	fed	up	with	everything	 right	now.”
       “Too	 bad	hot	Officer	 Choi	turned	out	to	be	such	a	bummer.”
       “Predictable,”	   she	 said.	 “All	   of	 this	  and	 that	 landlord	  are	so	 fucking
predictable.”
       “Why	  not	surprise	them?”	He	sipped	his	coffee.	 “I	 think	we	should	surprise
them,	don’t	you	think?”
       “What	 do	you	mean?”	she	asked.
       “We	 roll	 up	our	sleeves	and	figure	this	shit	 out	on	our	own.	You	 don’t	 need
him	for	anything	 else,	right?	Delete	him.”
       He	 was	right.	 She	didn’t	 need	Officer	 Choi	 or	the	 landlord.	None	 of	them
were	on	her	or	her	mother’s	side,	dead	or	alive.
       Normally,	  she	would’ve	 deferred	to	 their	 opinions.	Their	 doubts	would’ve
wormed	 their	 way	 through	 her	own	 intelligence,	  her	own	 instincts	 to	 defend
what	she	knew	 was	right.	 But	 she	now	 realized	that	 their	 power	relied	 on	 her
ability	 to	undercut	herself.	 And	she	was	tired	 of	doing	 that.	She	and	her	mother
deserved	more.	She	wouldn’t	stop	until	she	found	the	truth	of	her	mother’s	 life.

104
       TWO	DAYS	OF	SEARCHING	FOR	AN	APARTMENT	HAD	gone	by	before	Miguel
scored	a	modern	one-bedroom	 in	 Burbank	early	 Friday	 afternoon.	After	  a	late
lunch	at	an	 Italian	 chalkboard-menu	eatery	blocks	 from	 his	new	 place,	Margot
and	Miguel	 endured	the	stop-and-go	down	the	101	for	 almost	twenty-five	  miles
to	the	hills	of	Calabasas,	west	of	the	San	Fernando	Valley.
       The	 plan	was	to	check	out	Mr.	 Kim’s	  house	where	presumably,	his	widow,
Mary	 Kim,	 still	  lived.	 Margot	 wanted	to	 find	 out	 as	much	information	  as	she
could	 about	Mr.	  and	 Mrs.	 Kim	  without	 actually	  confronting	 her.	 Otherwise,
Officer	 Choi	 was	right;	 she	might	 be	revealing	 the	affair	  unnecessarily	to	her.
And	in	Margot’s	 mind,	 although	Mary	was	once	the	only	person	who	might	 have
a	motivation	 to	 harm	 her	 mother,	the	 landlord,	 who	 had	lied	 to	 either	 her	 or
Officer	 Choi,	 had	become	increasingly	 suspicious;	his	answering	 machine	now
indicated	that	he	was	out	of	town	for	a	family	 emergency.	How	convenient.
       “Do	  you	want	to	 stay	with	 me	on	Sunday	night—after	 I	 move	in?”	 Miguel
asked.	“Are	you	comfortable	 at	the	apartment	by	yourself?”
       “I	  think	 I’ll	   be	okay,”	  she	said.	“Besides,	 I	 probably	  should	stay	 at	 my
mom’s	and	find	that	landlord.	 Finish	stuff	 up.	Burbank	is	far.”
       Of	 course,	she	was	happy	for	Miguel,	but	she	envied	how	organized	he	was,
how	easily	he	seemed	to	manage	the	logistics	 of	life.	 He	had	found	 a	better	job
in	another	state	that	gave	him	 more	 options	to	 pursue	his	passions,	his	dreams.
He	now	 had	 an	apartment	with	  stainless	steel	appliances	in	 a	 LEED-certified
building	 located	close	to	his	workplace,	 an	acting	studio,	shops,	and	restaurants.
Why	couldn’t	 she	get	her	life	in	order,	too?
       What	 was	wrong	with	 her?
       She	 couldn’t	 stand	her	 job	 as	an	administrative	 assistant—the	data	entry,
the	proofreading,	creating	 brochures	in	 that	tiny	 appendix	of	 an	office	 with	 the
adobe	red	walls,	 the	single,	 dusty	task	 lamp	she	used	every	 day.	She	 couldn’t
bear	the	weather	in	Seattle.	After	a	life	in	 Los	Angeles,	she	had	never	adjusted	to
the	gray	winters.
       And	 when	she	did	catch	a	glimpse	of	the	things	she	wanted	(a	more	creative
job,	art	 classes,	a	stronger	sense	of	 community	 outside	 of	work),	  those	things
would	disappear	before	 she	could	touch	 them,	back	into	 the	mess	of	 her	mind.
She’d	 get	 distracted	 by	 other	 lives—the	  problems	 of	  men.	 Her	 two-month
relationship	with	 her	coworker	 Jonathan	last	year	had	been	disastrous.	His	self-
absorption	 combined	 with	  his	 generic	 f	 lattery—the	  compliments	 about	 her
thoughtfulness,	her	empathy	and	intelligence—was	 seductive.	She	had	this	keen
feeling	 that	 if	  she	could	  support	 him	 endlessly—through	  his	 grief	 over	 his
deceased	wife,	 his	  adult	 son	 who	  struggled	 with	  addiction—she	 would	  be
rewarded	with	his	 attention,	his	admiration	 forever.	 She	could	disappear	around

105
him	and	still	feel	 good	about	herself.
       But	 of	 course,	he	broke	her	 heart.	He	was	an	it-hurts-meto-hurt-you,	  an	I-
love-you-but-I’m-not-in-love-with-you	     kind	  of	 man.	 It	  was	 all	  so	 dull	  and
predictable	in	the	end.
       And	 now	 that	 her	mother	was	 dead,	there	was	no	 one	to	run	 from	 except
herself.	She	wasn’t	 even	a	 daughter	anymore.	She’d	 have	to	 become	someone
else.
       Her	 foot	 cramped	 in	 its	 stop-and-go	position	 over	 the	 brakes.	This	 slow
miserable	parade.
       “Look	  at	that	sunset,”	Miguel	said.
       Her	 mind	 shifted	 to	 the	 riotous	 sky,	 its	 mesmerizing	 wash	of	 pinks	 and
oranges.	She	had	 always	 loved	 those	sublime	 colors	 that	 suggested	both	 the
beginning	 and	the	 end	of	  everything.	 The	 sun	in	 LA	  could	 be	 a	real	 drama
queen,	quietly	blazing	 in	 a	tulle	 of	smog	 all	day	 until	 the	evening	asked	her	 to
leave,	and	she	became	all	flourish	and	flames.
       Exiting	  the	 101	later	 in	 twilight,	  the	 car	 wound	up	 hills,	  past	expansive
homes	 of	 varying	  architectural	  styles—Mediterranean,	  Tudor,	 Cape	 Cod—
complexes	of	 both	 good	 and	 bad	taste	but	 mostly	  expressions	of	 large	 bank
accounts,	impenetrability,	power.	Manicured	 lawns,	a	pristine	green,	not	a	leaf	or
twig	or	stem	misplaced,	maintained	by	 armies	of	workers	who	lived	 and	traveled
far	daily	 from	 much	poorer	parts	of	 the	Valley	 and	LA,	  who	spent	hours	in	 the
sun,	working	while	 remaining	invisible.
       Margot	 couldn’t	 believe	her	mother	had	a	lover	 who	lived	 with	such	wealth
less	than	thirty	miles	 away	from	 her	in	Koreatown.	 Could	he	also	be	her	father?
Perhaps	she	not	only	wanted	to	find	 out	more	about	Mary	 Kim	 but	also	whether
or	not	Mr.	 Kim	 could	be	her	dad.	It	 seemed	absurd	to	follow	 an	impulse	toward
such	an	elaborate	story.	But	 why	 else	would	 her	mother	be	dating	 this	wealthy
man	all	 the	 way	 in	 Calabasas?	What	would	 they	 have	in	 common	 with	  each
other	except	the	past?
       Growing	  up,	she	only	 knew	 that	her	mother	 had	worked	 at	a	supermarket
when	she	had	 first	 moved	from	  Korea	and	 met	a	 man	there	 who	disappeared
after	she	became	pregnant.	Her	mother	never	explained	why	and	refused	to	give
away	any	 details	 about	him—his	  name,	his	 personality,	 his	 face.	 Eventually,
Margot	stopped	asking.
       Margot	 had	always	 imagined	her	father	as	a	quiet,	 nondescript	person	who
still	worked	 at	a	grocery	 store,	and	potentially	had	his	 own	children	 and	family,
or	had	 been	a	perpetual	bachelor,	 breaking	 hearts	wherever	he	 went.	She	 had
preferred	the	latter,	someone	cruel.	That	 way	she	never	had	to	 wonder	why	 she
and	her	mother	had	been	abandoned,	discarded	like	the	peel	of	a	fruit.

106
       But	 now	she	couldn’t	 resist	the	potential	 of	this	 story—that	Mr.	 Kim	 could
be	her	father,	that	her	mother	 had	found	love	 in	the	 final	 year	of	her	life,	 that	 a
vengeful	wife	  had	confronted	 her	 mother,	maybe	 even	killed	  her,	whether	 on
purpose	or	by	 accident.	 As	far-fetched	 as	this	 scenario	seemed,	it	 made	more
sense	to	Margot	than	her	mother	randomly	 falling	 in	her	own	 apartment,	only	to
have	her	out-of-town	daughter	find	 her	body	days	later.	She	understood	that	both
life	 and	death	could	 be	 random,	unnecessary—but	she	 needed	more	from	 her
mother’s	story.	And	 now	that	her	mother	was	dead,	Margot	 was	no	longer	afraid
of	any	truth.
       They	 pulled	 up	in	 front	 of	 the	address	Margot	had	 received	from	 the	tour
operator	earlier	this	 week.	It	 was	 a	white	 two-story	 Mediterranean-style	 home,
expensively	kept	with	 its	dense	lawn	and	swaying	palm	trees.	All	 the	lights	were
on,	 blazing	 in	  the	 evening	 dimness.	 A	  tiered	 stone	 fountain	 gushed	 water
indefinitely	 as	if	the	drought,	or	any	other	problem	of	 this	planet,	could	not	touch
this	 blessed	house	and	 land.	 In	 the	 driveway,	 a	 brand-new	 Lexus	 SUV	 and
Mercedes	sedan	posed	as	if	straight	out	of	a	holiday	car	commercial.
       “Maybe	  you	should	 go	down	 a	block?	 So	they	don’t	 see	the	car,”	 Miguel
said.
       “Yeah,	  my	 car’s	just	 a	little	  out	 of	 place.”	 She	pulled	 forward	 along	 the
curb.	She	 said	in	  a	grande	 dame	voice,	 “Hello,	  911,	 there	 appears	to	 be	an
average-looking	automobile	outside	the	grounds	at	this	time.”
       “We	 could	be	housekeepers.”
       She	 laughed	despite	 the	pounding	 in	  her	chest.	 What	 if	 a	neighbor	 saw
them?	Were	they	trespassing,	breathing	in	the	citrus	blossoms,	the	new	car	smell
of	this	neighborhood?	She	felt	foreign	and	alien.
       After	  parking	down	 the	block,	they	 strolled	down	 the	sidewalk	through	 the
bronze	 gate	 that	  had	 been	 left	  wide	  open.	 Perhaps	 a	 car	  had	 pulled	  in
temporarily,	 or	 the	residents	 always	left	 the	 gate	ajar,	 which	 seemed	odd	 but
worked	 in	 their	 favor	 that	 night.	 As	 they	 approached	the	house,	 Margot	 and
Miguel	  ducked,	 scampering	 across	 the	 lawn	  until	  they	  reached	 a	 row	  of
boxwood	 to	 hide	behind	 while	  they	 peered	through	 a	large	 window	  into	 the
silent,	empty	 house.	Elegantly	 unlived-in	  with	 mostly	 monochromatic	 holiday
decor—pine	 cones	 and	 boughs	 painted	 platinum	  and	 white	  atop	 a	  mantel
covered	in	 silver	 photo	frames.	 An	 ivory	 tufted	 sofa	and	 armchair	with	 clean,
inviting	 lines.
       “It’s	  nice	in	there,”	Miguel	 said.	“Like	 in	 that	Anna	Win-tour	 kind	of	 way.”
       “It’s	  like	a	magazine.”
       “Do	 you	want	 to	look	around	the	back?”
       “No,	 I	 don’t	think	 we	should—”

107
       Margot	 froze	as	a	pearl-skinned	woman	of	an	indeterminate	age	appeared	in
the	center	 of	 the	 living	 space.	In	  her	long	 creamy	 nightgown,	  she	cradled	 a
crystal	 of	 whiskey	  with	 slender	 fingers	 crowned	  by	 oxblood	 nails.	 A	  lithe,
compact	body,	eyes	kept	 low.	 She	moved	in	 and	out	of	 their	 sight	line,	 pacing
like	an	animal	in	a	cage	as	if	possessed.
       Margot	 closed	 her	eyes,	afraid	she	might	 faint.	 She	had	an	impulse	 to	run
now,	forget	 everything.	She	never	had	a	 father.	She	never	needed	one.	She	had
her	 mother	 at	 least—a	 mother	  who	 was	 often	  unavailable	 but	 nonetheless
protected	her,	perhaps	protected	her	too	much,	but	she	had	done	so	because	she
had	known	 how	 sensitive	Margot	 could	 be,	 how	 emotional.	 But	now	 that	 her
mother	was	dead,	Margot	had	been	thrust	into	 seeing	her,	into	seeing	them	both
for	who	 they	really	 were—women	 who	 survived	on	 their	own.	 They	thrived	 in
their	 own	 country	 of	 two.	  They	 were	 in	 a	 way,	 despite	how	  they	 might’ve
appeared	to	the	outside	world,	perfectly	fine.
       Miguel	  tapped	 her	arm.	 A	  man	in	 his	 forties—handsome,	 chiseled	 as	a
movie	star—entered	the	room.	Wearing	a	black	crewneck	sweater	and	dark	slim-
fit	 jeans,	he	smoked	a	 cigarette	with	 an	 intense	Tony	 Leung	face.	 He	perched
himself	on	 the	edge	of	the	white	 sofa	as	if	 unable	to	 relax,	unwilling	  to	get	too
comfortable.	They	 appeared	to	be	in	some	intensely	 somber	discussion—brows
furrowed,	prolonged	silences	between	words.
       “Damn,	 he	is	fine,”	 Miguel	 said.
       “We	 should	go,”	 Margot	said.	“I	 don’t	 think—”
       The	man	stood,	snuffing	 out	his	cigarette	in	an	ashtray.
       Margot	 and	Miguel	 ducked	behind	the	bushes.	Edging	her	face	upward,	she
caught	a	glimpse	inside	of	the	couple	kissing	in	an	embrace.
       “Let’s	  get	out	of	 here.”	Margot	 pulled	Miguel’s	 sleeve,	and	they	scrambled
away,	low	 to	 the	ground.	 As	soon	 as	they	emerged	out	 of	 the	open	gate,	they
slowed	down,	trying	 to	appear	as	casual	and	ordinary	as	possible,	as	if	they	were
only	 two	 people	 out	on	 an	 evening	 stroll.	 The	 cold	 air	 burned	 her	lungs.	 A
queasiness	rose	from	her	stomach	up	into	 her	chest.	She	could	 taste	the	bile	 at
the	back	of	her	throat.
       “Whew,”	  Miguel	  said,	shutting	 the	car	 door.	“I	  guess	widows	just	 wanna
have	fun?”
       “Somebody	 traded	in	for	a	new	model.”
       She	pulled	away	from	 the	curb,	making	sure	no	one	followed	 them.
       Down	  tree-lined	  roads,	 branches	veined	 the	 night	  sky	 between	 stately
homes	lit	  like	 welcoming	  lanterns.	 But	 the	 images	 of	 the	 woman	 and	 man
kissing,	her	sullenness	despite	the	airy	perfection,	 the	heaven	of	that	 house,	had
been	burned	into	Margot’s	head.

108
       “I	 wonder	how	old	she	is?”	Margot	asked.	“That	had	to	have	been	his	wife,
right?	Officer	Choi	said	he	had	no	kids.”
       “How	old	was	her	husband?”	Miguel	asked.	“Sixty-four,	I	think.”
       “I	 feel	like	the	oldest	she	could	be	.	.	.	would	be	forty?	Maybe	fifty?”
       “Do	 you	think	 she	just	found	 this	guy?”	Margot	 asked.	“Maybe.	Or	he
could’ve	been	her	lover	from	the	get-go.”
       “You	mean,	while	her	husband	was	alive?”
       “A	 little	 side	dish,”	Miguel	 said.	“But	then	she	would	have	no	reason	to
fight	with	my	mom,	right?	I	mean,	why	would	she	care?”
       “Money?”
       “What	do	you	mean?”
       “I	 don’t	know,	but	that’s	the	only	thing	I	can	think	of.”
       Soon	they	sat	in	a	thick	silence	with	only	the	ticking	of	the	turn	signal,	the
hum	of	the	car’s	engine	between	them.	For	the	rest	of	the	drive,	Margot	sped
home	through	the	dark,	 thinking	 of	 the	woman’s	face—a	 perfect	oval	that
shimmered	softly	like	a	pearl.	The	man’s	hands	on	her	waist.
       Mary	and	her	mother	had	such	different	lives,	and	yet	it	was	as	if	Margot
could	hear	Mary	suffocating	under	all	that	rich	light,	straining	as	if	she’d	been
trapped	like	a	perfect	specimen	inside	of	a	jar.

109
  Mina

Fall	1987

110
       IN	MR.	KIM’S	BLUE	STATION	WAGON	WITH	VELVETY	seats,	a	paper	pine	tree
dangled	from	the	 rearview	mirror.	 The	 moon	glowed	 silver	 and	bright,	peeking
behind	a	faint	 cloud.	 Staring	 out	the	window	  into	 the	dark,	Mina	  wrapped	her
sweater	around	her	 body.	She	realized	 now	 how	 sullen	she	 had	been	the	past
couple	weeks	when	 Mr.	 Kim	 had	been	avoiding	  her	after	her	 rejection	 of	him
following	  the	last	 time	they	 went	 to	visit	  Lupe.	As	 a	 result,	she	was	 learning
Spanish	to	distract	herself	from	 how	unhappy	she	had	been,	how	impossible	life
could	sometimes	be.
       The	 air	freshener	hung	like	 an	amulet.	She	yearned	for	some	sign	 from	the
universe	that	said,	You	are	doing	fine.
       “So,	 where	 do	you	feel	 like	 going?”	 Mr.	 Kim	 asked,	breaking	 the	silence.
“Do	you	 feel	like	anything	 in	particular?”
       “No.	 I’m	 okay	with	 anything.”
       “There’s	  a	restaurant	that	 I	 like,	 Hanok	 House.	They’ve	 got	 pretty	 much
everything—galbi,	 jjigaes.”
       A	 longing	 to	 somehow	touch	him	 crept	up,	like	 vines	 attaching	her	to	 this
man	beside	her,	to	 this	 world.	 She	wished	she	could	 incinerate	 the	shoots	and
tendrils,	but	she	would	 risk	destroying	herself.	 What	was	she	doing?	It	had	been
a	year	 since	 her	husband	 and	daughter	 had	 died,	 since	burying	  them	 in	 the
ground,	a	single	 tombstone,	together.	What	was	 she	doing	in	 this	car,	far	 away
from	them,	far	away	from	 home?	She	wanted	to	ask	Mr.	Kim	 to	turn	back,	but	as
soon	as	she	looked	at	 him,	the	 inside	of	 her	mouth	 felt	 parched.	She	couldn’t.
She	wanted	to	be	here	now.
       As	 they	 pulled	into	 a	narrow	 parking	 lot,	she	almost	 clapped	her	hands	at
the	 sight	 of	  the	 restaurant	 that	  resembled	 a	 traditional	  Korean	  house.	Its
decorative	wooden	beams	and	curved,	gray-tiled	 roof	were	charming	 and	lovely
compared	to	the	drab	concrete	and	graffitied	stucco	of	Los	Angeles.
       Inside	 the	restaurant,	which	smelled	 of	seafood,	peppers,	onion,	garlic,	 and
sesame	oil,	Hahoetal	masks	grinned	on	the	walls	beside	booths	made	out	of	dark
slabs	of	 glazed	wood.	 Early	 still	  for	 dinner,	 the	restaurant	was	 mostly	 empty
except	for	another	 couple	in	 a	far	corner	 of	the	dining	 room	 and	an	older	 man,
sleeves	rolled	up,	carefully	sipping	from	 a	boiling-hot	 jjigae	by	himself.
       As	  they	 sat	 down,	 a	 waitress	 greeted	 them	 with	 two	  sticky	  laminated
menus.	Mina	studied	hers,	avoiding	eye	contact	with	Mr.	 Kim.
       “I’m	  having	the	maeuntang,”	he	said.	“I	 always	get	the	same	thing.”
       “Oh,	 that	sounds	delicious.”
       “What	 looks	 good	to	you?”
       “Ahl	  jjigae.”	  Her	 mouth	 watered	at	 the	thought	 of	 fish	 eggs	boiled	 with
tofu,	onion,	and	mu	in	a	spicy	stew.	“I	 haven’t	had	that	in	a	long	time.”

111
       “One	 of	 my	favorites,	 too.”	 His	 arm	moved	 on	the	table	as	if	 resisting	 the
impulse	to	hold	her	hand.
       The	waitress	returned	with	 a	pot	of	barley	tea.
       “So,	 how	long	have	you	been	in	LA?”	 she	asked.
       “Gosh,	 over	 ten	years,	I	 guess.	I	came	here	after	college.”	 He	 brushed	his
full	 black	hair	 back	with	 his	 hand.	“I	 was	going	 to	do	 my	master’s	 degree,	but
that	didn’t	 last	long.”	 He	 smiled,	crinkling	  the	skin	around	his	 soft	brown	 eyes.
She	loved	looking	at	him.
       “How	  come?”	she	asked.
       “Oh,	 just	 wasn’t	 my	thing.	 It	 was	an	excuse	to	get	over	here.”	 He	winked.
His	lips	 were	perfectly	 sized.	A	 sensation	of	 warmth	pressed	her	chest	like	 the
sun	shining	 on	 new	 leaves—tender	and	 bright	 green.	 She	could	 feel	 the	 sap
coursing	through	 her	body.	“It	  sounded	good	to	my	 mother.	 My	 poor	mother.”
He	shook	his	head,	pouring	her	tea.	“How	about	you?”
       “Me?”
       “How	  come	you’re	here?	Or	why	does	your	family	 think	you’re	 here?”
       Steam	rose	from	 her	cup	 of	barley	 tea.	She	closed	her	eyes	and	could	feel
the	grip	of	 her	mother’s	 hand,	and	then	 the	sudden	absence	of	that	pressure	on
her	skin.	 Even	 if	 she	had	her	 own	 family,	  a	husband,	a	daughter,	 for	 several
years,	she	didn’t	belong	in	this	world	 it	seemed.	She	never	did.
       “You	  don’t	have	to	tell	me,”	 he	said.	“I’m	 sorry.”
       The	 waitress	 returned,	spreading	 banchan	on	the	 table—mak	 kimchi	 and
kkakdugi,	seasoned	soybean	sprouts	and	spinach,	soy-glazed	lotus	root.	With	his
metal	 chopsticks,	 Mr.	 Kim	  sampled	 the	spinach,	 chewing	 thoughtfully	   as	if
admiring	 its	 composition—garlic	  cloves,	green	 onions,	soy	 sauce,	sesame	oil.
The	tanginess	of	the	mak	kimchi,	which	 she	always	tried	first,	opened	her	palate.
She	bit	into	 the	candy	of	 the	lotus	root,	 crunchy	and	chewy,	 for	comfort.	 There
was	a	 startling	  familiarity	  to	  the	 banchan	as	 if	 she	 had	 tasted	the	 specific
character	of	each	dish,	every	different	taste	and	texture,	someplace	else	recently,
but	she	couldn’t	name	where.
       “What	 did	 you	study?”	she	asked,	pouring	him	tea.
       “Economics,”	   he	said.	 “I	  guess	I	  still	 kind	  of	 ended	 up	 in	 economics.
Business,	sort	of.”	He	smiled	again.
       “Not	 quite	 what	you	expected,	though.”
       “Nope,	  but	 that’s	 okay.	  That’s	 how	 it	  is.”	 He	 sighed.	 “We	  come	 here
thinking	 that	we’ll	 work	 hard	and	sometimes	it	works	 out,	sometimes	it	doesn’t.
That’s	life.”
       “You’re	  still	 young.”
       He	 blushed.	 “Young?	  Not	 really.	 I	 haven’t	  been	young	 for	 at	 least	 ten

112
years.”
       “Well,	  young	enough.	If	you	wanted	to	start	over,	you	 could.”
       “That’s	 true.	I’m	 not	tied	 down	or	anything.”
       “Were	 you	ever	married?”	 The	words	slipped	out	of	her	mouth.
       “Yes.”	  He	sipped	his	tea.	“For	about	a	year.	Not	long.”
       Hands	 shaking,	she	lifted	 the	 pot	to	 refill	 his	 cup.	“She	 passed	away,”	he
said,	eyes	downcast.	“She	had	stomach	cancer.”
       “I’m	  sorry.”	 She	exhaled	out	loud.	“That	must	have	been	very	difficult.”
       The	 waitress	 arrived	 with	 two	 heavy	 stoneware	bowls	 filled	  to	 the	brim
with	 piping	 hot	 stews	redolent	 of	 the	 earth	and	 sea—snapper,	fish	 eggs,	and
clams,	zucchini,	 ginger,	and	 garlic.	Mina	  watched	hers	bubble	while	 Mr.	  Kim,
adventurous,	spooned	a	bit	 of	his	 soup,	blew	 on	the	broth,	 and	sipped.	She	bit
her	lip,	 wishing	 she	could	 scarf	down	 her	ahl	 jjigae.	 So	much	 of	Korean	 food
was	about	 patience	 as	the	 volcanic	 soups	 settled	down,	 building	  the	 diners’
anticipation	with	 the	bright	colors	of	 the	red	pepper	and	green	onion,	the	smells.
       “Is	 it	 good?”	she	asked.
       “Yes,	 try	some.”	 He	nudged	his	bowl	toward	her.
       “I	 will	  in	a	little	 bit.	Please,	go	ahead.”
       The	 broth	 burned	her	 tongue	but	 tasted	like	 it	 would	 at	any	 restaurant	in
Seoul,	perfect	in	 its	 depth	and	brininess	 from	 the	roe.	 The	fish	 eggs	crumbled
inside	her	mouth,	and	she	washed	them	down	with	a	spoonful	of	delicate	mu	that
had	become	perfectly	translucent.
       “You?”	  he	asked,	not	looking	up	from	his	bowl.
       “Yes?”
       “Did	  you	ever	marry?”	He	sniffed	 from	the	heat	of	the	spice.
       “Yes,”	  she	said,	surprising	herself.	“He	 died,	 too.”	Those	words	 wrung	her
heart.	If	she	were	to	mention	 her	daughter,	she	would	completely	 fall	 apart.	She
would	run	 out	into	 the	street	screaming.	She	would	 beat	the	bottom	 of	her	fists
on	the	ground,	as	if	 trying	 to	break	her	daughter	free.	She	never	intended	to	 tell
him	about	 her	husband	and	daughter	at	 all,	 as	if	 she	had	been	ashamed	of	the
tragedies	that	had	rent	her	life,	 her	family.	 Wasn’t	 that	how	most	 people	treated
her	back	home—like	her	sadness	was	a	disease	that	could	spread?
       “I’m	  sorry,”	 he	said.
       She	wanted	to	 get	out.	But	 she	couldn’t.	 On	the	walls,	 the	Hahoetal	masks
seemed	to	be	laughing	at	her.	How	could	she	leave	now?
       “Are	 you	 okay?”
       “I	 need	to	use	the	restroom.	Excuse	me.”
       Standing	 at	the	sink,	she	cried,	wiping	 her	eyes.	She	splashed	her	face	with
cold	water	and	waited	a	few	 minutes	until	 she	caught	her	breath	and	most	of	the

113
red	had	left	her	skin.	She	couldn’t.	She	couldn’t	 do	this.	She	didn’t	belong	 in	this
life,	this	 dream.	Her	husband	and	daughter’s	deaths	were	proof	 of	this	 fact.	She
was	made	for	 nightmares.	She	would	 work	 and	go	to	 church	until	 one	day	 she
died	and	went	 to	 heaven.	That	was	 all	there	 was	left	 to	 hope	for,	 that	was	 all
there	was	left	to	long	for	in	 this	world.
       She	returned	 to	the	table	 where	Mr.	 Kim	 had	 refrained	from	 eating	in	 her
absence.	Her	ahl	jjigae	had	gone	lukewarm.
       They	 drove	 back	home	 in	 silence.	The	pine	 tree	deodorizer	 swung	 like	 a
pendulum.	 The	night	  had	ripened	 into	  a	starless	black	  while	 the	 streetlights
glowed	amber	on	steel	and	glass.	From	the	periphery,	she	watched	his	arms,	thin
and	muscular,	guide	the	steering	 wheel,	his	leg	 press	on	the	gas.	She	could	say
something.	She	could	tell	him	everything.	 But	what?	What	would	 that	something
be?	What	  could	  she	say	 without	   falling	  apart,	 revealing	  how	 broken	  and
unlovable	she	had	become?	She	had	already	told	him	too	much.
       As	 he	 pulled	 up	in	 front	 of	 her	 dark	house,	Mina	  said,	“I’m	  sorry	 about
earlier.	I	just—”
       “No	 worries.	 I	understand.”
       “I’m	  .	 .	.	 It’s	 all	 so	new.”	 She	was	ruined	 now,	 wasn’t	she?	She	couldn’t
even	have	a	meal	out	and	enjoy	herself.
       “Of	 course.	Don’t	 worry	 about	it.”
       “I’m	  sorry.”	 She	wanted	to	run	out	of	the	car.	“Thank	you	for	 dinner.”
       Before	 she	shut	the	door,	he	said,	“You’re	very	nice	and	pretty.”
       She	didn’t	 know	how	 to	respond.
       “I	 mean	that.	You’re	 very	nice.”
       “Oh,	 okay.”	 She	resisted	the	urge	to	cry.	As	 a	widow	 who	had	also	lost	her
child,	 it	 seemed	she	had	again	become	 as	invisible	 as	 she	was	growing	 up—
alone	without	a	family,	 a	leftover	from	 a	war,	an	unwanted	girl.
       “Can	 we	have	dinner	again?	Next	Saturday?”
       She	nodded.	In	English,	she	said,	“Good	night.”
       Inside	 her	room,	she	lay	on	her	bed,	thinking	 of	Mr.	 Kim—his	  warm	smile,
the	sadness	of	his	eyes,	his	smooth	arms—then	her	husband,	the	peck	of	his	lips
as	he	departed	each	day	for	work,	and	she	buried	her	face	in	her	blanket.
       Tears	 leaked	out	 of	 her	 eyes.	She	tore	 at	 the	fabric	 with	  her	hands,	 not
ripping	 but	gripping,	  wings	 flapping	 over	a	 marsh	at	 dusk,	purple	 and	glassy,
until	 she	was	 too	 tired	 to	 realize	 she	was	falling	  into	 a	 soft	 miracle,	 insects
skimming	the	surface,	of	sleep.

114
       AUTUMN	SETTLED	IN	THE	CITY.	THE	NIGHTS	GREW	colder,	dropping	down	to	the
fifties	 at	 times,	which	 seemed	chilly	  in	 a	place	 where	houses	and	 apartments
didn’t	 have	much	for	 insulation	and	heat.	The	drafty	 home	in	 which	 Mina	lived
felt	 colder	 than	it	  was	outside	 at	night,	  and	she	bundled	 up	 in	 sweaters	and
blankets	as	 she	listened	 to	 the	 Korean	 radio	 or	 stood	by	 the	 stove,	 cooking
something	for	herself.	Some	of	 the	local	trees	had	lost	their	 leaves,	but	the	palm
trees	lining	the	streets	persisted,	ragged,	swaying	in	that	bright,	smog-filled	sky.
       At	  the	 supermarket	 when	 no	 one	 would	  notice,	 Mr.	  Kim,	  lips	 curled,
winked	at	her	with	 an	almost	comedic	force.	 Mina	laughed,	covering	 her	mouth,
when	she	wanted	more	than	anything	 to	kiss	 him,	feel	 his	warm	 animal	breath.
She	wanted	her	face	to	tingle,	her	heart	to	thump	against	her	chest.	Be	wild,	 like
rubbing	oneself	in	the	dirt	or	 plucking	flowers	 and	pushing	them	in	her	hair.
       After	 that	 awkward	first	 date,	he	still	 left	gifts	 in	her	bin—a	 Hershey’s	bar,
a	bag	of	salted	peanuts,	a	Valencia	orange	with	 the	most	perfect	 navel—objects
that	aroused	some	softness,	like	a	rabbit’s	fur	 against	her	face.	To	 know	that	 he
was	there,	to	know	 that	he	was	thinking	 about	 her	was	a	strange	but	marvelous
relief	from	 the	hardness	of	every	day.
       At	  the	beginning	 of	 their	 courtship,	 her	 husband,	with	 his	 long	 sensitive
face,	 relaxed	 eyes,	 and	  mischievous	  smile,	 had	  brought	 her	  flowers	  and
chocolates	 like	  the	 main	  character	 in	  an	  American	  movie.	  His	  kindness
continued	throughout	their	 marriage,	but	 not	with	 the	same	intensity,	 of	course.
After	 so	 many	 years	together,	 raising	 a	daughter,	 too,	 their	 lives	 had	 turned
toward	the	 practical,	 to	the	 questions	of	 how	 they	would	 provide	 the	 best	life
they	could	for	her,	what	they	would	 have	to	sacrifice.
       So	 the	 romance	 had	 left	 them,	 but	 never	 the	 love.	 Every	  morning,	 he
dropped	in	to	kiss	her,	 like	a	seagull	diving	 into	 the	ocean,	before	he	rushed	out
the	door.	  She	would	  be	eating	 breakfast	 by	 herself	  or	 getting	 ready	 in	 the
bathroom,	and	 he	pecked	her	 on	the	 cheek	or	 sometimes	sloppily	 like	  a	farm
animal	to	say	goodbye.	He	loved	rituals,	organization,	patterns.
       But	 to	 encounter	these	small	objects—these	ordinary	gifts—now	  from	 Mr.
Kim	revived	 something	in	her	that	she	had	forgotten,	stirring	 the	coals	of	a	small
fire	that	she	had	believed	had	long	 since	died.	She	began	wearing	lipstick—soft
pinks	and	berries—which	 she	purchased	at	a	drugstore	near	the	house.	She	still
wore	 the	 same	 blouses	and	 slacks,	 but	 she	 brushed	 and	 combed	 her	 hair,
checking	herself	in	a	pocketsize	mirror	 she	kept	in	her	purse	throughout	the	day.
She	lined	her	eyes	black	with	 the	tiniest	flick	 at	the	end.	All	  of	this	happened	so
quickly,	 within	 a	week,	 that	even	the	 landlady,	who	 rarely	 said	anything	 about
anyone’s	appearance,	noticed.
       “Somebody’s	 living,”	  she	teased.

115
       With	 Thursday	 off,	Mina,	 exhausted	from	a	late	shift	 the	night	before,	slept
in	until	  noon,	when	 pots	and	pans,	metal	 surfaces,	banged	against	each	other.
She	hated	loud	noises,	especially	sudden	ones,	striking	like	the	universe	crashing
down,	and	 she	didn’t	 know	 in	 which	 direction	 she	should	run.	 In	 her	pajamas
still,	she	exited	her	room	and	peeked	through	the	open	door	of	the	kitchen,	which
always	smelled	of	garlic	and	green	onion.
       With	  her	  pale	 and	 bony	 legs,	 Mrs.	  Baek	 stood	 in	 a	 gray	  T-shirt-like
nightgown,	clicking	 a	burner	on	the	stove.	Her	bun	of	curly	 hair	hung	low	 on	her
neck.	Her	forehead	and	nose	gleamed	in	the	room	half-lit	by	sun.
       “Ah,	  it’s	been	a	while,”	 Mrs.	Baek	said,	drizzling	 oil	onto	 a	pan.
       Mina	  feigned	a	smile,	 yearning	 to	return	 to	bed.	 “Are	 you	 hungry?”	 Mrs.
Baek	asked.	“I	was	just	about	to	make	something.”
       “I	 might	 wait	a	little	 bit.”	 She	placed	her	hand	on	her	stomach.
       “You	  sure?	Sit	down.”	Mrs.	 Baek	lifted	a	large	bowl	 on	the	counter.	“I	 have
all	this	pancake	batter.	Fresh	squid.”
       Mina	  loved	  the	 hot	 crispy	 pajeon	 or	 bindaetteok	  fried	 in	  the	 open-air
markets	back	home.	The	anonymous	bustle	and	then	the	 comfort	of	 sitting	 on	a
tiny	plastic	 stool	as	she	waited	 to	be	fed.	The	 women	who	 cooked	in	 each	stall
always	 seemed	harried	 and	 gruff,	 yet	 their	  mannerisms	were	 also	 distinctly
soothing—as	if	underneath	their	no-nonsense	approach	was	the	tenderness	of	the
family	 that	 they	were	 each	charged	with	  providing	 for.	 They	 were	 women	of
great	power	and	importance,	and	they	knew	it.
       “I	  have	some	rice	from	 yesterday,”	Mina	 said.	“Want	 me	to	 heat	that	up?”
She	reached	into	the	refrigerator	for	a	large	round	Tupperware,	cracked	open	the
lid,	 and	placed	it	 in	 the	 microwave,	 where	she	stood	 watching	 the	stove	 with
Mrs.	Baek.
       “I	  saw	you	the	other	 night,”	 Mrs.	 Baek	said	in	a	 low	voice,	 smiling	 as	she
tilted	the	pan	to	spread	the	oil.
       “Where?”
       “At	  Hanok	House.”
       “You	   work	  there?”	  Mina	  remembered	 the	 calming	  familiarity	   of	  the
banchan—the	spinach	and	soybean	sprouts,	the	crunchy	lotus	root.
       “Yes,	 I	 was	in	 the	back.	I	 noticed	you	 sitting	 with	 a	man.	I	 didn’t	 want	to
interrupt.”
       “I	  see.”	 Mina	 leaned	 her	 hip	 on	 the	counter.	 “I	  knew	 I	 recognized	 the
banchan	from	somewhere.”
       “Who	 is	he?”	 Mrs.	Baek	asked.	She	ladled	the	batter	onto	the	hot	pan	where
it	cooked	almost	immediately,	 the	edges	hardening.
       “He’s	 a	coworker.	 I	work	for	 him.”	 Her	stomach	rumbled.

116
       “Oh,	 that	makes	sense,”	Mrs.	Baek	said,	still	focused	on	the	pan.
       The	 microwave	 dinged.	 Mina	 scooped	 hot	rice	 into	 two	 bowls	 from	  her
drying	rack.
       “Do	 you	 like	him?”	 Mrs.	 Baek	nudged	the	pajeon	with	the	spatula	so	that	it
wouldn’t	 stick.
       “I	  don’t	  know.	  Maybe.”	 Mina	  settled	 in	 the	 breakfast	 nook,	 the	 wood
benches	cold	despite	their	cushions.	The	smell	 of	squid	and	scallion	 pajeon,	hot
and	crispy,	filled	 the	kitchen.	 With	 her	pale	bird	 legs,	feet	covered	in	 red	house
slippers,	Mrs.	 Baek	 shuffled	 toward	 Mina	 carrying	 a	 heavy	plate	 and	a	small
bowl	for	 the	dipping	sauce.	The	pajeon	was	perfectly	golden	and	browned,	sliced
into	quarters.
       “Go	 ahead	and	have	some.	Let	me	clean	up	a	little	bit.”
       Mina	 waited	until	 Mrs.	Baek	slid	 onto	the	bench	in	front	of	 her.
       “Go	 ahead,”	Mrs.	Baek	said.
       “No,	 you	first,	 please.	Thank	you	for	sharing.”
       Mrs.	 Baek	picked	 up	her	metal	chopsticks,	lifted	 a	piece	of	 the	pajeon	onto
her	bowl	of	rice.	“He’s	 handsome.”	She	raised	her	brows.
       Mina	 smiled,	 dipping	 a	piece	of	 pajeon	into	 a	tiny	 bowl	 of	 soy	sauce	and
vinegar.	“He	is.”
       “Is	 he	nice?”
       “Yes,	 so	far,	but	it’s	 hard	for	me	to	trust	anyone,	I	guess.”	She	sighed.
       “I’m	  the	same.”	Mrs.	Baek	nudged	the	mak	kimchi,	 Mina’s	 favorite,	 toward
her.	“You	can	never	tell	with	 men,	you	know?”
       Mina	 nodded,	tasting	the	mak	kimchi.	 Perfectly	tangy	and	ripe.
       “I	 don’t	 think	 I’ll	 trust	any	man	again,”	Mrs.	 Baek	said.
       Mina	 wondered	 about	what	kind	 of	history	 Mrs.	 Baek	might	 have	had,	but
she	could	 tell	 by	the	 resentment	in	 Mrs.	 Baek’s	 words	 that	to	 resurrect	those
experiences	here	might	only	 shatter	the	safety,	 the	precarious	lack	of	 judgment
between	them—two	 women,	 adrift	 in	 a	foreign	 country,	 without	  any	apparent
family.
       After	  eating	in	 silence	 for	 a	couple	 minutes,	Mina	 said,	 “Everything	  you
cook	is	delicious.”
       “It’s	  hard	to	cook	for	one,	you	know?”
       “I	   agree.	 I	  only	  make	  ramen	 or	  the	  same	 jjigae	  nowadays.”	  Mina
remembered	her	daughter’s	favorite	 meals—kalguksu,	 sujebi,	braised	 mackerel
in	the	fall	and	winter,	 naengmyeon	in	the	summer—and	how	much	time	and	care
she	put	into	feeding	them	all	 back	then.	She	wanted	her	daughter’s	life	to	be	full
so	that	she	 would	 never	suffer,	 so	that	 Mina	 could	 erase	all	 the	hardship	 and
deprivation	she	had	herself	endured.

117
       But	 the	 past	always	had	a	 way	of	 rising	 back	again	when	 so	many	 of	the
questions	had	remained	unanswered,	wrong-doings	 remained	unacknowledged,
when	a	country	 torn	 by	 a	border	 had	continued	for	 decades	to	 be	at	war	 with
itself.	Both	 the	living	 and	the	dead	remained	separated	from	each	other,	forever
unsettled.
       “Were	 you	ever	married?”	 Mrs.	Baek	asked.
       In	 Seoul,	 by	now,	 the	leaves	hanging	 would	 be	their	 brightest,	 their	most
beautiful	against	a	gray	 sky.	The	gingko	 and	maple	would	 glow	 yellow	 and	red
down	the	streets	and	up	the	hills.	 The	crisp	 fall	 air	would	 pierce	her	mouth,	 her
throat,	her	lungs.	She	and	her	daughter	ran	through	the	fallen	leaves,	kicking	and
laughing.
       But	 she	hated	those	red	leaves	now,	 the	season	that	took	 her	husband	and
daughter	away	from	her,	too.
       “He	 died,”	 Mina	said.
       “Oh,	  I’m	 sorry.”	  Mrs.	 Baek	placed	 her	chopsticks	 on	the	 table.	“Was	 he
sick?”
       “No.	 It	 was	an	accident.”
       Mrs.	 Baek	reached	out	and	squeezed	her	hand,	the	first	time	Mina	had	been
touched	with	 purpose	in	a	long	 time.	She	could	feel	 something	sprouting	 inside
of	her	 chest	as	if	 Mrs.	 Baek’s	kindness	 was	the	amber-colored	 light	 stretching
longer	and	longer	each	day	in	spring.
       But	 it	  was	still	 only	  autumn.	A	 season	of	 dying.	 And	 when	 she	thought
about	those	 trees,	 how	 they	 must	 look	  at	 this	 moment—the	  saturation,	 the
brightness—ablaze,	all	she	could	imagine	 was	the	blood	 that	must	have	been	in
the	road,	after	a	reckless	driver,	 rushing	on	his	 way	to	work,	 mowed	 her	family
down.

118
Margot

Fall	2014

119
       UNDERNEATH	VAULTED	CEILINGS	AND	STAINED	GLASS	catching	the	faintest	of
morning	light	 in	delicious	 jewel	tones,	Margot	 could	feel	how	 beautiful	 and	safe
a	church	could	be—the	sinuous	burn	of	incense,	the	calm	lemon	oil	on	wood,	 the
rituals,	the	 incantations	and	 song.	It	 had	been	years	since	Margot	 had	 gone	to
church	herself.	 In	 her	 teens,	she	had	 fought	 with	 her	 mother	about	 what	 she
viewed	as	the	oppression,	the	boredom	of	worship.	But	seeing	the	windows	now,
she	remembered	how	as	a	child,	she	would	stare	at	the	stained	glass	and	think	of
pieces	of	candy	like	Jolly	 Ranchers.	She	had	wondered	what	the	windows	would
taste	like	if	she	could	climb	 up	and	lick	them.
       The	 Irish	 priest	greeted	the	gathered	in	Korean	 with	 a	bit	of	 his	native	 lilt.
The	pipe	organ	played	and	the	choir	sang	clearly.	Every	cell	in	 her	body	vibrated
with	music.	 She	couldn’t	understand	the	lyrics,	but	 she	could	feel	their	meaning,
the	seduction	of	 their	 gentleness,	their	meekness	in	front	 of	 a	God	 who	would
reward	them,	a	God	who	would	always	restore	order	and	peace	to	this	world.
       She	closed	her	eyes.	Did	 her	mother	believe	 in	any	of	 this?	Or	did	 she	just
need	to	belong?	Did	 she	only	need	to	return	 here	every	Sunday	to	restore	order
to	her	spirit	 and	mind?	She	could	understand	why	 her	mother	needed	to	believe
there	was	a	 heaven	after	 all	 of	 this—after	 all	 her	 anxiety,	 her	 loneliness,	the
frailties	of	 a	body	that	 could	be	taken	from	 her,	apparently,	at	any	moment,	 this
body	that	suffered,	that	 belonged	to	and	dissolved	into	 the	earth	like	 that	of	any
animal.
       And	 her	 mother’s	 ashes.	What	would	 she	do	with	 them?	What	 would	 her
mother	have	wanted	for	herself?
       Whether	 she	was	in	 heaven	or	simply	 gone,	Margot	 ached	for	her	 mother.
Umma.	Tears	streamed	down	her	face,	dripped	from	her	chin	onto	her	chest.	She
licked	the	 salt	away	from	 her	lips.	 Amen	hummed	 around	her.	While	 the	priest
read	from	the	scripture,	 his	Korean	 calm	and	fluid	 as	a	creek,	she	kept	her	face
lowered,	 collecting	 herself.	 She	wished	 she	 could	 understand	the	 words,	 but
instead	the	Korean	 washed	 around	her	 like	 water,	 chest-deep.	Her	head	 spun
from	the	frankincense.	She	couldn’t	sit	still	 any	longer.
       After	  the	homily,	  more	 prayer,	she	stood	 to	 receive	the	 communion,	 but
instead	of	  walking	  toward	 the	 altar,	 she	bolted	  out	 the	 front	 door	  into	 the
morning	light	 where	she	could	finally	  catch	her	breath.	The	sun	glowed	through
haze	and	smog	like	an	ember	dying.	She	sat	on	the	cold	concrete	steps	as	finches
flitted	and	chirped	through	trees.	Pigeons	cooed	under	roof	eaves.
       After	 all	 those	years	of	fighting	 with	 her	mother	 who	feared	Margot	 would
go	to	hell	 one	day,	Margot	 was	now	here	searching	for	 what	everyone	else	was
—answers,	safety,	relief.
       She	had	hoped	to	 speak	to	the	priest	or	 a	deacon	after	the	service,	find	 out

120
what	 she	might	  do	 for	  her	 mother,	 her	 ashes.	At	  the	 same	time,	  she	was
embarrassed	by	the	fact	 that	she	couldn’t	 afford	 to	 do	anything	 proper	 for	 her
mother.	First	 she	had	 to	 sell	her	 mother’s	 store	and	 car.	Suddenly,	 she	felt	 a
profound	 sense	of	 shame—as	she	had	always	 felt	 around	 most	 other	 Korean
Americans—that	  she	 had	 grown	  up	  fatherless	 and	  poor.	  Among	  Korean
Americans,	 many	 of	 whom	 were	 Christian	  and	from	  middle-	 to	  upper-class
backgrounds	as	 a	 result	 of	 status-filtering	  immigration	  laws,	 a	 child	  out	 of
wedlock,	a	missing	 father,	seemed	to	be	particularly	  embarrassing	when	family
success	represented	all	that	you	had	in	this	country	far	away	from	home.	Anyone
who	 failed	 was	 defective.	 She	 and	her	 mother	 had	 been	 defective—not	 the
dream,	not	the	conventional	shape	of	a	family	and	success.
       Their	  existence	  was	 criminal.	  Her	  single	  mother	 was	  undocumented.
Margot	was	fatherless.	Shame,	shame	on	them	all.
       The	 heavy	wooden	doors	crashed	open	as	the	parishioners	emerged.	Margot
stood	at	attention,	searching	the	crowd	that	streamed	around	her.	With	a	jolt,	 she
recognized	Mrs.	Baek	 dashing	by	in	 the	shuffle.	Margot	 almost	said	something,
but	instead	she	followed	her	to	 the	congested	one-way	parking	lot	 where	groups
of	 people,	mostly	 middle-aged	 and	elderly,	  chatted,	while	 cars	 backed	out	 of
spots	with	care.
       Mrs.	 Baek	 had	reached	her	car	and	went	to	 unlock	it	 when	 Margot	caught
up	with	her.
       “Mrs.	 Baek,”	 Margot	 said.
       She	 jumped	 and	turned	 around	with	  her	keys,	 sharp,	sticking	  out	of	 her
hand,	while	 teeth	 flashed	 between	her	 red	lips,	 the	 edge	of	 a	 snarl.	 Startled,
Margot	 raised	her	hands	up	 in	front	 of	 her	 chest	as	if	 protecting	 herself.	Why
was	Mrs.	Baek	so	scared?
       “Oh	 my	 God,”	Mrs.	 Baek	said,	eyes	wide,	catching	her	breath.	“You	 scared
me.”
       “Sorry,	  I	 was	 happy	 to	 see	you.	 I	  don’t	 know	 anyone.	 You	 go	 to	 this
church?”
       “I	  just	 started,”	 she	said.	She	 smoothed	the	 bun	on	 top	 of	 her	head	and
loosened	her	grip	 on	 the	keys.	 “I	 never	 really	 did,	 but	my	 first	  time	 was	last
week.”
       “I	 see,”	Margot	 said,	wondering	why	she	had	begun	attending.
       “Did	  you	go	to	church	with	 your	mom?”
       “While	  I	was	growing	 up,	but	not	recently.”
       Mrs.	 Baek	nodded.	“Are	 you	going	to	have	a	service?”
       “I	 think	 so,	still	 trying	to	 figure	it	 out.	Her	ashes	are	at	the	mortuary.	I	don’t
think	 I’ll	  be	able	to	 have	a	 service	until	 after	 I	 sell	 my	 mom’s	 store,	her	car.

121
Maybe	at	the	end	of	the	month,	or	in	early	January.”
       Mrs.	 Baek	 fixed	 her	eyes	on	 the	cracked	 asphalt	of	 the	parking	 lot.	 “She
never	told	you	or	asked	for	anything,	right?	 She	never	had	any	requests?”
       “No,	 not	that	I	 know	of.”
       “She	 wouldn’t	 want	 you	to	spend	so	much	money.”	 Mrs.	Baek	 reached	out
and	squeezed	Margot’s	arm.	 “Now	 that	 you’re	 alone,	you	 have	to	take	 care	of
yourself,	right?”
       Margot	  nodded	 and	tilted	  her	 face	 upward	 to	 blink	  back	 sudden	tears,
noticing	a	white	 trail	in	 the	sky	like	a	scar.	She	looked	back	at	Mrs.	Baek,	whose
eyes	had	softened	into	 dark	brown	 pools	 that	shimmered	in	 the	 morning	 light.
Despite	the	distraction	of	 her	red	lips,	 she	had	the	soulful	 face	of	someone	who
felt	 deeply.	She	was	 the	kind	 of	 woman	 Margot	 would	 want	to	 be	one	 day—
stylish,	genuine,	self-possessed,	and	confident.
       “There	 are	ways	to	honor	your	 mom	privately,	 don’t	 you	think?	 I	think	 that
makes	the	most	sense.	It	would	probably	just	be	me	and	Alma,	 you	know,	if	 you
had	a	service.	Maybe	some	people	from	church.”	 She	smiled.	“But	 she	wouldn’t
want	you	to	spend	a	lot	of	money.”
       Margot	 suddenly	 remembered	what	Miguel	 had	suggested	about	Mrs.	Kim
after	 snooping	around	 the	 Calabasas	house	on	 Friday	  night:	 that	 if	  she	had
fought	with	 Margot’s	mom,	 who	was	having	an	affair	 with	her	husband,	her	only
motivation	 would	 be	money.	 She	already	had	a	 lover.	 She	couldn’t	 have	been
jealous	romantically.	  But	 if	  Mrs.	 Kim	  was	motivated	 by	  money,	a	 desire	 to
protect	herself	financially,	 what	 could	that	reveal	about	whether	 or	not	Mr.	 Kim
was	Margot’s	father?	Could	 her	mother	have	been	seeking	support?	Maybe	Mrs.
Baek	would	know.
       As	  Margot	 was	 about	 to	 ask,	 Mrs.	  Baek	 turned	 away	 toward	 her	 car.
Opening	 the	 door,	 she	said,	 “I	  miss	 your	 mom.”	  Her	 voice	  trembled,	 eyes
downcast.	“Maybe—maybe	 that’s	 why	 I	 came	here,	you	 know?	I	 just	 had	this
impulse	to	 come	 here.”	 She	glanced	 at	Margot	  before	wiping	  tears	from	  her
cheeks.	“Maybe	 I	was	hoping	 to	 see	your	mom?	That’s	 silly,	 I	 know.	 She	was
always	here	on	Sunday.”
       Margot	 hesitated,	deciding	it	wasn’t	 the	right	time	to	question	her.
       After	 shutting	 the	door,	Mrs.	 Baek	started	the	engine	and	backed	out	of	the
spot.	Margot	 watched	as	the	 windshield	 reflected	 a	plush	solitary	 cloud	 in	 the
gray-blue	 morning	 sky,	 obscuring	 Mrs.	 Baek’s	  face.	Her	 hands,	 slender	and
long,	guided	the	steering	wheel.	 Her	tires	squealed	unexpectedly.	Finches	f	lew,
a	f	  lurry	  of	 tan	 feathers,	 before	 landing	  and	pecking	  again	 at	 the	 asphalt,
whatever	scrap	they	could	find.

122
       LATE	AFTERNOON	THE	NEXT	DAY,	MARGOT	RETURNED	to	the	swap	meet	to	ask
Alma	and	the	 neighboring	store	owners	 if	 they	knew	someone	who	 might	want
to	purchase	her	mother’s	store	outright.	Earlier	that	morning,	 she	had	gone	to	the
bank	with	 her	mother’s	 death	certificate,	and	 since	Margot	 had	been	listed	as	a
beneficiary,	she	was	able	to	withdraw	 her	mother’s	funds—$562—and	 close	her
account.	But	 she	needed	more	 than	that	 to	 cover	her	 mother’s	 cremation	 and
unpaid	bills.
       In	 the	parking	 lot	of	 the	swap	meet,	large	speakers	vibrated	and	bumped	to
banda	music.	A	  man	in	 a	cowboy	  hat	grilled	  chicken	in	 a	 cloud	 of	 delicious
smoke.	Inside	 the	 old	 warehouse	 structure,	merchandise	 overflowed	 into	  the
aisles	where	people	perused	and	picked	over	 items	for	 sale.	Her	mother’s	 store
had	remained	untouched,	the	gate	still	padlocked,	undisturbed.
       Margot	 couldn’t	 help	but	worry	 that	someone,	knowing	that	her	mother	was
gone,	had	broken	into	the	place	 and	taken	everything.	And	 now	that	 her	mother
was	dead,	how	much	 was	her	store—the	 clothing,	 the	racks,	the	 display	cases,
the	hangers,	which	her	mother	had	worked	over	twenty	years	to	acquire—worth?
Margot	had	enough	of	her	own	savings	to	cover	rent	 in	Seattle	but	not	enough	to
remain	in	LA	 past	the	holidays.
       As	 Margot	 unlocked	 the	accordion	 gate,	Alma	  emerged	from	 her	store—
jam-packed	 with	  Christmas	  decorations—wearing	  a	 Santa	  hat	 delightfully
askew.	 Strings	 of	  flashing	  multicolored	  lights	  and	 metallic	  tinsel	 garlands
dazzled	in	the	 overhead	fluorescent	light.	 Alma	 hugged	Margot,	 kissing	 her	on
the	cheek,	a	benediction	of	sorts.	“Ven	conmigo.”
       She	offered	 Margot	a	mug	 of	champurrado,	easing	Margot’s	 mind	 with	 the
familiar	 smell,	 the	taste	 of	hot	 chocolate,	 cinnamon,	and	 masa	kept	warm	 for
hours.
       Sitting	  down	together,	Alma	  pointed	to	 her	mother’s	 store.	“¿Mi	 hermana
quiere	comprar	la	tienda?”
       “¿Tu	 hermana?”
       “$6,000?”
       Margot	 had	 no	idea	how	 much	her	mother’s	 store	was	actually	 worth,	 but
what	could	 she	do	about	that	 now?	How	 much	 time	 and	energy	did	 she	have?
$6,000	 was	plenty,	  enough	 to	 cover	 her	 mother’s	 cremation	  and	help	  with
Margot’s	 expenses	since	she	was	taking	 unpaid	time	 off	 work.	  And	 she	knew
that	Alma	and	her	sister	would	take	good	care	of	the	store	and	customers.
       “Next	 week?	Dinero,”	 Alma	 asked.
       “Okay.	  Sí.	Can	 I	call	 you?”	 Margot	 finished	 the	 last	of	 her	 champurrado
and	motioned	for	 Alma	 to	 add	her	 number	to	 her	phone.	“I’ll	   come	back	next
week?”

123
       A	 wave	 of	sadness	engulfed	Margot.	 She	couldn’t	 believe	 it	 had	all	 come
down	to	 this,	all	 those	years	her	 mother	had	 spent	protecting	 and	growing	 her
store.	All	 those	years,	she	had	yelled,	 Amiga!	 Amiga!	 at	the	women’s	 backs	as
they	walked	away,	swept	the	 floors,	complimented	 strangers	after	they	had	tried
on	clothes,	 Bonita.	  So	young.	 Joven.	 All	  the	 women	 who	 had	 stood	 in	 the
makeshift	 dressing	room	 mirror,	  observing	 themselves	from	  different	 angles,
considering	who	they	were	and	how	they	looked.
       Alma	 embraced	Margot,	 rubbing	 a	circle	 on	her	 back.	Of	 course,	this	was
how	her	mother	would	want	things	 to	be.	How	complete.
       After	  placing	 her	 mother’s	 notebooks,	receipts,	 and	the	 foot-tall	 ceramic
Virgin	 Mary	in	 the	biggest	cardboard	box	she	could	find,	she	locked	up	the	store.
       Now	 that	she	had	some	money	coming	her	way,	she	realized	that	maybe	she
should	take	Mrs.	 Baek	out	to	 dinner	this	 week.	They	could	 go	to	 Hanok	House
again.	Her	trip	 to	Calabasas	with	Miguel	 hadn’t	 answered	much	about	Mr.	 Kim
—other	than	 that	his	 wife,	 Mary,	 already	 had	another	lover—and	 maybe	 Mrs.
Baek	might	know	 more	about	him.	 Maybe	she	even	might	be	able	to	answer	the
question	of	whether	he	was	Margot’s	father.
       Margot	 strolled	through	 the	maze	of	shops	decked	out	in	tinsel	garlands	and
flashing	holiday	 lights.	 Children	 ran,	screaming	and	laughing.	Loud	 speakers	in
another	section	of	 the	 swap	meet	blasted	 “Feliz	 Navidad,”	  entangled	with	 the
music	of	various	electronic	toys	for	 sale.
       Margot	 thought	 of	 the	years	she	had	spent	hating	 this	place,	 resenting	the
work,	the	dirtiness,	and	the	trash	that	accumulated	in	the	aisles.
       “I	  don’t	want	 to	go	to	 work,”	 Margot,	 as	a	teenager,	had	yelled.	“I	 want	to
stay	home.	It’s	my	weekend.”
       “Do	  you	think	 I	want	 to	work?”	 her	 mother	asked,	voice	cracking.	 “I	 need
your	help.	I	can’t	 do	everything	alone.”
       “It’s	  not	my	fault	 that	you	have	to	work.	 Why	do	I	have	to	go	there?	You’re
fine	there	by	yourself.”
       “I	 need	your	help.	Do	 you	understand?	I	can’t	do	everything	alone.”
       And	 Margot	 almost	 always	caved	to	preserve	what	 little	 sanity,	what	 little
order	could	 be	kept	in	 their	 home	of	 two	people	 struggling	 to	understand	each
other,	preserve	what	little	control	 they	could	have	over	this	 world	that	seemed	to
shun	them—poor	immigrant	  outsiders.	Yet	 Margot	could	 witness	now	 that	this
store,	this	swap	meet,	where	her	mother	spent	six	days	a	week,	was	an	extension
of	home,	and	the	homes	of	all	 the	people	who	worked	here,	including	 Alma,	 not
just	for	  money	but	 because	of	 love,	 the	 love	 they	 had	for	 their	 families	  and
friends,	raised	and	supported	here	and	abroad.	Love,	in	 all	its	 forms,	could	 look
this	way,	too.

124
       Margot	 stopped	at	the	sight	of	the	racks	and	display	carts,	once	stacked	with
socks	and	underwear,	stripped	 bare.	The	lingerie	 hanging	 from	 torsos	made	of
metal	wire,	 all	 of	the	 merchandise	had	disappeared.	A	FOR	LEASE	sign	hung	on
the	wall.
       “Oh,	 shit,”	 Margot	 said	to	no	one,	almost	dropping	the	cardboard	box.	Mrs.
Baek’s	store	was	gone.
       Margot	  went	 straight	 to	 Hanok	 House,	 where	 she	met	 with	  Miguel	 for
dinner	after	his	first	day	at	work.
       She’d	 have	to	press	someone	there	further	to	find	Mrs.	Baek	now.	It	seemed
like	a	 good	place	to	 try	 since	Mrs.	 Baek	had	worked	 there	up	 until	 earlier	this
year.	Why	 would	 she	shut	down	 her	 store	without	 telling	 Margot	 yesterday	 at
church?
       Lone	  men	 in	 rolled-up	 sleeves	 slurped	 noodles.	 Families	 spoke	 in	 low
hushed	tones.	Closer	 to	 the	 holidays,	  Korean	 immigrants,	 who	 often	 owned
small	businesses	or	worked	long	hours	in	the	service	industries,	depended	on	this
time	of	year,	when	people	dined	out	 and	shopped	more	often,	to	survive.	No	one
appeared	to	be	celebrating	anything	at	all.	The	scent	of	meat	licked	 by	flame,	fat
dripping	on	fire	 lingered,	but	 tonight	was	a	night	 of	hardy,	inexpensive	dishes—
jjigaes,	 kalguksu,	 yukgaejang.	 Tonight	  was	 a	 night	 of	  getting	 by,	 fulfilling
oneself	after	an	especially	hard	day,	finding	comfort	 and	home	in	food.
       “Is	  the	 owner	 here	tonight?”	  Margot	 asked	the	 same	waitress	 from	  last
week.
       “Mr.	  Park?	No,	not	 today.”	 Her	face	was	unpowdered	and	pink	 around	the
cheeks	and	 nose	from	 the	 heat	 of	 the	 food.	 In	 her	 opaque	black	  tights	 and
sensible	ballet	shoes,	she	strode	toward	the	kitchen	in	the	back.
       So	 many	customers.	All	  look	almost	 same,	the	 restaurant	owner	had	 said
about	her	mother.	He	had	grinned	with	 those	Paul-Bunyan-statue	teeth,	cold	and
clinical.
       The	 myulchi	 bokkeum,	 chewy	 and	sticky	  stir-fried	 anchovies—tiny	 eyes,
gills	broken,	 bodies	twisted	in	 death	throes	that	had	disgusted	her	growing	up—
were	now	satisfyingly	  briny	 and	sweet	in	Margot’s	 mouth.	 It	 was	like	 a	bite	of
the	sea	but	candied,	pure	luxury.
       Miguel	  sampled	the	myulchi	bokkeum	 himself.	One	of	 the	tiny	 fish	slipped
out	of	his	chopsticks’	grip	 onto	the	table.
       “How	  was	work?”	Margot	 asked.
       He	 picked	 up	the	fallen	 myulchi	  with	 his	fingers,	 placing	 it	in	 his	 mouth.
“Oh,	it	 was	fine.	Met	 everyone	on	my	team.”	 He	sipped	from	 his	glass	of	water.
“Nothing	 much	to	 do	today.	Got	 my	 laptop,	all	 my	supplies	and	 everything.	So
many	pens.”	He	opened	his	eyes	wide.	“I’ve	  never	seen	so	many	different	types

125
of	pens.	Rollerball.	Gel.	Classic	ballpoint	 .	.	.”
       “A	  little	different	 from	 working	 at	a	nonprofit?”
       The	 waitress	delivered	two	 earthenware	pots	of	soondubu	jjigae	that	boiled
and	bubbled	at	their	table.
       “Excuse	 me,”	Margot	 said.
       “Yes?”	 The	waitress	lowered	her	head.
       “Do	  you	.	.	 .	happen	to	know	 how	I	 can	get	in	touch	 with	 Mrs.	Baek?	She
used	to	work	here—until	earlier	 this	year.”
       The	waitress	paused,	inhaling	deeply.	She	glanced	around	the	restaurant.
       “I	  tried	 going	 to	her	 store	at	the	 swap	meet	today,”	 Margot	 said.	 “It	 was
completely	gone.	She—”
       “No,	  I	 don’t	 have	any	information,”	  the	 waitress	interrupted	 with	 a	tight-
lipped	smile.	“I’m	  sorry.”	She	turned	away	with	 her	tray	in	hand.
       Margot	 resisted	the	urge	to	 call	after	her.	 Maybe	she	should	try	 asking	one
of	 the	 other	waitresses?	 Biting	 back	 her	 frustration,	  she	turned	 to	 the	 food.
Through	steam	from	 red	pepper,	onions,	and	fish	 broth,	they	cracked	an	egg	on
top	 of	 their	 jjigaes.	 Margot	  picked	 at	 more	 banchan—seasoned	spinach	and
soybean	sprouts—waiting	for	the	soup	to	settle	down.
       How	  this	 jjigae	 must’ve	 provided	 the	 perfect	 comfort	 on	 a	cold	 Korean
night.	She	had	never	been	to	Korea	herself,	never	had	enough	money	to	travel	on
her	own,	 but	through	 the	 vigor	 and	brashness	of	 this	comfort	 food,	 she	could
imagine	the	brutality	 of	a	winter,	 or	even	a	history	and	culture	itself,	 that	needed
this	kind	of	balm.	 She	needed	this	right	now.
       Where	 was	Mrs.	 Baek?	Margot	 could	go	 to	church	 again	this	Sunday,	 but
could	she	wait	 almost	 a	week	until	  then?	And	 what	if	 Mrs.	 Baek	 wasn’t	there
either?	Then	what?	Shimmering	like	 a	school	of	the	tiniest	fish,	 she	was	slipping
through	the	net.
       “Have	 you	decided	what	to	do	about	Calabasas	or	Mrs.	Kim?”
       She	sighed.	“I	 feel	 like	 I’ve	 hit	a	dead	end	with	 that.	Unless	I’m	 willing	  to
just	go	to	her	and	ask	her	outright	about	her	husband,	there’s	nothing	much	I	can
gain,	especially	 now	 that	 Mrs.	 Baek	is	 gone.”	 She	dipped	 her	 spoon	into	 the
soup,	mixing	  the	 ingredients—the	 clams,	 mussels,	and	 shrimp,	 zucchini	 and
onion.
       Margot	 felt	 a	light	 tap	on	 her	shoulder	and	turned	to	 see	the	waitress,	who
leaned	forward	 and	asked,	 “Could	 I	 talk	 to	 you?	Outside?”	 Bowing	  her	 head
slightly,	she	gestured	toward	the	door.	Margot	followed	 her	out.
       The	  fog	 of	 their	  breath	 rose	from	  their	 faces	 as	if	  smoking	  cigarettes
together	on	break.	The	waitress	hugged	the	empty	tray	like	 a	shield,	pressing	the
round	surface	 to	 her	chest.	 Margot	 jammed	 her	 hands	into	 her	 pockets.	Lint

126
rolled	at	her	fingers.
       “You’re	  looking	 for	Mrs.	 Baek?”
       “Yes.”	  Margot’s	chest	again	was	a	dark	mortar,	the	pestle	grinding.
       “Everything	  okay?”	Mascara	clumped	the	waitress’s	 lashes	into	sharp	ends.
Cigarette	butts	 littered	 the	somber	 parking	 lot,	 which	 glittered	 with	 specks	of
broken	glass.
       “No.”	  Margot	shook	her	head.	“My	 mom—she’s	dead.”
       “What?”
       “My	  mother	 is	dead.	She	died	about	two	 weeks	ago.	And	 .	.	 .	I	 wanted	to
ask	Mrs.	Baek	some	questions	about	her.	They	were	friends	for	 a	long	time.	She
might	be	able	to	answer	some	questions	about	my	mother.”
       The	waitress	touched	Margot’s	 arm	involuntarily	  as	if	both	offering	 comfort
and	steadying	herself.
       “I	 went	 to	Mrs.	Baek’s	 store	today	and	she	wasn’t	there.	She	sold	her	store,
I	guess.	She	 left.	 Do	 you	have	 her	number	 or	 address?	Some	way	 to	contact
her?”
       The	 waitress	squeezed	the	tray	 to	 her	chest	again	and	 shook	her	 head.	“I
don’t	know	 if	I	 can	give	that	to	you.	I’m	 sorry.”
       “Why	  not?”	Margot	 asked.
       “When	  she	quit,	she	also	.	 .	.	 She	told	me	 to	never	tell	 anyone	where	 she
lives.”
       “Why?	  My	 mother	was	her	 friend	for	 a	really	 long	 time.	I	 don’t	 think	 it’d
be	a	problem	if—”
       “Yes,	 but	.	.	.”	 She	slid	the	tiny	cross	around	her	necklace.
       “But	  what?	 It	 doesn’t	make	 sense.	I	 don’t	 have	any	 problems	with	  Mrs.
Baek.	I	saw	her	yesterday	even,	at	my	mother’s	church.	We’re	fine.	 I	just	need	to
ask	her	some	questions.”	Margot’s	voice	 grew	hoarse.	On	the	verge	of	tears,	she
said,	“She’s	the	 only	person	I	 have	left	 right	 now.	I	 don’t	 have	any	family.	  No
one	else	can	help	me.”
       The	waitress	closed	her	eyes	and	frowned.
       “I	 don’t	 have	anybody	to	help	me,”	Margot	 said.	“Please.”
       She	opened	her	eyes	and	met	Margot’s	gaze.	“Do	you	know	 why	Mrs.	 Baek
left?”	The	waitress	pointed	toward	 the	ground,	meaning	the	restaurant.
       “She	 said	she	couldn’t	be	on	her	feet	all	the	time,”	Margot	 said.
       “She	 quit	when	Mr.	 Park	bought	the	restaurant.”
       “Wait,	  who’s	Mr.	 Park?”
       “Mr.	  Park	bought	the	restaurant	to	be	closer	to	her,”	the	waitress	explained.
       Mr.	 Park	must	be	the	owner	Margot	 had	spoken	to	the	other	night.	His	 eyes
lingering	on	Margot’s	 face	too	long.

127
       “I	  think	 maybe	they	had	 a	few	 dates	or	 something,	but	 she	was	not
interested	in	him.	And	he	bought	this	restaurant	to	be	closer	to	her,	you	see?	He
was	already	retired	for	a	while.”
       “Oh,	shit.”	Margot	covered	her	mouth.
       The	waitress	glanced	at	her	watch.	“I	have	to	go.”
       “Wait.”	 Margot	touched	the	waitress’s	elbow.	“So	he’s	been	following	her,
or	.	.	.	stalking	her?”
       She	nodded.	“She	had	to	move,	too.	She	told	me	not	to	tell	anyone	anything
about	where	she	lives	now.	When	you	came	here	last	time,	Mr.	Park	was	here	so
I	couldn’t	say	anything	in	front	of	him.”
       “Do	you	know	where	she	lives?	I	promise	that	I	won’t	tell	anyone.	I	would
never	tell	Mr.	Park	or	anyone	else.	I	would	never	put	her	in	danger	like	that.”
       “I—”
       “I	 really	need	her	help.”
       “I	 will	write	it	 down	for	you	before	you	leave,	okay?”	Her	eyes	were	full	of
fear.	“Don’t	tell	her	I	told	you,	okay,	about	Mr.	Park?	Don’t	tell	anyone,	okay?”
She	squeezed	Margot’s	arm	before	she	reentered	the	restaurant.
       Hard	breaths	billowed	 fog.	 Streetlights	glowed	off	 the	glass	of	 parked
vehicles	in	the	lot.
       Margot	returned	to	the	table	to	 find	Miguel	 slumped	in	his	seat,	texting
someone	on	his	phone.	He	had	finished	most	of	his	jjigae.
       “Sorry	about	that,”	she	said,	sliding	herself	onto	the	bench.	“God.”
       “Something	wrong?”
       Margot	planted	her	forehead	in	 her	palm.	“Mr.	 Park,	the	 owner	of	 this
place?”	she	whispered.	“He’s	been	stalking	Mrs.	Baek.	That’s	probably	why	she
left	the	store.	Maybe	he	found	her	there?”
       “Oh	my	God.	Shit.”
       “I	 know,	I	know.	I	knew	something	was	off	about	him.”
       “I	 hope	she’s	okay.”
       “Me,	too.	The	waitress	is	supposed	to	give	me	her	address.	She’s	writing	it
down.”
       “What	are	you	going	to	do?”
       “I’m	 going	to	her	place—tonight.”
       “What	if	she’s	already	gone?”
       “I	 have	to	find	out	what	she	knows	about	Mr.	Kim.	She’s	the	only	one	who
knows.	I	know	it.	I	just	know.”
       The	waitress	slipped	a	small	folded	piece	of	paper	on	the	table	in	front	of
Margot.
       Her	jjigae	had	gone	lukewarm,	but	she	didn’t	care	about	eating	anymore.

128
She	had	to	find	Mrs.	Baek	before	it	was	too	late.

129
  Mina

Fall	1987

130
       WITH	THE	SUN	HANGING	LOW,	A	DUSKY	AND	MOLTEN	landscape	of	clouds
striated	and	stretched	thin,	 and	the	dark	 silhouettes	of	 palm	trees	backlit,	 Mina
and	Mr.	  Kim,	  on	 their	 second	date,	 drove	 west	 in	 his	 station	 wagon	 down
Olympic	 Boulevard,	 one	 of	 the	 longest	 streets	in	 the	 city.	 It	 was	 lined	 with
stores,	restaurants,	and	shopping	plazas	through	Koreatown	but	rapidly	dwindled
down	  to	 a	  residential	  area	 with	   mostly	  single-family	   homes	  around	 its
intersection	with	Crenshaw	Boulevard.
       Staring	 out	the	window,	 Mina	 marveled	 at	how	much	her	 life	 had	changed
in	the	past	several	months	since	 moving	to	 America,	 how	large	and	 strange	the
world	 now	seemed	in	 this	 foreign	 place	of	 warm	weather	 and	cold	 surfaces—
cars,	speed,	metal,	and	 glass	between	people.	 She	missed	Korea	 and	its	 quiet
alleyways,	snow	melting	 into	 clear	water,	 the	mustard-colored	leaves	of	 gingko
trees,	undulating	 stone	shingles	on	 roofs,	 despite	coups,	military	  rule,	 wars,	a
border	that	was	not	a	scar	but	an	open	wound.
       And	  how	could	 she	remove	 the	memory	 of	 the	physical	 beauty	 from	 the
memory	of	 her	 losses,	the	tremendousness	of	 that	pain?	 Absence	was	 always
present.	Thunder,	bombs	dropping.	Now	she	had	only	this	dull	 ugliness,	this	dull
drone—the	charmless	buildings,	 the	boring	 roads,	the	 battered	buses,	drooping
palm	trees	gone	brown—spectacularly	lit.
       “Are	 you	 cold?”	Mr.	 Kim	 adjusted	the	temperature	with	the	dial.
       “A	  little.	I’m	 okay.”
       “Let	 me	know	 if	you	want	 me	to	turn	the	heat	up	some	more.”
       “Okay.”
       “How	  was	your	day	today?”
       Earlier,	 Mina	  had	slipped	 into	his	 car,	afraid	 that	 someone	might	 see	her
from	the	store.	She	had	been	at	work	 all	 day,	distracted,	ringing	 up	items	 twice
or	giving	the	incorrect	 change.	She	had	been	unable	to	sleep	the	night	before.
       “It	 was	fine,”	 she	said.	“Yours?	I	 didn’t	see	you	at	all.”
       “I	  took	 the	day	 off.”	 He	 cleared	his	 throat.	“I	  wasn’t	 feeling	 so	well	 this
morning.”
       “Are	 you	 okay?”
       “Yeah,	  totally	 fine.	 Just	 some	stomach	problems	 I	 sometimes	have.”	 He
sighed.	“Been	really	busy	at	the	store.”
       “Yeah,	 seems	that	way.”
       “I	 guess,	that’s	a	good	thing.	More	customers,	maybe	more	money.”
       “Or	 maybe	just	more	work.”
       He	 laughed.	“Yeah,	 pretty	much.	 One	of	these	days,	I’m	 going	 to	own	 my
own	place.”
       “What	 kind	 of	place?”

131
       “Grocery	 store.	I’m	 a	grocery	man.”
       She	smiled.	“You	 make	it	 sound	like	that’s	your	destiny.”
       “Why	  not?	 I	 mean,	what	 else?	The	 only	 thing	 I	 like	 better	 than	 food	 is
books.	But	 what	am	 I	going	 to	 do,	sell	 Bibles?	What	 kind	 of	books	 do	people
buy	in	Koreatown?”
       “There’s	 a	bookstore	near	the	market.”
       “Have	 you	ever	been	in	there?”
       “Sure.”	 She	thought	of	the	Spanish	textbook	she	had	bought	a	couple	weeks
ago.
       “It’s	  Bibles	 and	English	 and	Spanish	books.	And	 maybe	some	other	 stuff,
but	no	one	has	time	to	read	anymore.	All	 we	do	is	work	 .	.	.	But	 everyone	has	to
eat.”
       “I	 hope	so,”	she	joked.
       “The	 grocery	store	is	the	future.”
       “The	 grocery	 store	is	 now.”	 She	cracked	up,	covering	 her	mouth	 with	 her
hand.
       “I’ve	  been	saving,	but	 probably	in	 a	few	years	I’ll	  start	a	store	somewhere
else,	maybe	in	the	Valley,	so	I’m	 not	.	.	.”
       “Directly	  competing	with	 the	boss,”	Mina	 finished.
       He	 grinned.	“Exactly.”
       Driving	  down	 Olympic	 Boulevard	 toward	a	wide	 sky	of	 hot	 bright	streaks
of	citrus	pink,	 he	turned	down	a	residential	street	with	small	 but	well-maintained
homes	and	 green	lawns	 with	  rose	bushes	still	  in	 bloom,	 shapely	 ornamental
shrubs,	trees	pruned	into	pleasing	forms,	arms	stretched	open.	He	appeared	to	be
taking	  in	  the	 surroundings	  and	 admiring	  the	  houses	 until	  they	  hit	  Pico
Boulevard,	where	 they	turned	 right	 to	continue	 west,	the	farthest	 she	had	been
from	Koreatown	 since	that	day	in	July	when	she	had	landed	at	LAX.
       “So	 where	are	we	going?”	she	asked.	“The	beach.”
       “The	 beach?
       What	 is	there	to	do	at	night?”
       “Oh,	 restaurants,	games,	rides,	all	kinds	of	things.	You	haven’t	 been	yet?”
       “Nope.”
       “How	  long	have	you	been	here	again?”	he	asked.
       “Few	 months.”
       “Well,	  you	don’t	 have	a	car.	I’m	 only	 surprised	you	haven’t	 been	with	 one
of	your	friends.”
       She	thought	of	 Mrs.	Shin,	her	kids,	her	business.	“Everyone’s	too	busy.”
       “Do	 you	like	 the	beach?”
       “Yes.”	  She	remembered	sitting	with	 her	husband	on	the	smooth	hot	sand	at

132
Naksan	Beach,	watching	 their	daughter	play	 in	 the	waves,	who	 seemed	so	tiny
then	in	her	 shell	pink	 swimsuit	 and	floppy	 white	 hat.	A	 much-needed	weekend
trip,	 a	relief	 from	 the	oppressive	heat	 of	the	 city.	 Mina	 loved	 the	smell	 of	 the
ocean.	But	she	remembered	also	feeling	guilty	for	 wanting,	 for	whatever	reason,
despite	how	 much	she	 loved	 them,	to	 be	alone.	 “I	 love	 the	 beach,”	 she	said.
“You?”
       “One	 of	my	favorite	 places.”	He	smiled.	“Reminds	 me	of	my	childhood.”
       After	  parking	 on	 the	 side	 of	 a	 palm	 tree–lined	 road,	 already	lit	  by	 the
hollow	 glow	 of	streetlamps,	she	opened	the	heavy	car	 door	to	 the	surprise	of	 a
teeth-chattering	 wind	  that	 whipped	  her	 hair	  everywhere.	 She	 wrapped	 her
sweater	around	her	body.	Despite	the	cold,	 the	sharp	salt	and	seaweed	in	the	air
cleared	her	heart	and	her	head.	Here	she	could	forget	LA’s	 soot-colored	sky	like
the	aftermath	 of	 a	constant	 fire,	 a	perpetual	 burning.	 Here	 she	might	 breathe
again.
       “Do	 you	want	 my	jacket?”	he	asked,	walking	by	 her	side.
       “No,	 that’s	 okay.	I’ll	 get	used	to	it.”
       “Are	 you	 sure?”
       She	 nodded.	 Approaching	 the	 water,	 she	read	 a	high	  arch	over	 a	 wide
driveway	 lit	 up	with	  words	she	didn’t	  quite	understand—Santa	Monica,	 Yacht
Harbor,	  Sport	 Fishing	  Boating,	  Cafés—a	 beacon	in	  a	 darkening	 sky.	  She
recognized	fishing	and	boating	and	cafés,	but	what	was	yacht?	Was	it	a	name?
       “I	  thought	we	could	 just	grab	 something	on	the	pier,”	 he	said.	“Something
easy.	Hot	dog?	Hamburger?”
       “Sure.”	 Seagulls	chirped	overhead.
       “And	  then	we	could	walk	around,	check	out	the	Ferris	wheel?”
       “Um,	 I’m	 scared	of	heights.”	 She	smiled,	embarrassed.
       “You	  are?”
       “Yeah.	 I	don’t	 want	to	fall.”
       “You	  should	try	this,	though.	It’s	 going	to	be	beautiful.”
       Down	 the	walkway	 to	the	pier	 in	a	bustle	of	 all	ages	and	races,	she	thought
about	the	first	 and	last	time	 she	had	been	on	a	Ferris	 wheel	when	her	 daughter
was	four	 or	 five	 years	old.	 Mina	 had	closed	 her	eyes	the	 entire	time.	 All	  she
could	 imagine	 was	 them	 plummeting	 down	 from	  that	 wheel	 into	 the	 crowd
below.	The	screams	and	the	crash.	She	hated	the	creaking	sounds	that	 the	seats
made	lurching	in	the	wind.	 She	swore	to	herself	that	she	would	never	go	up	there
again.	She	would	stand	back	and	watch	on	the	ground	where	she	belonged.
       “What	 do	you	feel	 like	eating?”	he	asked.
       “Oh,	 anything.”
       “There’s	  a	pretty	 good	 place	right	 here,	off	  to	the	 side.	It’s	 not	 fancy	 or

133
anything,	but	they’ve	got	 hamburgers	and	hot	dogs.”
       She	had	tried	American	 food	a	handful	 of	times	in	 Korea	but	never	enjoyed
the	flavors—the	 taste	of	dry	beef,	 bread,	and	cheese,	the	odd	mealy	tomato,	the
flappy	 lettuce.	 But	 tonight,	 she	felt	 a	 little	 adventurous,	 ready	to	 plunge	 into
something	different—American	  food	 in	 where	else?	America.	 She	had	already
enjoyed	Mexican	 food	 from	 a	 taco	truck	 parked	 a	few	 blocks	 away	 from	 the
market;	she	craved	the	bright	 salsas,	the	lime	squeezed	on	meat,	the	soft,	moist
tortillas.
       “What	  do	you	 think	 you’d	 like?”	 he	asked	as	they	 stood	before	the	 menu
board	of	a	simple	and	low	rectangular	building,	 weather-beaten	on	the	pier.
       “What	 do	you	recommend?”
       “Really	 anything.	 I	think	 I’ll	 get	a	cheeseburger.”
       “I’ll	   have	the	same.”
       He	 stepped	toward	 the	 counter	while	 she	 stood	there	 watching	 him—the
flex	of	 his	arms	as	he	reached	to	pull	 his	wallet	 out	of	his	 back	pocket,	the	way
his	thick	 black	hair	faded	into	 his	neck.	The	smooth	 lines	of	his	 back,	his	waist.
When	he	turned	around,	she	couldn’t	help	but	smile,	still	 looking	at	him.
       “Busy	 night,”	 she	said.	“So	many	people	out.”
       “Yeah,	 people	love	this	place.”
       “Do	 you	come	here	a	lot?”
       “I	  used	to	 come	here	 all	 the	time,	 but	 now	 I	 come	every	 now	 and	then.
Sometimes	I	just	 walk	 on	the	 pier.	I	 like	 to	see	the	ocean.	It	 always	clears	 my
head.	We’ll	  have	to	 come	when	 it’s	 light	 out	 sometime—that’s	 nice,	 too,	 but
different.”
       Behind	 the	 counter,	a	woman	 called	 their	number.	 After	 thanking	 her,	he
picked	up	the	tray	with	 two	cheeseburgers,	a	pile	of	fries,	and	two	 cans	of	Coke.
From	an	 empty	 table	by	 the	 window,	  they	could	 watch	 the	 water	as	 the	sun
slipped	below	the	horizon.
       “Sorry,	  I	forgot	 to	 ask	what	 you	wanted	 to	drink.	 I	 got	you	 a	Coke,	 but	I
could	get	you	something	else.”
       She	popped	the	can	open	and	sipped.	“It’s	good.”
       She	wasn’t	 sure	how	 to	 eat	her	cheeseburger,	so	she	picked	at	it	 with	 her
fingers,	 tearing	off	  pieces	to	 put	 in	 her	 mouth	 and	enjoying	  the	taste	 of	 the
lettuce	and	tomato,	the	greasy	meat	and	cheese	between	the	bread.	She	watched
him	dip	 his	 head	to	the	 burger,	ripping	  with	 his	teeth	 and	chewing.	 American
food	seemed	so	barbaric.	Where	were	the	chopsticks?
       She	took	 a	bite,	mimicking	 Mr.	 Kim,	 and	covered	her	mouth	with	 her	hand
as	she	chewed	the	massive	amount	of	food.	She	tried	hard	not	to	laugh	at	herself.
       “Are	 you	 okay?”

134
       She	 motioned	 with	  her	 finger	 that	 she	needed	a	 minute.	 After	  she	had
swallowed	the	food,	she	asked,	“How	do	Americans	eat	like	 this?”
       “Is	 it	 good?	Is	everything	okay?”
       “Yes,	 it’s	 all	delicious,	but	 .	.	.	messy.”	She	grinned.
       “You’ll	   get	used	to	it.	 I	try	 not	 to	eat	it	 too	much.	Not	 the	healthiest,	but	 I
do	love	french	fries.”	 He	grabbed	a	couple,	gesturing	for	her	to	try.
       She	dipped	one	in	the	tiny	 cup	of	ketchup	and	popped	it	in	her	mouth.
       “I	 can	get	used	to	this,”	she	said.
       “Ha,	 I	know.	 I	gotta	be	careful.”	 He	patted	his	stomach.
       “You	  don’t	have	anything	to	worry	 about.	You’re	 so	thin.”
       He	 laughed.	“You	think	 so?”
       “Yes.”
       “Skinny?”
       “No,	 not	skinny.	 Just	right.”	 She	blushed,	looking	down	at	her	cheeseburger
and	taking	another	bite.	Eager	to	change	the	subject,	she	asked,	“So	you	went	to
the	beach	a	lot	growing	up?”
       “Yes,	 I	did.	 I	grew	up	in	the	south,	Busan.”
       “Oh,	 that’s	supposed	to	be	nice.	Never	been.”
       “It	  is.	I	 think	 about	it	 a	lot.”	  His	eyes	locked	 into	 hers.	She	looked	away,
pretending	not	to	notice.	“I	 guess	this	isn’t	 a	bad	place	to	be,	though.”	 He	stared
out	the	window,	admiring	 the	carnival	lights.
       “No,	 it’s	 not.”	 She	wanted	to	reassure	him,	to	reassure	them	both.
       “Lots	 of	 work,”	 he	said.
       “Yeah.”	  Her	gaze	rested	on	the	salt	and	pepper	shakers,	the	fries.
       “Are	 you	 not	sure	about	being	here,	in	America?”	he	asked.
       “I	 haven’t	 figured	it	 out	yet.”
       “Well,	  something	I	 learned	is	you	don’t	 have	to	know	 where	you	are	going
to,	you	know,	enjoy	yourself	 a	little,	 have	a	good	time.”
       Tears	filled	 her	eyes.	She	picked	up	one	of	the	last	fries	 and	placed	it	in	her
mouth,	chewing	slowly.
       After	  finishing	 the	food,	 Mr.	 Kim	  threw	away	 their	 trash.	A	 blast	of	 mist
and	wind	struck	them	as	they	ducked	out	of	 the	café	onto	the	worn	boards	of	the
pier.	The	 rough	surface	pressed	through	the	 soles	of	her	 shoes	to	her	feet,	still
throbbing	after	the	day	at	work.
       “Here,	 take	my	jacket.”	 He	took	off	 his	windbreaker.
       “No,	 that’s	 okay.	You’ll	 catch	a	cold.”
       “Please	 take	 it.”	 He	 held	 it	 out	 to	 her,	insisting.	 She	 reached	for	 it,	 but
instead	he	helped	her	put	it	on	 from	behind.	 She	slid	her	arms	through	the	large
jacket	and	zipped	it	around	her	body.	The	warmth	engulfed	her.

135
       He	 suppressed	a	smile.	“You	look	funny	in	 that,”	he	said.
       “Thanks.”
       “No,	 I	 mean,	you	look	cute.”
       She	couldn’t	 help	but	 chuckle,	wanting	to	 hit	him	 playfully	 on	the	arm.	But
she	felt	conscious	of	 how	close	they	stood	together,	 how	he	could	 reach	out	his
hand	and	grab	 hers	as	they	 walked	 past	the	 carnival	 games,	the	 wild	 pulsing
lights,	the	stuffed	neon	animals.	How	his	fingers	 would	feel	between	hers.
       He	 stopped	 in	 front	 of	 a	tent	 with	  basketball	hoops.	 “Should	 we	 play	 a
game?”
       “Oh,	 I’m	 no	good.”
       “Here,	 let’s	 try	 this	one.	I’m	 Magic	 Johnson.”	He	 pretended	to	dribble	and
mimed	a	sloppy	jump	shot.
       She	laughed.	“I’m	 terrible,	 it’ll	 just	 be	a	waste	of	money.”
       “Let’s	  try.”	  At	 a	 red-and-white-striped	 booth,	 he	purchased	a	 handful	 of
tokens.	After	 handing	 them	to	 the	vendor,	 they	 threw	the	 ball	 wildly,	  missing
each	time.	Mina	 screamed	when	she	almost	shot	 her	ball	 into	 another	person’s
hoop.	Finally	 after	several	rounds,	both	Mr.	 Kim	 and	Mina	 scored,	one	after	the
other.	 They	 jumped	 up	 and	 down,	 high-fiving	   like	  children,	 victorious	  and
giddy.
       They	 each	won	 a	small	 white	 teddy	bear,	holding	 a	 red	heart	between	its
paws.
       “I’ll	   give	you	mine,	if	 you	give	me	yours?”	he	asked.
       “Why	  should	I?	I	like	 mine	better.”
       “They’re	  the	same.”
       “No,	 they’re	 not.	Mine	is	 more	symmetrical.”
       “Okay,	 fine.	 Yours	is	more	symmetrical.”	 He	pouted	playfully.
       “I’m	  just	kidding.	 Give	 me	yours.”	 She	took	his	bear	and	placed	hers	in	his
hand.	For	 a	 second,	they	 held	 them	together,	 admiring	  their	 silly	 faces—the
bulbous	snout	and	half-moon	ears,	the	saccharine	heart.
       “Thank	 you	very	 much,”	he	said	in	English.
       “You’re	  welcome	very	much.”	 She	couldn’t	help	but	 laugh.
       Through	   the	 maze	  of	  people,	 mostly	  younger	  than	  them,	  her	 self-
consciousness	twinged.	She	squeezed	the	bear	in	her	hand.	Was	she	cheating	on
her	husband?	In	 their	 fifteen-year	 marriage,	 there	had	been	only	  a	handful	 of
times	when	she	had	come	close	to	even	thinking	about	another	man.	Nothing	had
actually	happened.	She	had	met	an	attractive	 new	coworker,	 or	 she	would	pass
someone	on	the	street,	and	she	would	imagine	 what	it	 would	 be	like	 to	be	with
that	person—a	dinner,	an	embrace,	a	kiss.	It	flashed	in	her	mind	like	a	projection
on	a	movie	 screen.	When	she	thought	 about	these	moments,	she	hated	herself.

136
But	why	 should	 she?	Hadn’t	her	 husband	ever	thought	 about	someone	else—a
pair	of	legs	passing,	a	pretty	smile?	 How	was	it	 possible,	human,	to	not	imagine
the	possibilities?
       She	 panted,	breath	quick	 and	shallow,	 questions	seated	on	 her	chest.	Her
mind,	 like	 a	 fine	 fishing	 net,	 strangled	 the	details	 around	 her,	 the	sounds:	 a
shriek	of	laughter,	 children	 screaming,	a	man	singing	in	 a	Spanish	baritone,	the
thumping	bass	of	a	boom	box.
       “What	 do	you	think?”
       Without	 her	realizing	 it,	they	had	reached	the	Ferris	wheel	line.
       “Wanna	  try?”	  He	 raised	 his	 dark	 brows.	  His	 eyes,	 however,	 appeared
sympathetic,	ready	to	be	turned	down.
       As	 she	lifted	  her	face	toward	 the	sky,	 the	questions	 unseated	themselves;
her	brain	was	 less	of	a	 tangle.	The	 wheel	seemed	gentle,	a	spider’s	 web	made
from	steel	and	light.	“Okay.”
       “Are	 you	 sure?	You	don’t	have	to	if	you	 don’t	want	to.”	 He	smiled.
       “I	 think	 I’ll	 be	all	 right.”
       As	  he	 walked	 toward	 the	 ticket	  booth,	 she	waited,	 watching	  him,	 still
holding	 the	 bear.	 Black	 beady	 eyes.	 Red	heart.	 Thinking	  of	  her	 daughter’s
stuffed	animals,	 she	hugged	 the	bear	to	 her	 chest.	She	could	 almost	 cry.	 She
didn’t	 want	to	 think	 about	her	anymore.	 But	if	 she	stopped	thinking	  about	her,
would	 that	 be	a	 betrayal?	How	  could	 she	manage	to	 love	 and	 honor	 people
without	 those	feelings	tearing	 her	apart?	How	 could	she	continue	 to	hold	 on	to
them	without	it	 destroying	every	bit	 of	her,	shredding	every	 possibility	 and	hope
she	might	dare	to	have?
       He	 returned	with	the	tickets.	“Are	 you	okay?”
       “Yes.	 I’m	 fine.”
       They	 walked	to	wait	 at	the	end	of	the	line.	“Are	you	 cold	still?”
       “A	  little.”
       “I	 wish	 I	had	more	layers	to	pull	off,”	  he	said.
       “Ha,	 that’s	okay.”
       “Wait	  here.	I’ll	 get	us	something	to	warm	up.”
       The	 crowd,	 bodies	 like	 bees	in	 a	 hive,	 swallowed	 him.	 A	 mass,	strange
faces	and	limbs.
       An	  explosion	 blasted	inside	 her	 mind.	 Her	 knees	almost	 buckled	 as	she
clung	to	that	rope	inside	her	brain.	 She	had	been	holding	her	mother’s	hand,	and
suddenly	she	was	not.	She	was	lost.	Frightened,	she	had	cried	out	at	 the	people,
rushing	by	her	to	get	out.	She	had	fallen	to	 the	ground,	smoky	and	sulfurous,	the
earth’s	shards	 stabbing	 her,	had	 been	 almost	trampled	  except	that	 a	 man,	 a
stranger,	had	 helped	 her,	 had	 picked	 her	 up	 and	 placed	 her	 on	 top	 of	  his

137
shoulders	even	though	blood	ran	fresh	from	his	scalp.
       Mr.	  Kim	   returned	 with	  two	  Styrofoam	 cups,	 startling	  her	 out	  of	  the
memory.	“Have	you	 had	hot	chocolate?”
       “No,	 never,”	 she	said,	relieved	he	was	back.
       “I	 think	 you’ll	 like	 it.”
       She	blew	 on	the	drink	 before	sipping.	 “Mmm,	 that’s	 good.”	 She	wanted	to
gulp	it	all	 down,	but	it	was	too	hot.
       “I	 guess	you	have	a	sweet	tooth.”
       “Didn’t	   realize	it	 until	 now.”	  She’d	always	 liked	 chocolate	but	 had	never
had	it	melted	into	a	drink	 before,	a	comfort.	She	leaned	her	head	back,	entranced
by	the	Ferris	wheel,	the	swaying	cars,	the	lights	dancing,	winking	 at	the	world.
       “You’re	  going	 to	be	cold	 up	there,”	 she	said.	“You	 don’t	 want	your	 jacket
back?”
       “I’ll	   be	okay.”
       As	 they	 walked	up	 the	line,	 the	attendant	 said,	“You	 have	to	 throw	 away
those	drinks.”
       She	took	 a	final	sip	before	 he	placed	their	two	cups	in	a	trashcan	nearby.	“I
was	hoping	we	could	hold	on	to	those.”
       “Me,	 too.”
       As	 she	climbed	on,	 the	entire	car	rocked	 as	if	they	 could	flip	  over	and	she
squealed	sitting	down.
       “Don’t	  worry,”	  he	said,	 grabbing	her	 hand	gently.	 She	squeezed	his	hand
back	as	they	rose	higher	 and	higher	into	 the	black	 sky.	The	 crowd	below	 them
receded,	shrank	in	size.	Shivering,	 she	sat	the	closest	to	 him	that	 she	ever	had,
the	side	of	her	hip	pressed	against	his.
       “I’m	  going	to	close	my	eyes,”	she	said.
       “Okay.	 Don’t	 worry.”
       While	  the	 wheel	 rotated,	gliding	  up	 and	over	 and	 down	 and	under,	 she
squeezed	his	hand	harder,	eyes	closed.	Her	heart	thumped	against	the	wall	of	her
chest.	Teeth	chattering,	they	huddled	together	closer.	He	reached	his	arm	around
her	shoulders.	The	cars	creaked	gently	around	them.
       “Are	 you	 okay?”	he	asked.
       “Yes,	 just	keeping	my	eyes	closed.”	She	laughed.	“I	 know	it’s	 childish.”
       “Don’t	  worry.	 It’s	a	big	step	for	you.	 Be	happy	that	you	made	it	this	far.”
       “You	  mean	.	.	.”
       “On	 the	Ferris	wheel.	You	 didn’t	 have	to	get	on,	but	you	did.”
       His	 breath	was	close	to	her	ear,	her	neck.	 She	turned	her	head	toward	him,
and	he	touched	his	lips	against	hers.	She	kissed	him,	tasting	chocolate,	the	salt	in
the	air	around	them.	She	became	nothing	but	a	body,	far	away	and	light,	built	 for

138
flying.
       And	 when	he	lifted	 his	face	from	 hers,	she	opened	her	eyes	to	the	contrasts
of	  the	  world	  below—bright	   and	  sparkling,	  deep	  and	 dark,	  everywhere,
magnificently,	 breathtakingly	around	her.

139
Margot

Fall	2014

140
       LAMPLIGHTS	GLOWED	STEADY	AND	UNFLINCHING	WHILE	television	screens
flickered	 behind	 gauzy	 curtains,	 closed	 windows.	  A	  chorus	of	  dogs	 behind
fences	and	walls	accompanied	the	howls	of	sirens.	Sweet	corn	masa	toasted	on	a
griddle	 somewhere.	 Regardless	of	  temperature	or	  season,	there	 was	 always
something	burning	in	 Los	Angeles—a	bacon-wrapped	hot	dog,	 a	roach	of	weed,
short	 ribs	 sizzling,	  the	 rubber	 of	  tires	 in	 the	 heat,	 an	 entire	 neighborhood
crackling	 with	 sparks	in	 July,	 an	entire	 forest	 on	fire.	 You’d	  never	forget	 the
flames.
       Sitting	 in	 her	car,	 parked	beside	a	strip	of	 dying	 lawn	 with	 succulents	and
cacti	in	 battered	ceramic	 pots,	Margot	  gathered	herself,	breathing	 through	 her
mouth.	Twenty	minutes	earlier,	 the	waitress	at	Hanok	House	had	slipped	her	this
address	near	MacArthur	Park.	It	was	still	only	 Monday.
       Through	 the	 open	courtyard,	 Margot	 ascended	the	first	  flight	 of	 stairs	 to
Mrs.	Baek’s	 apartment.	Unit	211.	Her	 knuckles	rapped	on	the	door.	The	pads	of
her	fingers	lingered	on	the	smooth	gray	surface	as	if	touching	an	animal.
       A	 shadow	filled	 the	muted	light	of	 the	fisheye	on	the	door.
       “Who	 is	it?”	 Mrs.	 Baek	asked,	gruff	and	harsh.
       “It’s	  Mina’s	 daughter,	Margot.”
       The	 door	creaked	open	to	reveal	a	brass	chain	bisecting	Mrs.	Baek’s	face—
pale	and	ghostly	without	 makeup,	hair	 wrapped	in	 a	salmon-colored	towel.	 She
squinted	and	asked,	“What	are	you	doing	here?”
       “Could	 I	 talk	to	you?”
       “It’s	  late.	How’d	 you	get	my	address?”
       “I	 .	.	.	googled	you.”
       She	sighed,	unlatching	the	chain.	“I	 was	just	about	to	put	on	a	sheet	mask.”
       The	 cramped	 living	  room	 smelled	 of	 a	 used	bookstore—a	 dust-covered
breakdown	of	 paper	and	ink—and	 thick	cucumber	 cold	cream.	Stacks	of	 books
and	newspapers	on	the	coffee	table	resembled	a	fragile	skyline	that	could	 topple
to	the	ground.	A	fire	 hazard.
       Margot	  sank	 into	  the	 velvet	 of	 an	 old	  hunter	 green	 couch—a	 vintage
curbside	piece	that	had	been	cleaned	and	now	 animated	a	space	that	resembled
more	of	 an	office	 or	a	storage	closet.	 On	the	flat-screen	 television	 between	the
living	 and	dining	areas,	the	Korean	news	had	been	muted.
       In	 a	gray	dove-colored	robe	 over	a	pink	sleeping	gown,	 frayed	hem	kissing
her	bony	knees,	Mrs.	Baek	crossed	her	arms	beneath	her	chest,	remote	control	in
hand.	Without	 her	 armor	 of	 makeup—the	 red	lipstick,	  the	eyebrows	 penciled
into	the	slivers	of	a	moon—she	resembled	a	tropical	bird	plucked	 of	its	feathers.
       “I	 wanted	to	ask	you	some	questions,”	Margot	 said.
       Mrs.	 Baek	crossed	her	arms.	“About?”

141
       The	  claustrophobia	 of	  the	 room	 closed	 in	  on	 Margot.	  What	  was	 she
thinking	coming	 here?	But	she	thought	of	what	she	was	searching	for	and	steeled
herself.
       “Mr.	  Kim	 and	my	mother,”	Margot	 said.
       Mrs.	 Baek	tightened	the	towel	wrap	on	her	head.
       “I	 went	 to	the	swap	meet	today,”	Margot	continued.	“Your	 store	was	gone.”
       Mrs.	  Baek	planted	 a	dining	 chair	 in	 front	 of	 Margot	 and	sat	 down.	 “I’m
done.”
       “With	  work?”
       “For	 now.”	 She	bit	into	a	hangnail.	“Did	 you	 see	any	customers	there?”
       “No.”
       “I’ve	  been	losing	money	for	a	while.”
       Business	was	slow	 again	today.	 Even	all	 the	Korean	businesses	downtown
are	closing.
       The	 waitress	expected	Margot	to	refrain	 from	mentioning	 Mr.	 Park,	but	she
wanted	to	 know	 if	 Mrs.	 Baek	 was	safe.	Even	 if	 her	 business	had	been	doing
poorly,	it	 seemed	odd	that	Mrs.	Baek	would	close	down	her	store	right	before	the
holidays—the	most	lucrative	 time	of	the	year.
       “Any	   other	  reason	 why?	 Seems	 like	  you	  closed	 things	  down	  pretty
quickly.”
       “I’ve	  been	.	.	.	planning	this	for	a	while.”
       “What	 will	 you	 do	now?”
       “I’m	  not	sure.	I’ll	 survive.	 Don’t	worry	 about	me.”
       “Will	   you	go	 back	to	 Hanok	House?”	 Margot	 asked,	knowing	 the	answer
but	hoping	that	she	could	provoke	some	response.
       “No,	  not	 there.	Never	 again.”	 Mrs.	 Baek	adjusted	the	 knot	 on	her	 robe’s
belt.
       Margot	 examined	a	stack	 of	books	on	 the	coffee	table,	novels	 that	she	had
read	in	high	school	and	college	herself.	Difficult	  books.	Beautiful	 books.	George
Eliot.	Edith	 Wharton.	Pages	on	pages	like	teeth	once	white,	now	 yellowed.	How
a	book	was	kind	 of	 like	a	 mouth.	Did	 stories	keep	us	alive	 or	kill	  us	with	 false
expectations?	It	depended	on	who	wrote	them	perhaps.
       “You	  read	 these?”	 Margot	 asked,	noticing	  Thomas	 Hardy’s	 Tess	of	 the
D’Urbervilles,	  one	of	her	favorites,	 in	a	pile.	 A	 pang	of	sorrow	filled	  her	as	she
thought	of	that	story,	and	its	end.	“My	 mom	never	read.”
       “She	 hated	reading.”	Mrs.	 Baek	leaned	back	in	her	chair.	“Believe	 it	 or	not,
I	majored	in	English.	 Like	you.”
       Those	words,	 like	you,	wrung	 something	in	Margot’s	 chest.	How	much	 had
her	mother	talked	about	Margot?	Had	she	been	proud	of	her?

142
       Mrs.	  Baek	planted	 her	 hands	on	 her	knees,	 ready	to	 stand.	 “It’s	  getting
late,”	she	said.	“My	 sheet	mask	is	calling.”
       “Could	 I	 ask	you	about	Mr.	Kim?”
       “I	  don’t	 know	 that	much,	to	 be	honest.”	Her	 voice	 trembled.	“Like	  I	said,
she	didn’t	tell	me	about	him	 until	after	 he	died.”
       “Was	 he	my	father?”	Margot’s	 heart	thumped	inside	of	her	chest.
       Mrs.	 Baek	widened	her	eyes	in	shock.
       “I	  found	his	 obituary	 at	our	apartment.	There’s	 a	picture	of	 him.	 He	looks
like	me.”
       Biting	 down	 on	her	lip,	Mrs.	 Baek	remained	silent.
       “It	  doesn’t	make	sense	that	they	would	 be	together	otherwise.	 I	visited	 his
house	in	Calabasas,	you	know?	He	had	this	beautiful	 house,	a	beautiful	life.	 His
wife	 is	stunning.	 He	was	living	  in	 an	entirely	 different	 world.	 How	 could	 they
have	met?	What	would	they	have	in	common	except	for	the	past?”
       Mrs.	 Baek	inhaled	deeply,	staring	down	at	her	lap.
       Margot	  leaned	back,	 hands	on	the	 velvet	 couch	 again.	“He	 owned	 some
supermarkets.	I	remember	 my	 mother	said	 that	my	 father	 worked	 at	the	same
supermarket	as	her	when	she	first	came	to	 America.	 Why	else	would	 he—what
else	would	 the	connection	 be	between	them?	Or	 maybe	they	 were	just	 friends
from	 back	then?	 But	 every	time	 I	 look	 at	 his	picture—”	  Her	 voice	 shook.	 “I
swear—”
       “It’s	  him,”	 Mrs.	 Baek	 interrupted,	brows	 furrowed.	 “You’re	  right.	He	 was
your	father,	Margot.”
       “Why	  didn’t	 anyone	tell	me?”	Her	heart	broke.	She	needed	air.
       Mrs.	 Baek	shook	her	head	in	response.
       “Why	  didn’t	 anyone	tell	 me?”	Margot	 shouted—angry	at	 her	mother,	Mrs.
Baek,	the	world.	Crying,	 she	rose	to	her	feet.
       “Because	 your	 mother	thought	 there	 was	no	reason	for	  you	to	 know.	 He
was	dying.	 There	was	no	reason	to	 tell	him	 about	you	 as	well.	 What	 would	be
the	point?”	  Mrs.	 Baek	 tightened	 the	towel	  around	her	 head.	“She	 made	 that
decision.”
       “But	  it’s	 not	 fair.	 I	 would’ve	  rather	 known.	 I	 wouldn’t	  care	that	he	 was
dying.”
       “Maybe	  she	just	 didn’t	 want	 to	 tell	 him,”	  she	responded	fiercely.	 “It’s	  a
tough	thing	 to	 find	  out	 when	you’re	  sick.	 He	had	 cancer.	She	 was	trying	  to
protect	you	 both.”	 She	burst	into	 tears	and	sobbed.	“She	 was	trying	  to	protect
you.	She	was	trying	 to	 protect	everyone.”	 She	wiped	her	 nose	on	the	sleeve	of
her	gray	robe.
       Margot	  plopped	down	 again	 on	the	 couch.	 Mrs.	 Baek	stood	 and	left	 the

143
room,	returning	with	 a	box	of	tissues	that	she	handed	to	Margot.
       “I	  still	 don’t	 understand.”	Margot	 blew	 her	nose.	“And	 now—what?	 What
do	I	do	with	all	 this	information?	 It’s	useless	to	me	now.	They’re	both	dead.”
       Mrs.	 Baek	sat	next	to	Margot,	 held	her	hand.	“The	 past	is	.	.	.”	She	winced,
her	eyes	fixed	on	the	 carpet.	“Sometimes,	it’s	 better	to	forget.	 You	 have	still	 so
much	ahead	of	you,	okay?	You	have	to	.	.	.	We	have	to	move	on,	okay?”
       “But	  I	 don’t	 want	to,	 not	until	 I	 understand.	Whether	it	 was	really	 just	 an
accident.”
       “Your	  mother’s	death?”
       Margot	 nodded.	“I’m	  not	 going	to—to	 move	 on	until	 I	 understand.	I	can’t
move	on	until—”
       “Until	   when?	Until	  you	realize	 it	 was	not	 your	 fault?”	 Mrs.	  Baek’s	eyes
glistened.	“Do	you	feel	 guilty?”
       Margot’s	  cheeks	burned.	“I	  should’ve	 checked	on	her	 more	often,	 visited
her	more	often.	Maybe	I	wouldn’t	  have	.	.	.	prevented	anything,	but	also	maybe	I
would’ve	 known	what	was	going	on	in	her	life.	 I	could’ve—”
       “It	  wasn’t	your	 fault,	Margot.”	 Mrs.	 Baek	squeezed	Margot’s	wrist.	 “It	 was
an	accident.	A	very	bad	accident.”	Wiping	 the	corners	of	her	eyes,	she	said,	“We
all	wish	 that	we	 could’ve	 done	something	 differently,	 right?	 But	 it’s	 not	really
worth	revisiting.	  We	all	 could’ve	  done	things	differently.”	   She	focused	on	 the
piles	of	books	in	front	 of	them.	“That’s	 the	problem	with	 memory.”
       Her	 mother	could	 crack	open	a	moment	 with	 her	memory	as	if	 the	present
was	nothing	but	an	eggshell,	spotted	and	frail.	As	a	teenager,	Margot	had	begged
her	mother	once	to	attend	a	concert	(she	couldn’t	even	remember	the	band	now).
Even	if	Margot	 had	secured	a	ride	with	her	friend’s	 parents,	which	was	a	lie,	 her
mother	did	not	want	her	out	at	night.
       “Do	  you	know	 how	 hard	I	 work?”	 her	 mother	had	 yelled	in	 Korean.	 “Do
you	know	how	hard	I	 work?	I	haven’t	 done	anything	fun	for	years.	Fun?”
       “Why	  won’t	 you	let	me	be	happy?”	Margot	yelled	 in	English	with	 little	 care
for	her	neighbors	next	door.
       “You	  should	be	doing	 schoolwork.	 You	 should	be	at	home.	 Do	you	 know
how	lucky	 you	 are?	Do	you	 know	 what	I	 was	doing	 at	your	 age?”	Her	mother
jabbed	her	own	 chest	with	 an	index	 finger.	 “I	 worked	 in	a	factory	 all	 day	 as	a
child.	 Do	 you	 know	 what	 that’s	 like?	 I	 got	 sick	 all	 the	time.	 Terrible	  things
happened	to	children	like	us.	We	were	all	burdens.	We	were	all	 mouths	to	feed.	I
had	to	learn	to	feed	myself.	There	is	no	fun.	There	is	no	fun	in	this	 world.”
       But	 her	mother’s	 harshness	was	designed	to	protect	Margot	 from	 what	her
mother	considered	to	 be	a	universe	without	 shelter,	 without	 much	kindness	for
kindness’s	sake.	Of	course,	her	 mother	would	 perceive	the	world	  that	way—so

144
much	of	 her	 identity	  was	about	 the	past.	 She	was	 floating,	 like	 all	  of	 us,	in
history.	Yet	 the	 taste	of	hers	was	 particularly	 foul	 and	dark,	 filled	 with	 smoke
and	flame.
       Tears	 streamed	down	  Margot’s	  face.	She	 had	 to	 get	 out	 of	 this	 room.
Clawing.	She	needed	air.	Gripping	 the	arm	 of	the	sofa,	 she	stood	and	moved	to
the	door.
       “Sorry	 to	come	by	so	late.”	 She	placed	her	hand	on	the	doorknob.
       “Your	  mother	 .	 .	.	 She	was	very	 lonely	 when	 she	first	 came	here.”	 Mrs.
Baek	offered	 this—a	departing	 gesture	perhaps	to	help	 Margot	 forgive	 herself,
forgive	her	mother	at	last.
       But	 Margot	  didn’t	 turn.	 She	hated	 that	word,	 lonely.	 She	wanted	 to	 ask,
What	about	 me?	It’s	 not	 my	fault	 she	was	 lonely.	It’s	  not	my	 fault	 that	 I	was
born.	 I	 was	lonely,	 too.	 I	 was	 lonely.	 Nobody	 wanted	me.	 But	 she	remained
silent,	clenching	her	teeth.
       “She	 was	like	 a	lot	 of	us.	Lonely.	 But	 that’s	 what	it’s	 like	 for	 women	like
us.	That’s	why	.	.	.	we	were	the	way	 we	were.	That’s	why	 we	make	the	decisions
that	we	 make.	 So	that	 we	 can	survive.	 We	 can	get	 by.	 We	 can	protect	 each
other.”	Mrs.	 Baek	 sighed.	“She	would’ve	  done	anything	 for	you.	 You	 kept	her
safe.	You	saved	her.”
       Margot	  couldn’t	 hear	 any	more.	 Gasping	 for	 air,	 she	stepped	out	 of	 the
apartment,	descended	the	stairs,	and	rushed	through	the	courtyard	into	the	street.
She	waited	in	the	car,	catching	her	breath.	A	single	lamp	beamed	onto	the	vacant
sidewalk.
       Women	like	us.
       Margot’s	  brain	 was	a	wild	  animal,	clawing	  out	of	 her	 head.	The	net	 that
wrapped	around	Margot’s	ankles,	threatening	to	drag	her	into	the	sea.
       You	saved	her.
       But	 she	hadn’t.	She	had	been	too	late.
       Margot	 wound	 her	way	 past	MacArthur	  Park,	its	 black	lake	 glowing	 with
smeared	reflections	of	light,	toward	10	West,	realizing	 now	that	she	never	owned
a	car	in	 Los	 Angeles,	 that	her	 whole	life	  until	 she	moved	 away	at	 the	age	of
eighteen	had	been	confined	 to	 buses,	walking,	 and	 riding	 with	 her	 mother	on
surface	streets.	And	yet	she	could	always	find	the	freeway,	 at	least	I-10,	as	if	the
signs	toward	them	had	somehow	been	imprinted	on	 the	map	of	her	memory,	 the
bones	of	her	hands	and	feet	that	drove	this	car	now	to	the	ocean.
       She	had	never	 taken	a	car	onto	the	pier,	 which	 jutted	like	 a	driveway	 onto
the	sea	toward	the	horizon,	a	 visual	cliff.	  The	wheels	rumbled	 beneath	her	over
the	boards.	She	imagined	gassing	it,	a	Thelma	&	 Louise	 end,	flying	 through	the
metal	handrails	and	over	the	edge.	She’d	be	weightless	and	free	before	plunging

145
into	the	 terrible	 deep.	Inhaling	 the	salt	and	water	 would	 be	both	the	 end	and	a
great	relief.
       In	 the	pier’s	 parking	lot,	 she	turned	the	car	off	 and	stared	at	the	dark	ocean
and	the	Ferris	wheel,	 a	many-spoked	strobe	that	 throbbed	like	 the	heart	 of	this
place,	dreamlike,	up	and	over	and	around,	dipping	the	rider	back	into	life	 and	out
again.	She	got	 out	 and	jogged	 toward	 the	ticket	 booth,	 empty	 at	 this	time	 of
night.	Standing	 in	line	 for	 the	Ferris	 wheel,	 alone,	the	salt	air	 and	the	 carnival
food	cleansed	her	head.
       After	  stepping	in	one	of	 the	tubs,	which	 swung	 beneath	her,	she	waited	as
the	others	boarded,	and	she	rose	into	the	black	night,	light,	eating	air.

146
         Mina

Winter	1987—1988

147
       MINA	THOUGHT	ABOUT	THE	FIRST	NIGHT	THEY	HAD	kissed	on	the	Ferris	wheel,
how	the	 car	had	 swayed	beneath	them	 as	they	 revolved	 again	and	 again	at	 a
steady	pace,	 floating	   in	 the	  night	 sky.	  Teeth	 chattering.	  Salt	 air	  and	 hot
chocolate.	His	 breath	close	to	her	 ear	and	neck.	She	had	been	terrified	  of	both
the	ride	malfunctioning	 and	the	free	fall	 of	 plunging	 into	the	depths	of	 what	she
could	feel,	her	body	and	her	lips	pressed	against	his.
       She	had	been	taking	an	inventory	 of	 his	kindnesses—the	way	he	had	given
her	his	jacket	that	night,	brought	 her	a	drink	to	keep	her	warm,	 hadn’t	teased	her
for	closing	 her	eyes	when	the	wheel	started	to	turn.	Her	husband	would’ve	 done
that,	not	out	of	cruelty,	 but	because	he	enjoyed	innocuous	jabs,	jokes,	laughter—
a	quality	that	appealed	to	her	more	serious	self.
       But	 what	 if	 this	was	a	 ruse,	this	thing	 between	her	and	Mr.	 Kim?	 What	 if
she	allowed	him	to	get	close,	showed	him	 love,	only	 for	him	 to	change?	What	if
she	were	to	lose	herself	in	the	feelings,	the	illusion	 of	 potential	happiness	again?
What	if,	what	if,	 what	if?
       Since	 riding	 the	Ferris	wheel,	 they	had	spent	many	nights	 together,	even	a
weekend	celebrating	the	holidays	 in	Las	Vegas—a	 neon	place	of	lush,	dizzying
distraction.	She	had	played	the	slot	machines,	lost	money	and	won	it	 back	again,
witnessed	a	kangaroo	box	with	 a	man	in	a	circus	ring	 as	cowboy	clowns	 chased
each	other	 around	 the	stage.	 At	 a	 dinner	 buffet,	 they	 gorged	 themselves	on
American	food—breaded	 chicken,	grilled	 steak,	macaroni	 and	cheese,	all	kinds
of	 potatoes	(baked,	 fried,	 roasted).	She	 refused	to	 drink,	 mostly	  because	she
didn’t	like	 to,	but	also	because	she	had	become	afraid	of	losing	herself	again.
       After	 her	husband	and	daughter’s	deaths,	she	had	spiraled	out	of	control	for
almost	a	week,	crawling	 around	the	apartment	on	her	knees	and	elbows,	only	 to
throw	up	in	 the	restroom.	Drinking	 was	the	lone	 response	she	had	for	pain.	And
drunkenness	gave	her	permission	 to	 express	her	 anger,	her	rage	 in	 flashes	of
tearing	clothes	or	 smashing	plates.	When	she	couldn’t	 drag	herself	to	 the	store,
the	cough	syrup	in	the	medicine	 cabinet	could	bludgeon	 her	mind	enough	to	get
her	through	a	night.
       But	 now,	 with	Mr.	 Kim,	  in	a	tangle	of	 sheets	on	the	bed,	at	restaurants,	by
the	turquoise	pool	of	 a	motel,	she	hadn’t	felt	 this	good	 in	a	long	time.	 She	often
caught	herself	smiling	 for	 no	 reason,	checking	her	hair	 and	makeup	 in	mirrors
that	she	passed	by.
       Both	 Mrs.	 Baek	 and	the	landlady	 noticed	 the	shift	 in	 her	appearance,	her
demeanor,	and	habits.	The	 landlady	 bestowed	upon	her	 a	knowing	  smirk	 or	a
nod	of	 approval	 every	 now	 and	 then,	but	 Mrs.	 Baek	 never	 shied	away	 from
asking	direct	 questions,	even	though	 Mina	 didn’t	  feel	ready	 to	 talk	 about	Mr.
Kim	yet.

148
       Some	nights,	 Mina	didn’t	 have	the	energy	to	avoid	 Mrs.	Baek.	They	 shared
the	same	kitchen,	the	same	bathroom.	Less	than	ten	feet	separated	their	bedroom
doors.
       “I	  grilled	  some	mackerel.	Do	 you	 like	  mackerel?”	 Mrs.	 Baek	asked	two
days	before	the	end	of	the	year.
       “Yes,	 I	 do.”	 Mina	 loved	 the	fish’s	 oily	 and	 sticky	 smell,	the	 beauty	of	its
dark	stripes,	the	crispiness	of	the	skin	when	grilled.
       Mrs.	  Baek	had	 prepared	a	feast—seasoned	spinach	and	 soybean	sprouts,
baechu	kimchi	 and	kkakdugi,	 pickled	 perilla	 leaves,	and	 two	types	 of	 jjigae—
compared	to	their	usual	meals	of	maybe	two	or	three	banchan	and	soup.
       “Go	 ahead.”	She	motioned	to	Mina.
       Picking	  up	her	 chopsticks,	 Mina	 tasted	the	 kimchi—rich	  and	 tangy	with
hints	of	pear	and	shrimp.
       “How’s	  your	 boyfriend?”	  Mrs.	 Baek	 asked,	adjusting	her	 position	 on	the
bench.
       Mina	 tried	to	smile.	 “He’s	 okay.”
       “Has	 he	been	nice?”
       “He’s	  been	fine.	Yes.	He’s	 nice.”	The	 mackerel’s	f	 lesh	slipped	away	from
the	bones,	melted	like	butter	in	her	mouth.	How	 this	fish	 tasted	like	comfort	on	a
winter	night	 even	here	in	 Los	Angeles.	 “How	 about	you?	Are	 you	 interested	in
anyone?”	Mina	  only	 now	 remembered	that	Mrs.	  Baek	had	 once	said,	 I	 don’t
think	I’ll	 trust	 any	man	again.
       “No.”	  Mrs.	 Baek	 laughed	to	herself.	 “I	 have	books.	 I	 have	music.	I	 don’t
need	a	boyfriend.	I’m	busy.”
       “What	 is	that	supposed	to	mean?”
       “I	 mean	that	you	seemed	bored	before,	that’s	all.	All	 you	did	 was	work.	I’m
not	bored.	I’m	never	bored.”
       “I	  see,	because	you’re	so	interesting.”	 Mina	placed	 her	hands	on	the	table.
“Educated.”
       “I	  didn’t	 mean	it	that	 way,”	 Mrs.	Baek	 said.	“I	 wasn’t	 talking	 about	you.	I
was	referring	to	myself.”
       Mina	 slid	off	 the	bench	and	cleaned	up	her	side	of	the	table.
       “Just	 leave	it	there,”	Mrs.	 Baek	said.	“I’m	 sorry.”
       “No,	 I’m	 sorry.	I’ll	  put	this	soup	back.	I	haven’t	touched	it.”
       “Don’t	  do	that.”
       She	grabbed	the	bowl	and	Mrs.	Baek	pulled	 it	back.
       “Please	sit	down.	 I’m	 sorry.”
       Mina	 realized	then	how	 much	she	had	been	a	little	frightened	by	 Mrs.	Baek
—her	quick	 mind	 and	mouth,	carefully	 drawn	 brows,	her	 relaxed	sense	of	self,

149
sprawling	 like	 the	 city	 itself.	 But	 at	 the	 same	time,	 Mrs.	 Baek	 had	been	too
generous,	too	helpful,	and,	yes,	maybe	even	too	interesting	to	deny	from	her	life.
And	she	made	 some	of	 the	most	delicious	 banchan.	Something	 as	simple	as	a
leaf	fermented	 could	create	a	 moment,	a	 meal	that	 resembled	a	home,	even	 if
you	never	really	had	one.
       Mina	 sat	down	again,	gazing	at	what	 remained	of	the	mackerel—the	brown
meat	at	the	belly,	the	clear	bones	pronounced.
       “Anyway,	  I	 was	wrong,	 okay?	I	didn’t	  mean	what	I	 said.	It	has	nothing	 to
do	with	you.	I’ll	  never	trust	men.	I	don’t	 know	how	anymore.”
       “Were	 you	married	before?”	 Mina	asked.
       “Yes,	 yes,	I	was.”	Mrs.	 Baek’s	face	grew	red.	“He	 was	terrible.”
       “Do	 you	talk	 to	him	still?”
       “No,	 God,	no.”	 Her	nostrils	flared.	 “He	lives	 in	Texas.”
       “You	  ran	away?”
       “Yes.	 I	 didn’t	 have	a	choice.”	Her	 voice	trembled.	 It	was	the	first	 time	that
Mina	had	seen	Mrs.	Baek	this	vulnerable.
       Mina	 reached	out	her	hand	and	rubbed	Mrs.	Baek’s	wrist	with	 her	thumb.
       “Maybe	  I’m	 just	 a	 little	 bitter	 sometimes,”	 Mrs.	 Baek	 said.	“I	 wasted	 so
much	of	my	life.	 And	now	 what?”
       “You’re	  still	  alive,”	 Mina	 said,	 both	to	 Mrs.	 Baek	and	 herself.	“Isn’t	  it	 a
miracle?	 That	 we’re	 still	  here?”	Tears	 filled	  her	 eyes.	“No	  one	would	  have
expected	this	of	us.	We	surprised	them.	We	surprised	ourselves.”
       Entering	 the	kitchen,	the	landlady	said,	“That	 smells	good.”
       “Do	  you	want	 to	join	 us?”	 Mrs.	 Baek	asked,	pulling	 her	arm	 gently	 away
from	Mina,	 who	lowered	her	head,	wiping	her	face.
       “No,	   I’m	  fine.	   I	 already	  ate.	 I’m	   just	  making	  some	 soup	 now	  for
tomorrow.”
       After	 dinner,	 Mrs.	Baek,	 as	a	kind	of	 peace	offering,	peeled	and	sliced	two
golden	apples,	which	they	enjoyed	 together	in	silence.	Mina	 swallowed	 the	fruit
—bright	 and	sweet	and	tart	as	if	 just	plucked	 from	the	 branch—with	 an	intense
satisfaction.
       Despite	 all	  their	 efforts	 to	 forge	 their	 own	 lives	 in	 this	 foreign	  land	 as
individuals,	 it	was	obvious:	 they	needed	each	other.	They	reminded	one	another
with	 shared	food	 or	words	 that	 life,	 although	mostly	  mundane	and	sometimes
painful,	  was	 still	  spectacular,	 full	  of	  wonder,	 especially	  when	 we	  pushed
ourselves	toward	the	edge,	beyond	our	fears,	as	Mr.	Kim	 had	asked	Mina	to	ride
the	Ferris	wheel,	and	imagine	another	life,	with	 him.

150
       AT	 HIS	ONE-BEDROOM	APARTMENT	OFF	NORMANDIE	Avenue	in	Koreatown,
Mina	and	 Mr.	 Kim	 would	 eat	dinner	after	 work	 and	then—arms	draped,	thighs
touching,	fingers	laced—they	 would	watch	the	Korean	news	and	occasionally	an
American	show.	Eventually,	 they	would	 make	their	way	to	the	bedroom	to	 make
love.	Lying	  next	to	 each	other	 afterward,	 with	 Mr.	 Kim	  snoring	loudly,	  Mina
would	 sometimes	stare	at	the	ceiling,	 wondering	 what	 had	become	of	 her	 life,
how	it	had	all	happened	so	quickly.
       A	  couple	months	 into	 their	 relationship,	 a	 TV	 special	 aired	on	 the	local
Korean	channel	 about	the	 temporary	 reunification	  events	for	 Korean	 families
separated	in	the	North	 and	the	 South	without	 any	 ability	 to	 communicate	with
each	other	for	decades	since	the	Korean	War.	These	families	had	been	torn	apart,
members	lost,	 in	  the	 process	of	  fleeing	 the	 violence	 and	 death	 that	 erased
millions	 of	  people.	How	  could	 they	 have	 known	 that	 one	day	 their	 country
would	 be	 split	 in	  two,	 severing	 them	 from	  their	 mothers,	 fathers,	 brothers,
sisters,	children,	without	any	palpable	end	in	sight?
       And	  the	 reunification	  opportunities	  were	 scarce.	Tens	 of	  thousands	of
families	 remained	on	the	 waiting	 lists,	 hoping	to	 be	chosen	by	 the	lottery,	 not
knowing	 if	 they	 would	 die	before	 they	got	 the	 chance	to	see	their	 loved	 ones
again.
       Mina	 closed	her	eyes,	yearning	to	change	the	channel.	She	couldn’t	bear	the
volume	of	 feeling,	the	faces	stretched	with	 a	violence	 of	so	many	 emotions,	the
raw	complexity	 in	response	to	so	many	years	lost	between	members	of	the	same
family	 on	the	screen.	Grandmothers	in	hanboks	wept,	 holding	 the	faces	of	each
other	between	wrinkled	  and	spotted	hands.	Grandfathers	 cried	 and	begged	for
forgiveness	at	the	feet	 of	the	 children,	 now	adults,	 whom	they	 had	left	 behind,
not	knowing	that	the	war	and	border	would	 separate	them	forever.
       But	 Mr.	 Kim	  remained	transfixed	 by	the	 screen,	red	creeping	up	his	 neck
and	face.
       From	 a	box	that	he	kept	on	 his	coffee	table,	Mina	 handed	him	a	tissue.	Her
heart	cracked.	“I’ll	 change	the	channel,”	she	said.
       “No.	 I	 want	to	see	this.”
       On	  the	 television,	  the	 elderly	  offered	 testimonials	  on	 who	  they	 were
missing	and	how	much	they	 hoped	to	hear	from	or	see	them	again	before	dying.
Tears	streamed	down	so	many	faces.	Hands	clutched	 handkerchiefs	and	tissues
as	the	reunited,	 dressed	in	their	 best	suits	 or	hanboks,	 dropped	to	 the	ground,
grabbing	each	other	as	if	checking	 to	make	sure	that	the	bodies	of	 the	lost	were
real.	A	single	 human	being	could	live	 an	entire	continent	 of	pain	 and	worry	and
longing.
       “Do	 you	 ever	wonder	if	 your	parents	might	 still	 be	there,	in	North	 Korea?”

151
Mr.	Kim	 asked.
       “What	 do	you	mean?”
       “When	 you	lost	your	 parents—where	were	you	when	you	lost	them?”
       “I	  don’t	 remember.	I	 only	 remember	there	were	hills,	 dirt,	 people	 fleeing.
That’s	all	I	 remember.”
       “Do	 you	ever	think	 that	maybe	they	never	made	it	across?”
       “No,	  I’ve	 never	 thought	 of	 that.”	 Heat	 rose	from	 the	 pit	 of	 her	stomach
through	her	lungs	and	throat.
       “But	 maybe	that’s	why	 they	never	found	you,”	 he	said,	disturbed.
       “Maybe.	  I	guess	there’s	nothing	 to	 do	about	it	 now.”	 She	stood	to	 change
the	channel.
       “No,	 not	yet.”
       “I	 don’t	 want	to	watch	this	anymore.”
       “Just	 let	me	finish	this,	 please.”
       “I’ll	   go	and	sit	in	the	bedroom.”
       As	 she	 entered	the	 bedroom	 and	lay	 down,	 tears	 spilled	 from	 her	 eyes,
soaking	the	pillowcase	 beneath	her	head.	Why	 was	he	doing	 this	to	 her?	What
did	he	 know	about	 her	parents?	How	 dare	he	assume	that	they	 hadn’t	 made	it
through?	What	kept	her	alive	 all	these	years	was	the	thought	that	they	were	fine,
maybe	they	had	moved	on	 without	 her,	maybe	they	 had	another	child,	 but	they
were	fine.	They	were	fine.
       They	 were	 somewhere	in	 South	Korea.	 They	had	 normal	lives.	 They	 had
moved	on.	They	were	fine.	Fine.	Fine.
       She	wanted	 to	yell	 this	 to	him.	 She	wanted	to	 scream,	but	she	didn’t.	 She
couldn’t	afford	 to	lose	him	now.
       Ten	 minutes	had	gone	by	until	she	heard	him	stepping	toward	her.	With	 her
back	facing	the	door,	her	body	tilted	 like	a	canoe	as	he	sat	on	the	bed	by	her	feet.
He	put	his	hand	on	her	leg,	which	he	squeezed	in	the	softest	way	as	if	testing	the
reality	of	her	presence	in	his	life.
       “I’m	  sorry,”	 he	said.
       “Don’t	  worry,”	  she	said,	trying	 to	 disguise	in	 her	voice	 that	she	had	been
crying.
       “I’m	  very	sorry.”
       A	 sharp	sob	escaped	his	mouth	like	 a	hiccup	as	he	wept.	She	turned	to	 see
his	face	above	hers,	broken,	 before	he	covered	it	 with	 his	 hand.	She	wanted	to
touch	his	face	but	didn’t	know	 how,	not	at	that	moment.
       “I	  .	 .	.	 I	 should	 have	told	 you	 this	 before,”	 Mr.	 Kim	  said	softly.	  “I	 was
hoping	that	I	would	 see	my	father.	Every	 time	anything	about	North	 Korea	is	on
television—I	 always	hope	to	see	my	father.”

152
       She	sat	up	in	bed.	He	bowed	his	head,	staring	at	her	legs,	which	were	a	kind
of	border	between	them.
       “My	   mother,	 when	 she	was	 pregnant	 with	 me,	 left	 the	 North	  with	 her
brother	and	parents.	My	 father	 had	to	stay	behind	 for	work.	 He	 wanted	to	 take
care	of	everything,	the	home	we	had.	He	 didn’t	 want	to	just	leave,	but	 she	never
saw	him	again	 after	that.”	 He	paused	to	 wipe	the	 tears	from	his	 eyes.	“No	 one
knows	 what	 happened	to	 him.	 My	  mother	 tried,	 but	 who	  knows?	 So	many
people	back	then,	everyone	just	trying	to	get	out.	Maybe	he	made	it.	Maybe	not.”
He	wiped	his	nose	on	his	sleeve.	“Anyway,	 I	like	 to	believe	that	if	I	 saw	his	face,
I’d	know	 it	was	him.	I’d	 know—there’s	 my	father.	That’s	 why	I	 watch	the	TV.”
       She	reached	to	touch	him	 as	tears	leaked	out	of	her	eyes.	She	wanted	to	be
strong	for	him,	but	she	couldn’t	 hold	herself	together.
       “She	 raised	 me	by	 herself,”	 he	continued.	 “It	  was	very	 hard.	She	 did	all
kinds	of	things,	just	so	we	could	 get	by.	She	could’ve	lost	me,	too,	when	she	was
pregnant.	There	was	so	little	to	eat.	It’s	 really	a	miracle	that	I’m	 alive.	 She	was	a
very	good	mother.”
       “Where	 is	she	now?”
       “In	 Busan.	Getting	old,	 though.”
       “She	 never	remarried?”
       “No.	 As	 I	got	older,	 I	tried	 to	convince	her,	but	she	always	seemed	to	think
that	one	day,	she	would	see	my	dad	again,	and	she	wouldn’t	want	to	tell	him	 that
she	had	remarried.	I	guess,	she’s	waiting.	She’s	been	on	the	list	 for	a	while.	 But
she	doesn’t	 even	know	  if	 he’s	 still	  alive	 or	 what.	 No	 one	 knows.	 It’s	  all	 a
mystery.”
       He	 wiped	his	eyes	before	lying	 down	on	the	bed.	She	joined	him.	 Her	hand
rested	on	the	side	of	 his	face	where	she	could	 feel	the	sandpaper	of	 his	stubble
under	her	palm,	her	 fingertips	 on	his	cheekbone.	This	 man’s	kindness	 emerged
out	of	the	cruelties	of	 their	lives	like	 birds	hatched	on	fields	ruined	 by	mines	and
barbed	wire.	She	wanted	to	be	kind,	to	be	gentle,	too.	He	was	showing	her	that	it
was	okay	to	try.
       “I	  thought	 one	 day,	I’d	  get	 rich.”	 His	 eyes	 brightened	 as	if	 laughing	 at
himself	inside.	“I’d	  come	to	America,	 get	rich,	and	go	back,	you	know?	 And	if	 I
had	enough	money,	we	could	find	him.	 But	that	doesn’t	seem	to	be	going	to	plan
either.	I’m	 sort	of	trapped	here	now.”
       “We’re	  trapped	together,”	she	said	with	a	smile.
       “At	  least	I	met	you.”
       “There’s	 still	 time.”
       “Yes,	  there’s	 still	 time,	 but	 we’re	  getting	 old.	 All	  of	 us.	Especially	  my
mother.”

153
       “How	  old	is	she?”
       “She’s	 in	her	fifties.”
       “She’s	 still	 young.”
       He	 lowered	his	eyes.	The	tips	of	his	fingers	trailed	her	arm.
       “Have	 you	tried	 prayer?”	Mina	asked.
       “I	 have,	but	God	gives	me	the	cold	shoulder.”
       “That’s	 not	 true.”	But	she	felt	that	way	 on	most	days	herself.
       “I’m	   sorry	 about	what	 I	 said	 earlier,”	 he	 said.	“I’m	   sure	your	 family	  is
fine.”
       Pipes	 tapped	 on	 the	walls	  as	the	 shower	 ran.	 In	 the	 next	 apartment,	 a
neighbor	snored.
       Mina	 couldn’t	 fall	 back	asleep.	Her	mind	turned	over	Mr.	 Kim’s	 words	 like
stones	that	clacked	soothingly	 on	a	shore:	She	always	seemed	to	think	 that	one
day,	she	would	see	my	dad	again,	and	she	wouldn’t	want	to	tell	 him	that	she	had
remarried.
       What	 if	his	 father	was	dead	already?	All	those	years	his	mother	would	 have
wasted,	alone.	But	then	again,	what	if	 the	hope	of	 never	having	to	move	on	 was
what	 kept	 her	 alive?	 Maybe	 the	 tragedy	 of	  waiting	  was	the	 only	  way	 she
survived?
       Would	 Mina	 be	able	to	face	her	husband	in	the	afterlife?
       Would	 he	be	angry	about	Mr.	Kim?
       In	 heaven,	if	 they	 were	all	 dead,	would	 they	 awkwardly	 have	to	 see	each
other?	Or	 would	 heaven	mean	 that	she	 could	 have	two	 lives?	 Was	 heaven	a
world	 in	which	 she	could	 have	them	both	 but	separately?	She	wondered	if	  her
brain	and	 her	 heart	could	 even	handle	 the	 different	 iterations	 of	 her	 life,	 the
many	ways	a	 song	could	 be	played.	A	 change	in	 lyrics,	 a	different	  tempo	and
pace.
       Perhaps	thinking	  she	was	 still	 asleep,	Mr.	 Kim	  tiptoed	 toward	 his	closet
from	 which	 he	pulled	 out	 his	day’s	 outfit—his	  polo	 shirt,	 his	khaki	 slacks.	 A
eucalyptus	scent	from	 his	 after-shave,	clean	 and	fresh,	 filled	 the	 room,	which
had	become	a	bit	 musty	from	 the	 windows	 unopened	in	winter.	 With	  her	eyes
half-open,	 she	observed	him	  slide	on	 his	 underwear	 and	pants,	 admiring	 the
muscles	in	his	back	and	shoulders.
       “You	  should	keep	your	shirt	off	more	often,”	 she	said.
       “Ah,	  you’re	up.”	 He	turned	around	and	sat	on	the	edge	of	the	bed,	his	hand
on	her	leg.	“Hope	I	didn’t	 wake	you.”
       “No,	 I	 had	trouble	falling	 asleep.”
       “Are	 you	 not	feeling	well?	 You	could	call	 in	sick?”	He	slipped	 on	his	shirt.
       “I	 wish.”

154
       “Do	you	want	me	to	find	out	if	someone	could	cover	for	you?”
       “No,	 I	don’t	think	 so.	I’ll	 be	fine.	I	have	at	least	five	more	hours.	I’ll	get
sleep	now.”
       He	kissed	her	wetly	on	the	cheek.
       “Ew,”	 she	said,	wiping	her	face,	laughing.
       After	she	heard	the	locks	on	the	front	door	click	shut,	the	knob	tested,	she
closed	her	eyes,	thinking	of	him,	trying	to	stay	focused	on	him,	them,	the	feel	of
his	hand	on	her	 leg,	the	feel	 of	 his	face	beneath	her	fingers,	now.	But	 she
couldn’t	shake	the	feeling	that	this	couldn’t	last.	Nothing	did—good	or	bad.

155
       FIFTEEN	MINUTES	EARLY,	MINA	GRABBED	A	CAN	OF	7-Up	for	the	dull	ache	in
her	stomach	and	made	her	way	 to	the	 rear	of	the	 store.	She	hadn’t	eaten	lunch
yet	but	wasn’t	hungry	 at	all,	so	she	stashed	the	ham	sandwich	and	Fuji	apple	that
she	had	packed	for	 herself	 in	 her	storage	bin	 and	 returned	to	 the	registers	 up
front.
       For	  as	long	 as	 she	could	  remember,	whenever	 upset	 or	 depressed,	she
couldn’t	 force	herself	 to	eat.	She	could	 skip	 a	few	 meals	easily,	unable	 to	free
herself	from	the	weight	 of	 the	sadness	in	her	chest	or	the	gnawing	of	a	dolorous
mind.	Her	 emotions,	like	 a	long	 pin	 holding	 an	insect	or	a	 butterfly	 into	 place,
could	control	her	in	that	way.
       On	 her	first	day	at	the	orphanage	in	front	 of	a	meal	of	beans	and	barley,	her
stomach	had	closed	like	a	fist	as	if	protecting	 the	most	vital,	the	most	mysterious
part	of	herself.	All	 she	could	do	was	sip	water	until	 the	nuns	allowed	her	to	leave
the	table	after	over	two	hours.	Only	 after	a	few	days	of	 settling	into	 the	routines,
the	faces	around	her,	could	she	finally	  ingest	an	entire	meal,	a	watery	 doenjang
jjigae,	heavily	 boiled	with	 summer	squash.	At	her	first	bite,	 her	entire	body	from
head	to	toe	tingled	in	a	riot	 of	sensations—a	plant	bulb	 buried	in	the	most	brutal
winter	scorched	with	 a	startling	summer	heat—and	she	had	to	fight	 herself	from
devouring	the	rice	and	soup	like	an	animal.
       At	 the	front	 of	the	store,	Mr.	 Kim,	 with	 his	sweaty	hair	flopping	 and	falling
onto	his	forehead,	appeared	as	if	he	had	been	running	around	all	morning.	When
their	 eyes	met,	he	 flashed	 the	most	 subtle	 yet	knowing	  smile	 before	 jogging
away	 to	  some	 task—a	 customer	  complaint,	  a	 shipment	  delayed,	 a	 bottle
shattered	on	the	floor	in	aisle	three.	Perhaps	they	had	been	understaffed	that	day.
       She	 imagined	him	 owning	 his	 own	 supermarket	and	how	 much	pride	 she
would	have	for	 him,	knowing	 that	he	could	 help	his	mother	 one	day.	Maybe	his
mother	could	 move	 to	 America,	 and	they	 could	 take	care	of	 her	 together.	Or
maybe	his	mother	 would	 want	 to	stay	in	 Korea,	 but	Mr.	  Kim	 could	 buy	her	 a
nice	house	and	visit	 her	once	a	year,	 lavishing	 her	with	 gifts—chocolates,	 new
shoes,	and	clothes.
       How	  often	did	 he	 go	back	 to	 Korea	these	 days,	if	 ever	 at	all?	 He	 never
spoke	of	traveling	despite	his	feelings	for	 his	mother.	Could	he	not	afford	 to	take
time	off,	 or	was	he	not	able	to	fly	 freely	because	of	his	immigration	 status?	How
much	could	they	ever	know	about	each	other?
       Two	  bundles	 of	 green	onions.	 Doenjang.	 Large	 sesame	oil.	  Package	of
dried	seaweed.	Dried	anchovies.	Flour.
       Six	 pack	of	Hite.	Dried	 cuttlefish.	 Two	boxes	of	Choco	Pie.
       She	 felt	 dizzy	 after	a	 few	hours,	 having	 to	steady	herself	 on	the	 counter.
Acid	rose	from	 her	stomach	to	the	root	of	her	tongue.	The	flow	 of	customers	had

156
slowed	down,	 so	she	rushed	to	 the	back	of	 the	store,	 afraid	she	might	 faint	 or
throw	up.
       Through	  the	doorway	 of	  long	 rubber	strips	 that	 slapped	together	 as	she
passed	through,	the	darkness	and	the	drop	in	temperature	revived	her.	She	stood
bent	over,	hands	gripping	 the	front	of	 her	thighs,	catching	 her	breath	before	she
headed	to	the	restroom.	Arching	 her	head	backward,	she	gulped	air	 through	her
mouth,	worrying	 that	she	needed	to	go	home.	Maybe	all	she	needed	was	rest—in
her	own	room,	on	her	own	bed—alone.
       Behind	 the	door	of	Mr.	 Park’s	office,	 she	heard	chairs	slide	violently	 on	the
dusty	floor.	A	 woman	shrieked.
       Mina	  froze,	 startled	by	 a	 fear	 that	grabbed	 her	by	 the	 throat.	 Unable	 to
approach	the	sound,	she	ran	back	into	the	aisles,	searching	for	Mr.	Kim.	Near	the
registers,	he	stood	with	 an	elderly	 woman.	 As	 soon	as	he	saw	Mina’s	 face,	 he
excused	himself	and	followed	her	to	the	back	where	she	pointed	toward	the	door.
He	listened,	 then	shouted,	“Mr.	  Park.”	 Silence.	“Mr.	  Park!”	 He	 tried	 the	knob
and	pushed	inside.
       Standing	about	fifteen	 feet	away	at	a	sharp	angle	that	obscured	the	inside	of
Mr.	 Park’s	office,	 Mina	  heard	a	woman	scream	again.	 The	men	shouted,	 soon
followed	by	 the	crashing	sound	of	bodies	colliding.
       Mina	 didn’t	 know	 what	to	do.	She	wanted	to	rush	inside,	but	she	was	frozen
in	place,	terrified.	Should	she	hide?
       “You	  son	of	a	bitch,”	 Mr.	 Park	yelled	from	 the	room,	panting	as	if	 catching
his	breath.	“You’re	 fired.	Get	out	of	 here.”
       With	  his	 arm	 around	 the	shoulders	 of	 a	 woman	 bent	in	 pain,	 Mr.	  Kim
limped	through	the	door.
       It	 was	Lupe.
       Mina’s	 heart	sank.	The	room	spun.	Foul	acid	rose	in	her	throat.
       “Let’s	  get	out	of	here,”	Mr.	 Kim	 whispered	to	Mina.	“Before	 he	sees	you.”
       “What?”
       “C’mon.”	  He	grabbed	her	hand.	“Lupe,	c’mon.”
       Together,	 they	walked	 out	the	heavy	back	door	 into	a	cruel	 white	sunlight.
“My	 purse,”	Mina	 said.	“My	 keys.”
       “We’ll	   get	our	 stuff	 later.	 I’ll	  call	 Daniel	 and	have	 him	 grab	everything.
We’ll	 get	it	all	later,	okay?”
       Opening	 the	station	wagon	door,	Mina	 motioned	for	 Lupe	to	sit	 in	the	front
seat	where	she	sobbed	uncontrollably	 with	 her	face	in	 her	hand.	Red	ran	 down
the	side	of	Mr.	Kim’s	 jaw,	 dripping	onto	 his	shoulders,	onto	the	polo	shirt	he	had
put	on	that	 morning	in	 front	 of	 her.	From	 the	back	seat,	Mina	 searched	the	car
for	napkins,	something	to	blot	the	blood	 but	couldn’t	 find	anything.	 She	removed

157
her	sweater	and	reached	forward,	holding	it	to	his	head.
       “I’m—I’m	   so	sorry,”	 Lupe	said	in	English,	coughing,	 almost	choking.
       “No,	 no	le	preocupe.	Le	llevaremos	a	casa,	a	su	casa,”	he	said.
       Mina	 reached	to	squeeze	Lupe’s	shoulder,	an	attempt	to	say	what	she	didn’t
know	how	 to	say	in	 Spanish	or	English:	It’s	 not	 your	fault.	 None	of	this	 is	your
fault.
       Trapped	 in	 the	 back,	 unable	 to	 attend	to	 Mr.	  Kim’s	  wounds,	unable	 to
comfort	 Lupe,	 Mina’s	 heart	 and	mind	 raced	as	she	 scrambled	to	 put	together
what	had	just	happened.	Swallowing	the	taste	of	 her	own	vomit,	 she	didn’t	want
to	think	 about	 what	would	 happen	 to	them	 now,	later,	 tomorrow.	 She	tried	 to
calm	her	breath,	closing	her	eyes.
       “Son	 of	a	bitch,”	 Mr.	 Kim	hissed	to	himself.
       Arriving	  at	 her	apartment,	Lupe	 tried	to	 compose	herself,	wiping	  her	face
dry	with	 her	sleeve.	Mina	 vomited	 on	the	strip	 of	 grass	next	to	the	sidewalk	 as
soon	as	she	 opened	the	 car	door.	 Neither	 Lupe	 nor	 Mr.	  Kim	  noticed.	 For	a
second,	Mina	became	distracted	by	a	long	trail	of	 ants	devouring	a	snail	that	had
been	smashed.
       Body	 covered	in	bruises,	forehead	and	hands	bandaged,	Mr.	Kim	lay	 on	the
bed,	staring	at	the	ceiling.
       “What’s	  going	to	happen	now?”	Mina	 asked.
       “I	 don’t	 know.”	 He	had	described	how	he	had	walked	into	the	office	 on	Mr.
Park	holding	Lupe	down.	 Upon	seeing	him,	Mr.	 Park	pushed	Lupe	aside.	She	hit
the	corner	of	the	desk	as	she	went	crashing	to	the	ground.	Mr.	Kim	 punched	Mr.
Park	in	 the	face	until	 his	 hands	bled.	And	 when	 he	reached	to	help	 Lupe,	 Mr.
Park	shoved	him	into	a	bookshelf.	Objects	toppled	onto	his	head.
       “You	  son	of	a	 bitch.	You’re	 fired.”	  Mr.	 Park	had	spit	the	 words	out	of	 his
bloody	mouth.
       Imagining	  Lupe’s	  horror—that	  fear	 and	 entrapment	 and	 disgust—Mina
yearned	to	  kill	  Mr.	  Park.	 A	 box	  cutter	 to	 his	 neck.	 She	 remembered	 him
emerging	out	of	 his	office	 to	 help	her	 while	 lifting	 cartons	off	 the	 ground.	The
grip	of	a	pistol	 had	flashed	at	his	side.	Are	you	sure	you	can	do	this?	He	winked.
Chills	 ran	down	her	 spine.	Fists	clenched.	I	 worked	hard,	 very	 hard.	And	 now,
I’m	the	owner.	I	 own	all	of	this.
       She	could	break	him	 down	like	 one	of	his	boxes,	stuff	his	words	 back	in	his
mouth.	He	deserved	the	worst	kind	of	ending.
       Mr.	 Kim	 sighed.	“There’s	 a	chance	.	.	.”
       “A	  chance	of	what?”
       “That	 he’ll	 call	the	police	 on	us.”	He	squeezed	his	eyes	shut.
       “You?	 Why?”	 Her	voice	 had	grown	hoarse.

158
       “He	 has	friends.”
       “What	 do	you	mean?”
       “He	 has	friends.	 Just	.	.	.	 If	 he	really	 wanted	to	.	 .	.	he	could	 get	rid	 of	 us
all.”
       “But	 he	already	fired	 you.”	Her	heart	pounded	in	her	chest,	her	head.
       “If	  that’s	enough	for	him.”
       “What	 do	you	mean?”
       “I	  don’t	 know	 for	 sure,	but	my	 sense	is	that	he	had	something	 to	do	 with
Mario	getting	sent	back.”
       “What?”
       “I	  don’t	 have	 any	proof.	 Maybe	 I’m	  just	 being	 paranoid.”	 He	 shook	his
head.	“The	other	day,	he	made	this	comment	about	what	a	good	worker	 Lupe	is.
Then	he	 said	 something	 about	Mario	  not	 being	 able	 to	 keep	himself	  out	 of
trouble,	that	 he	wasn’t	smart	 enough	to	mind	 his	 own	business.”	A	 tear	leaked
out	of	Mr.	 Kim’s	 eye.	“I	 didn’t	 press	him	any	further.	 But	it’s	 like	 he	was	trying
to	tell	me	something.	It	was	like	 a	warning.	I	don’t	 know.”
       “Why	  would	he	call	 the	police	on	you	 when	you’re	the	one	who	 was	trying
to	help	Lupe?	He’s	the	criminal.”
       “Because	he	knows	 that	she	would	not	call	 the	police.	 She	could	risk	being
deported.	He	could	make	up	some	kind	 of	story	about	 how	I	assaulted	him.	 She
has	children.	She	would	never	go	to	the	police.”
       “But	   I	 would	  say	 something.	 I	  could	 say	 something.	 I	  was	 there	 for
everything.”
       “He’s	  more	 powerful.”	 His	 nostrils	 flared.	 “It’s	  his	 story	that	 gets	heard,
you	see?”
       Carefully,	 she	pressed	the	adhesive	of	the	bandage	peeling	off	his	forehead.
The	cotton	 had	grown	brown.	 She	closed	 her	eyes	and	an	explosion	 blasted	in
her	head.	There	was	 no	mercy.	 Even	the	 silence	itself	 was	preparation	 for	 the
most	 horrible	  sounds.	She	 had	 cried	  out	 at	 the	  people,	 desperate	to	  save
themselves,	rushing	by	her.	Umma,	she	had	screamed	through	her	tears.	Umma.
She	couldn’t	get	the	screams	and	the	whistles	of	the	bombs	out	of	her	mind.	 The
earth	stabbed	her	knees	when	she	fell	to	the	ground.
       She	imagined	blood	 spurting	out	of	Mr.	 Park’s	neck.
       “I	  better	lie	low	 for	 a	while.”	 Mr.	 Kim	 gripped	her	hand,	nudging	 her	back
to	the	present.
       “What	  do	you	mean?”	 She	touched	his	arm	 in	a	gesture	that	 urged	him	 to
lie	back	down	with	 her.
       “Hide.	  I	don’t	 know.”	  His	 eyes	wide.	“I	 should	 call	 Lupe	first,	 make	sure
she’s	okay.”

159
       “What?	 Where	are	you	going	to	go?	This	doesn’t	make	sense.”
       “I	 don’t	 know.”	 He	covered	his	face	with	his	hand.
       “Are	 you	 thinking	of	 leaving	town?”
       “I	 don’t	 know.”
       “You	  can’t	leave	town.”	 She	wanted	to	say,	You	can’t	leave	me	now.
       “I	 can’t	 get	arrested.	I	can’t	.	.	.”
       “Nothing	  will	 happen.	Why	do	you	 keep	thinking	 something	like	that	could
happen?”
       He	 rubbed	between	his	brows.	“I	 never—I	 never	told	you	 this.	When	I	 first
came	to	this	country,	 I	came	on	a	student	visa,	and	I	 let	it	 expire.	By	 then	I	had
given	up	on	everything,	and	then	I	found	this	 job.”
       “You’re	  not	supposed	to	be	here?”
       Neither	 was	she.	And	the	concept	of	who	was	and	who	was	not	supposed	to
be	here	perplexed	Mina.	 Hadn’t	 he	been	working	 all	 this	time?	Hadn’t	 he	 been
paying	his	taxes,	too?	Hadn’t	 the	wars,	the	uprisings,	the	 slaughter	in	the	streets
that	had	destroyed	their	families	and	homes,	driven	them	here	to	this	country	that
glittered	untouched	by	the	bombs	it	dropped	everywhere	else,	been	enough?	And
why	did	 the	law	 take	any	opportunity	 to	either	 lock	people	 up	or	kick	 them	out
when	the	worst	 kind	 of	 people,	like	  Mr.	 Park,	should	 be	in	 prison	 rather	than
getting	rich	off	 the	labor	of	everybody	else,	the	terror	of	everybody	 else?
       Rushing	 to	the	bathroom,	she	knelt	in	front	of	 the	toilet.	Nothing	 came,	only
a	trail	 of	mucous	that	 clung	to	 her	mouth.	She	hadn’t	 eaten	at	all	that	 day.	The
square	pink	tiles	spun	as	she	tried	to	steady	herself	standing	up.	She	remembered
those	days	after	her	husband	and	daughter	died,	those	days	of	 palms	and	knees
dragging	on	a	wet	 floor,	 of	brushing	 her	teeth	with	 an	index	finger	 because	she
had	already	thrown	 all	 their	 toothbrushes	in	 the	 trash.	There	 were	pills	 in	 the
cabinet	that	she	had	jammed	in	her	mouth,	forced	 dry	down	 her	throat.	Yet	 here
she	was,	six	thousand	miles	away,	still	  confused,	still	 lost.	Would	 she	ever	find
home?
       Entering	 the	 bedroom,	she	jumped	 at	the	 sight	of	 Mr.	  Kim	 seated	on	the
edge	of	the	mattress	in	 the	low	 glow	of	 the	lamp,	 holding	 a	gun—small,	 black,
and	matte.
       “What	 are	you	doing?”	 she	asked,	breathless.	“Put	that	away.”
       “I	 want	 you	to	have	this,”	he	said.	“I’ll	  show	you	how—”
       “No,	 I	 don’t	want	 that.	What	do	I	need	that	for?	I’m	 fine.	 I’ll	 be	fine.	Please
put	that	away.”
       He	 contemplated	the	gun,	shook	his	 head,	and	returned	it	to	 its	holster	and
bag	on	the	bed.
       “Why	  do	 you	even	 .	.	 .”	 But	she	didn’t	  bother	finishing	  her	question.	 Of

160
course	he	owned	a	gun.	She	had	never	seen	so	many	guns	on	men	who	were	not
in	 the	military	  until	  coming	 to	America.	  From	 what	 were	they	 all	 protecting
themselves?	He	could	hurt	himself,	 if	not	 someone	else.	She	had	to	take	it	away
from	him	 somehow.	It	was	too	easy	to	hurt	someone.	She	couldn’t	lose	him.	She
couldn’t	 lose	 anyone	again.	“Could	  you	 please—put	that	 away	 somewhere?	I
can’t	be	in	this	room	with	 it	there.”
       He	 slid	open	his	nightstand	drawer,	tucked	the	bag	inside.
       She	closed	 her	eyes,	inhaled,	and	placed	her	 head	in	her	 hands.	“Should	I
go	to	work	tomorrow?”
       He	 sighed.	“Yes,	I	think	 you	should.”
       “I	  can’t.	I	 can’t	ever	 go	back.”	 Her	lips	 trembled.	She	couldn’t	 hold	 in	her
tears	anymore.
       “I	  think	 you	should	 pretend	that	.	 .	.	you	 weren’t	 there.	You	 have	no	idea
what	happened.	Did	he	see	you?”
       “I	 don’t	 know.	I	 don’t	think	 so.”
       “That’s	   good.”	 He	  paused.	“I	  think	  it’s	  better	 if	  you	 pretend	 nothing
happened	so	that	he	doesn’t	think	you	were	there,	right?”
       “I	 can’t	 do	that.”
       “You	  have	to.”	His	eyes	glowed	wet	with	 fear	or	some	profound	resignation
or	both.	“His	 face	was	bleeding.	I	probably	 broke	his	nose.	I	doubt	he’ll	 be	there
tomorrow.	If	 you	don’t	 feel	safe,	leave,	okay?	But	I	 think	if	 you’re	 missing	from
work,	 everyone	will	  assume	you	were	 involved	 somehow,	 and	we	 don’t	 want
that	right	now.	We	should	keep	you	out	of	 it.	We’ll	 keep	you	out	of	 it,	okay?”
       “Why?	 Why	 should	I	go?”
       “You	  need	the	work	for	now.”	 His	voice	 cracked.	“We	can	all	find	 different
jobs	later,	 but	 you	 need	the	work,	  okay?	I	 know	 this	 is	 terrible.	 I	 know,	 but
someone	has	to	.	.	.	We	can’t	all	not	go	back.”
       “I	 know.”
       “Can	 you	do	it?	Can	you	go	back	to	work	 tomorrow?”

161
Margot

Fall	2014

162
       THE	MORNING	AFTER	VISITING	MRS.	BAEK	AT	HER	apartment—the	cramped
living	 room	 that	 smelled	 of	 used	bookstores	 and	cucumber	 cold	 cream—and
then	riding	the	Ferris	 wheel	at	the	pier	by	herself,	 Margot	woke	 up	early	to	once
again	drive	to	Calabasas,	which	might	take	almost	an	hour	in	weekday	traffic.
       The	question	of	 her	mother’s	death	zigzagged	in	Margot’s	 mind.	Regardless
of	what	Mrs.	 Baek	had	said—that	she	had	closed	her	store	because	she	had	been
struggling	financially—her	  stalker,	 Mr.	 Park,	with	 his	 fake	smile	 and	lingering
eyes,	seemed	increasingly	dangerous,	capable	of	 physically	 harming	 someone.
But	even	with	 the	 yelling	 that	the	landlord	 had	heard	the	night	 of	 her	mother’s
death,	she	couldn’t	connect	Mr.	Park	with	 her	mother	yet.	And	 if	 she	dug	deeper
into	Mr.	 Park’s	 life,	 if	 she	confronted	 him	 somehow,	could	 she	be	responsible
for	 him	 retaliating	 against	Mrs.	 Baek	 and	the	 waitress	who	 had	 disclosed	his
behavior?	These	women	were	doing	their	best	to	navigate	their	 own	lives	 within
circumstances	driven,	stories	told	by	men.	Margot	also	had	to	protect	them.
       She	 was	also	still	 upset	that,	 in	 those	final	 months	of	 his	life,	  her	mother
had	not	connected	 her	with	 her	 father,	as	if	  she	had	been	hoarding	 him	 all	 to
herself.	Perhaps	her	mother	 had	everyone’s	 best	interest	in	 mind,	 but	why	 did
her	mother	get	to	decide?	And	she	had	left	unexpectedly	the	tangle	of	this	net	for
Margot	to	unravel	by	herself.
       With	 her	foot	 on	the	accelerator,	Margot	needed	to	know	her	father	now.
       She	 wanted	 to	know	  what	 he	had	 done	all	 those	 years	after	 he	left	  her
mother	and	why	he	had	fled	 Los	Angeles.	 These	were	hard	questions,	questions
she	wasn’t	even	sure	she	was	ready	to	ask	out	loud.	But	 she	had	been	presented
with	this	 rare	opportunity,	 and	in	a	way,	she	had	been	preparing	for	 the	answers
her	entire	life.
       Maybe	 that’s	 what	she	had	been	doing	 this	entire	 time—hardening	 herself
for	 the	truth.	 Some	 questions	were	 never	 meant	to	 be	 answered,	yet	 ideally,
pursuing	them	might	 at	 least	shed	light	 on	how	 much	you	 valued	yourself,	 the
need	you	might	have	to	 tell	your	 own	story,	 however	fragmented	it	 might	 be.	It
was	okay	 to	 yearn	 for	 the	impossible	  every	now	 and	 then	 as	long	 as	in	 the
yearning	you	discovered	something	about	yourself.
       And	  she	was	admitting	  to	herself	 now	 that	 all	 those	years	of	 not	 caring
about	who	her	father	was,	brushing	 off	the	idea	of	 him,	 was	a	mask	she	wore	to
deny	what	  she	really	 wanted—to	  learn	 more	 about	 him	 and	 her	mother,	  to
understand	her	origins.	Were	her	 parents	in	love?	Was	it	 a	one-night	 stand?	An
affair?
       How	  human,	how	 beautiful	 even	 our	 mistakes	could	 be.	 Once	again	 the
bronze	gate	had	been	left	 open.	The	 same	two	cars—glistening	 and	 new—had
been	parked	 in	 the	driveway	  along	 with	 a	 muddy	 landscaper	truck.	  A	 weed

163
whacker	whirred	in	the	distance.
       The	 creamy	white	 two-story	  house	appeared	even	more	dreamlike	 during
the	day.	The	sun	drenched	the	surrounding	foliage	 in	a	honey-colored	 light,	 and
well-fed	 birds	 flitted	  playfully	  on	 the	 dense	grass.	The	 tiered	 stone	fountain
gushed	water	as	the	palm	trees	rustled	against	each	other	in	the	breeze.
       She	 tapped	 the	heavy	 brass	 door	 knocker,	 and	 the	very	  handsome	and
chiseled	man	 from	  the	 other	 night	 answered,	wearing	  a	soft	  gray	 cashmere
sweater	and	perfectly	fitted	 dark	slacks.	He	smelled	like	 a	Dolce	&	 Gabbana	ad,
and	from	what	she	could	tell,	had	the	body	to	match.
       “Can	 I	help	you?”	 he	asked.
       Her	 knees	almost	buckled	 beneath	her	from	 nerves.	“I’m	  here	to	see	Mrs.
Kim?”
       “Can	 I	ask	who	you	are?”	His	 brows	furrowed.
       She	gulped.	“I’m	  someone	from	.	.	.	her	husband’s	past.”
       “You	  mean	a	friend?	Or	a	relative?”
       “Kind	  of,”	 she	said.	“Um,	yeah,	a	relative.”
       “One	 moment.”	 He	shut	the	door	as	she	waited.	Behind	 her,	the	landscaper
dumped	bare	branches	into	the	back	of	his	truck.	She	waved	hello	at	him,	and	he
nodded	back	under	his	cap.	The	cold	morning	air	smelled	like	fresh-cut	grass.
       A	 minute	later,	Dolce	 &	Gabbana	reappeared.	“Come	in,”	he	said.
       After	  walking	 through	the	entryway	 where	she	left	 her	shoes,	embarrassed
about	the	condition	 of	 her	dingy	 socks,	Margot	 perched	herself	 on	the	edge	of
the	ivory	tufted	 sofa	in	the	living	 room	 that	she	had	peered	in	on	the	other	night.
The	air	felt	impossibly	 crisp	 and	clean	inside	the	house	as	if	she	had	been	sealed
in	a	vacuum	of	 perfect	temperature	and	humidity	 and	light—both	 wondrous	and
eerie.
       “Can	 I	 help	 you?”	 Mrs.	 Kim	  asked	as	she	entered.	She	 tucked	her	 silky
black	hair	 behind	 her	ear,	 revealing	 a	large	 iridescent	pearl	 like	 a	 full	 moon,
hypnotic	and	 silvery.	 Her	fingernails	  were	shiny,	 oxblood-colored.	 She	wore	a
voluptuous	sweater,	snow-white,	 a	pair	of	 heather	gray	leggings,	 and	chic	mule
slippers	made	out	of	the	most	impractical	velvet.
       “You	  look	lovely,”	  Margot	said	out	loud,	 involuntarily,	 as	she	stood	up	like
a	suitor	in	a	Victorian	 novel.
       Mrs.	 Kim	 smiled	and	patted	herself	on	the	cheek,	blushing	as	she	sat	on	the
armchair	beside	the	 sofa.	“I	  try	 to	 take	good	 care	of	 my	 skin.	 Please,	have	a
seat.”	She	raised	her	brows.	“Could	I	offer	 you	something	to	drink?”
       “Oh,	 no,	not	right	 now,	thank	you.”
       “Is	 there	something	that	I	 can	help	you	with?	My	 driver	 mentioned	that	you
might	be	related	to	my	husband.	A	relative?”

164
       “Well,	  that’s	 one	way	 to	put	 it,”	 Margot	 said,	realizing	 that	her	 lover	was
the	driver.	She	couldn’t	wait	 to	tell	Miguel	 about	this.
       “And	  we’ve	 never	met?	You	 .	 .	.	 do	look	 familiar.”	  Mrs.	 Kim’s	 face	 was
indeed	beautiful,	in	 the	most	 idealized	Korean	way—line-free	  and	luminescent,
narrow	chin	 and	 jaw	 and	nose,	 creased	and	doe-like	 eyes—but	 immobile	 the
entire	time	 as	if	  she	didn’t	 quite	 feel	 anything	 anymore,	 or	as	 if	 there	was	 a
human	being	 trapped	behind	 the	 skin.	 She	was	like	  the	perfectly	  constructed
woman—from	 an	alien	planet,	luxurious	and	fur-covered.
       Suddenly,	 Margot	 became	very	self-conscious	about	her	 socks,	the	lack	of
makeup	or	any	color	on	her	face,	her	ragged	nails.
       Margot	 took	 a	deep	breath	and	began.	“I	don’t	really	 know	how	 to	say	this,
but—”
       Mrs.	  Kim’s	 driver-slash-lover	  reappeared.	“Would	 you	 like	 something	 to
drink?	I’m	 making	myself	 some	tea.”
       “Oh,	 no,	no	thanks,”	Margot	 said.	“Well	 .	.	.	what	kind	 of	tea?”
       “Green	 tea?”
       “Sure.”
       He	 nodded.	Mrs.	Kim	 stared	at	Margot’s	 face	as	if	she	recognized	her	from
somewhere.
       “So,	  a	couple	 weeks	 ago	.	 .	 .”	 Margot	  cleared	her	 throat.	 “I	  found	 my
mother’s	body	in	her	apartment	in	Koreatown.	 She	was	dead.	And	going	through
her	things,	I	found	your	husband’s	obituary	 in	an	envelope.”
       “What?”	  Mrs.	Kim’s	 mouth	dropped	open.
       “Well,	  let	me	backtrack.	I	never	knew	 my	dad.	I	grew	up	in	 Koreatown.	My
mom	was	working	 at	this	 supermarket	in	the	eighties,	 and	someone	she	worked
with	got	 her	pregnant,	and	he	left	 right	 after.	I	 never	knew	anything	 about	him,
but	when	I	saw	his	picture	in	the	obituary—”
       Mrs.	 Kim	 froze,	eyes	open	wide.
       “And	  then	my	mother’s	friend	 confirmed	that	he	is	my	dad.”
       “What’s	  your	mother’s	name?”
       “Mina.	  Mina	Lee.”
       “Oh	 my	 God,”	she	said,	slapping	her	hand	down	on	the	cushion	of	 her	seat.
Her	face	grew	red,	jaw	clenched.	“So,	that’s	who	 she	is.”
       The	 driver	  reappeared.	“Here’s	 your	 tea,”	 he	 said,	handing	 the	 delicate,
bone-colored	cup	on	a	saucer	to	Margot	then	exiting	the	room.
       An	 awkward	pause	fell	 before	Mrs.	Kim	 finally	 spoke.	“My	 husband	and	I	.
.	.	We	were	not	exactly	.	.	.	conventional.”
       “Okay.”
       “We	 have	always	been	very	open.”

165
       “You	  mean	.	.	.”
       “Open	 about	our	relationships	with	 others.”
       Margot	 almost	spit	the	tea	out	of	her	mouth.	“Like	 swingers?”
       “No,	 not	like	 that.”	She	gave	a	small	laugh.	“But	 we	were	.	.	.	flexible.”
       “Open	 relationship?”
       “Yes,	 basically.”
       “Wow.	  Modern.”	  Margot	 placed	 the	 cup	and	 saucer	on	 the	glass	 coffee
table	next	 to	perfectly	 positioned,	 untouched	 books	like	 monuments	 to	a	 very
predictable	taste—Richard	Avedon,	Chanel,	and	black-and-white	Paris.
       “Anyway,	  my	 husband	got	very	sick	over	 the	summer.	He	had	cancer.	And
I	had	seen	this	.	.	.”	her	voice	broke	“.	 .	.	woman’s	 name	that	he	had	been	calling
a	lot.	Mina.	Your	 .	.	.	mother.	I	 didn’t	 care	much.	So	what,	he’s	dying.	‘Go	 for	it.
Have	fun.’”	  Tendons	pulsed	in	 her	neck.	“But	 then	 after	he	died,	 I	realized—”
Her	eyes	widened.	“Do	you	know	 how	much	he	spent	on	that	woman?”
       “My	  mom?”
       “Yes,	 your	 mom.	Sorry.	 I’m	 sorry	for	 your	 loss.	I	mean—”	 She	gritted	her
perfect	teeth.	“Do	you	know	 how	much	he	spent?”
       “No.	  No,	  I	 don’t.	  I	  don’t	 know	  what	 you’re	  talking	  about	 at	 all.”	  A
heaviness	built	inside	of	Margot’s	 chest.	What	money?	None	of	this	made	sense.
       “He	  hired	an	 investigator	that	 he	had	been	using,	 for	 himself,	 to	 find	 out
some	things	for	her.	I	found	all	 these	receipts—”
       “What?”	  Margot	 exhaled,	letting	 all	the	 air	out	of	 her	lungs.	 She	had	been
holding	her	breath.	She	picked	up	 the	saucer	and	drank	some	of	the	tea	that	had
cooled	and	now	 tasted	faintly	 metallic.	 “What	  would	 she	have	been	using	this
investigator	for?”	 She	shook	her	 head.	“It’s	 not	 like	he	 spent	money	on	her	for
stuff.	There’s	nothing	of	value	where	she	lives.”
       “This	 investigator	 works	with	 people	all	 over	Korea	to	find	 missing	people,
missing	families,	  like	 the	 ones	who	 were	 separated	by	the	 war.	 My	 husband
found	out	about	his	 own	father	that	 way.”	 She	sighed.	“Not	 that	your	mother	 or
her	family	 didn’t	 matter,	 but	to	me,	 she	was	just	a	stranger,	see?	Some	random
woman	that	he	just	met.”
       “Do	  you	  know	 what	  she	 found	 out?	 Or	 what	  specific	 information	  he
would’ve—”
       “No.	  And	 I	tore	 it	all	 up.	 I	didn’t	  want	to	 look	at	 it	anymore.”	 Frustrated,
Mrs.	Kim	 pinched	between	her	brows	with	her	fingers.
       Margot	  felt	  a	 pang	 of	  remorse	 that	 she	 would	 never	  know	 what	  the
investigator	found.
       “Why	  would	 he	spend	so	 much?”	Mrs.	 Kim	  asked.	“But	 now	 .	.	 .	now	 it
makes	sense.”

166
       “I	 don’t	think	he	knew	about	me.”
       “But	 she	was	someone	from	his	past	then.	It	 was	some	kind	of	 deeper
relationship.	Maybe	he	even	.	.	.	loved	her,”	she	said,	biting	her	lip	as	if	ashamed
of	herself.
       Margot	didn’t	 know	what	to	 say.	“Why	did	 you	marry	him?”	she	asked.
“Did	you	ever	love	each	other?”
       “Yes,	I	suppose	so.	But	you	know,	it	just	made	the	most	sense.	He	was	rich,
and	I	wanted	security.	I	had	had	my	heart	broken	so	many	times	before	then.”
       “By	other	men?”
       “By	 all	kinds	of	people,”	she	said.	“I	used	to	feel	so	much,	you	know?	But
feelings	are	dangerous.”
       “Wouldn’t	life	 be	meaningless	without	them?”
       “Ha,	you’re	very	sentimental.	Like	your	father.”	Mrs.	Kim	nodded.	“I	never
understood	him	much,	to	be	honest.	He	was	so	different	from	everyone	else.”
       “How?”	 Margot	could	feel	the	grip	 of	her	muscles	loosening,	relieved	to
learn	even	this	tidbit	about	him—what	they	might	have	in	common.	For	a	few
seconds,	she	felt	less	alone.	It	was	wondrous	to	be	like	someone,	to	be	carrying
someone	else	in	your	blood	and	bones.	People	whom	you	might	not	have	even
met.
       “Oh,	in	 so	many	ways.	I	can’t	really	talk	about	this	right	now.”	Mrs.	Kim
wiped	carefully	at	the	inner	corners	of	her	eyes	with	her	fingertips.	“I	do	miss
him.”	She	exhaled	out	loud.	“I’m	sorry,	but	I	have	this	terrible	headache.”
       “Can	I	get	you	something?”
       “No,	no,	that’s	okay.”	She	shook	her	head.	“It’s	been	difficult	for	me,	now
that	I’m	on	my	 own.”	She	opened	her	eyes.	“He	took	care	of	everything,	you
know?	The	finances,	the	bills.	Now	what?	I’ll	probably	sell	all	the	supermarkets,
and	then?”
       The	driver	stood	by	the	wide	doorway,	waiting	and	watching	Margot.	She
could	feel	the	hair	on	the	back	of	her	neck	rising.
       “I	 should	sell	everything	and	travel	the	world,	don’t	you	think?	I	could	go
to	Machu	Picchu.	I’ve	always	wanted	to	go	there.	Have	you	been?”
       “No,	I’ve	never	been.”
       “It’s	 supposed	to	be	magical.”
       “Could	I—could	I	 get	your	number?”	Margot	asked.	“Maybe	when	things
settle	down,	we	can	talk	again,	before	you	go	to	Machu	Picchu.	I’d	love	to	learn
more	about	him.	I	know	that	it	brings	up	a	lot,	but	there	are	still	so	many	things	I
don’t	know,	like	what	he	was	doing	all	those	years	after	he	left	Koreatown,	why
he	left	my	mother	in	the	first	place.”
       “To	be	honest,	there	are	so	many	things	that	I	don’t	even	know	about	before

167
we—before	we	were	married.	Sungmin,	give	 her	my	number,	okay?”
       The	driver,	 Sungmin,	nodded.
       “Thank	 you	for	 visiting.	 What	was	your	name	again?”
       “Margot	  Lee.”	She	stood.
       “Thank	 you.	 What	a	lovely	 name,”	she	said.	“Sungmin	 will	 walk	 you	 out.”
Mrs.	Kim	 left	the	room,	rubbing	 her	temples.
       Following	   Sungmin	 to	 the	 entryway	 and	 lacing	 on	 her	 sneakers	again,
Margot	pulled	 out	her	phone	 for	him	 to	enter	Mrs.	 Kim’s	  information.	 After	 he
opened	the	 door,	 on	 an	 impulse,	  Margot	 asked,	 “Do	  you	 happen	 to	 know
anything	about	my	father?	When	did	you	start	working	 for	 him?”
       Sungmin	 shook	 his	head.	“Please	 leave.”	 He	tried	 to	 smile	 politely.	 “We
have	a	lot	to	get	done	today.”
       With	 his	hand,	he	gestured	like	an	usher	toward	the	exit.
       Margot	 stood	 at	the	doorway,	 facing	 the	driveway	  into	the	 honey-colored
morning	light.	 She	felt	a	hand	on	her	shoulder	and	then	a	small	shove.
       She	gasped	and	looked	back	at	him	as	the	door	shut.	He	had	touched	her.	It
had	all	happened	so	quickly	 she	didn’t	even	have	time	 to	react.	The	tiered	stone
fountain	 gushed	 water	 indefinitely.	  She	 smelled	 the	 fresh-cut	 grass	and	 the
undercurrent	of	something	foul	like	 manure	or	compost	in	the	air.
       He	 had	pushed	her.	 Not	 hard	but	 in	 a	way	 that	still	  alarmed	her	 with	 its
abruptness,	a	hand	out	of	nowhere.	And	she	could	still	taste	the	tea,	that	metallic
taste	in	her	mouth.
       The	 Virgin	 Mary’s	 face	was	half-smashed,	revealing	the	creamy	bone	color
inside.	 Her	 single	 dreamy	 eye	 and	 delicate	 mouth,	 pert	  and	peach-colored,
appeared	unbothered.	Beneath	 the	drape	 and	 the	folds	  of	 her	 sky	 blue	 cape
bordered	by	gold,	her	 arms	stretched	forward.	A	 bare	set	of	toes	peeked	out	the
bottom	of	 her	diaphanous	white	dress,	like	 that	of	 a	Greek	goddess,	on	top	of	a
serpent	flicking	a	tongue.
       Margot	 had	been	in	 bed	for	 the	past	two	days	sick—dizzy,	  sore,	and	tired,
immobilized	 yet	frustrated	by	 how	much	she	still	 had	left	 to	do.	She	now	sat	on
the	living	 room	 couch,	exhausted,	contemplating	 the	Virgin	  Mary	 in	 her	hand.
Margot	recalled	 how	 upset	Mrs.	Kim	  had	been	about	her	husband	spending	so
much	money	on	the	investigation	of	 her	mother’s	family.	 If	 she	called	Mrs.	Kim,
would	 she	provide	her	 with	 the	investigator’s	  number	so	that	 she	could	 figure
out	what	kind	 of	information	 he	had	found?	 Would	she	know	 enough	Korean	to
speak	with	him?
       And	 the	 push,	that	final	  push	on	the	 doorstep	by	the	 driver?	Why	 had	 he
done	that?	 Was	it	 a	 warning?	 The	 green	tea	had	 tasted	a	 bit	 metallic	 in	 her
mouth.	Poison	seemed	too	far-fetched—plus	 she	was	still	 alive—but	 the	timing

168
was	odd.	Was	this	all	about	money?	Was	Mrs.	Kim	 out	for	revenge?
       Should	 she	 call	 the	police,	 Officer	  Choi	 again?	But	 he	 had	said	 that	 he
didn’t	 think	 they	should	 be	contacting	Mrs.	 Kim.	  And	his	 hands	were	tied.	 He
couldn’t	get	further	 involved:	 I	don’t	 really	 see	what	else	I	can	do	here,	Margot.
As	far	  as	your	 mother’s	  death	goes—which	 was	 terrible,	  I’m	 sorry—it’s	  an
open-and-shut	case.	It	was	an	accident.
       As	 she	 turned	the	 statue	in	 her	 hands,	Margot	  inhaled	 through	 both	the
sadness	and	a	grave	feeling	of	 responsibility	 since	 she	had	found	her	 mother’s
body	two	weeks	ago.	It	was	as	if	 she	was	living	for	 both	of	them	now—thoughts
spinning,	heart	racing	wildly—but	  what	if	she	never	found	any	answers?
       Her	 phone	rang.	“How	are	you	feeling?”	 Miguel	 asked	when	she	picked	up.
       “Better.	 Not	 dead.”
       “You’ve	  been	working	 pretty	 hard	over	 there.	Visiting	 Mrs.	 Baek,	visiting
Mrs.	Kim.	 Maybe	you	should	relax	a	little.”
       “I	 guess	now	that	I’m	 sick,	I	kind	 of	have	to.”
       “Could	 I	 get	you	something?	I	could	drive	over	 later	tonight?”
       “No,	 no,	 thanks.	If	I	 don’t	feel	 better	by	tomorrow,	 I’ll	 find	 a	doctor.	I’ll	  be
fine.”
       After	  hanging	up	 the	phone,	she	went	 into	her	 room,	retrieved	 one	of	 her
old	unused	notebooks	 from	 her	desk	drawer,	 and	sketched	the	broken	 Mary—
fragments	of	 her	 face,	 her	 toes,	the	 serpent’s	 tongue	at	 her	 feet.	 Her	 pencil
pressed	onto	paper	the	big	 blue	eye,	thin	 round	brow,	 the	perfect	 Cupid’s	 bow
mouth.
       It	 had	 been	years	since	Margot	 had	 been	compelled	to	 draw.	 Despite	her
lack	of	 technical	skill,	  she	had	a	way	of	 juxtaposing	 images	unexpectedly.	She
always	suspected	she	might	have	a	knack	for	something	more	three-dimensional,
something	akin	to	 mixed	 media	or	assemblage,	which	 required	more	space	and
would	 be	difficult	  to	 describe.	The	 point	 was	that	 it	 would	 tell	 its	 own	story,
invent	its	 own	dimension	 and	time.	But	 all	 of	this	 sounded	so	high-minded	and
ridiculous	 for	 a	woman	 like	 her	to	 pursue,	a	woman	 who	had	 grown	 up	poor,
who	had	been	surrounded	most	of	her	life	by	people	struggling	 to	keep	the	lights
on	and	food	on	the	table.
       Yet,	 everyone	needed	art.	Why	else	did	her	mother	assign	so	much	care	into
the	fruit	  that	 she	 sliced,	 that	 long	  peel	 of	 skin,	 a	 ribbon	  that	 revealed	the
tenderness	of	the	flesh	inside?	 Or	the	 tiny	 flick	 of	 her	eyeliner	 that	she	angled
perfectly	in	 the	mirror,	 the	arrangement	of	the	outfits	 that	she	hung	on	the	walls
of	 her	 store.	Her	  mother,	 who	 was	 in	 another	 life	 a	 clothing	  designer,	had
sometimes	caught	Margot	 drawing.	 Once	when	Margot	 was	in	 the	sixth	 grade,
still	 young	enough	to	not	 understand	how	distant	 her	own	tiny	 family	 had	 been

169
from	 ideal,	 she	had	been	 sketching	a	 portrait	 of	 her	 mother’s	 face—the	 high
cheekbones,	the	narrow	chin,	the	soft	brown	eyes	that	shone	as	if	on	the	verge	of
tears,	water	lapping	at	a	lake’s	edge.
       “Let	 me	see.”	Her	 mother	grabbed	the	drawing.	Squinting,	she	held	it	 to	the
yellow	light	 above	the	dining	table.	“Am	 I	 this	old	already?”
       Margot	 didn’t	 have	a	response.	Her	mother	was	the	most	beautiful	person	in
the	world.
       It	 became	difficult	 for	 Margot	 to	understand	what	to	create.	As	a	child,	 she
hated	to	upset	her	mother.	 Instead	she	stuck	to	 close-ups	of	 flowers	 or	trees—
evergreen	in	winter	 or	 deciduous	and	 mustard	yellow	 and	blood	 orange	in	 the
fall—pastoral	 landscapes	that	she	copied	out	of	wall	calendars,	which	bored	her,
but	what	else	could	she	do?	She	hated	to	draw	her	own	face—a	face	she	couldn’t
quite	recognize	in	her	mother	or	anywhere	else	on	TV	or	in	 the	movies—the	face
of	a	stranger,	a	foreigner,	anonymous	and	plain.
       Later	 as	 a	teenager,	abstract	 sculpture	like	  that	of	 Ruth	 Asawa	 and	 Lee
Bontecou,	assemblage,	and	installation	had	captured	her	imagination.	She	would
have	the	urge	to	 topple	 trashcans	over,	scour	for	 materials,	 but	how	 could	 she
explain	this	 to	her	 mother?	And	 where	 would	 she	store	all	 her	projects?	Their
apartment	was	too	small.	Of	course,	she’d	have	to	run	from	this	place.
       But	 after	she	had	finally	  left	for	 Seattle,	after	college,	 her	student	debt	had
grown	and	she	settled	into	a	desk	job,	the	first	one	she	could	find	 that	also	might
benefit	society.	 At	 the	nonprofit,	  all	of	 the	 clients	and	 many	of	 her	coworkers
were	blind	or	had	low	 vision	 and	navigated	the	world	in	 ways	that	startled	her—
a	white	cane	and	GPS,	Braille	watches,	software	that	read	screens	out	loud.
       The	 first	year	or	 so	had	been	almost	inspirational,	a	marvel,	but	quickly	 her
administrative	 tasks	 had	 become	 insurmountable	  piles,	 deadening	 levels	 of
repetition	on	her	desk.	Her	life	 smelled	of	 printer	toner,	sounded	like	 the	gulp	of
the	water	cooler,	the	 beep	and	whir	of	 the	copy	 machine.	Of	 course,	after	three
years	of	 this,	 her	 relationship	 last	 year	with	  Jonathan,	a	coworker,	  had	been
thrilling—the	  warm	animal	 breath,	the	pulse,	 the	tiny	 hairs	on	 her	arms	rising.
She	needed	 danger.	 The	 thrill	   of	 sex	 drowned	  out	 her	 burning	  questions,
replaced	the	real	dangers	that,	when	 pursued,	might	actually	 kill	  her.	Who	 was
she?	What	would	happen	if	she	were	unafraid	of	herself?
       Margot	 had	always	guarded	the	different	parts	of	 her	life	from	 each	other—
her	mother,	 her	 friends,	 past	 boyfriends,	 coworkers.	 If	  none	 of	 those	things
touched,	if	she	could	keep	them	in	isolation,	she	could	never	be	hurt	or	destroyed
entirely.	 The	constant	 yet	quiet	 construction	 of	 separate	rooms,	compartments
around	her.	But	 most	of	 the	 time,	she	felt	 alone	 in	the	 center	of	 that	building.
Lightless	and	airtight.

170
       Her	 mother’s	death	had	burned	that	structure	of	Margot’s	life	 to	the	ground.
       She	attempted	now	 to	 draw	her	mother’s	 face	again	 on	a	blank	 page—the
soft	 brown	 eyes	 and	 narrow	  chin,	 her	 hair	  in	 a	 bob—just	  as	 Margot	 had
remembered	her	the	last	time	she	had	seen	her.	And	 then	on	the	opposite	 page,
she	drew	her	father’s	face	as	best	as	she	could	from	her	memory	of	the	obituary.
She	carved	the	outlines	of	their	faces	in	pencil,	 the	wrinkles	 around	the	eyes	and
between	the	brows.
       When	 she	stopped	to	rest,	exhausted,	she	realized	that	when	she	closed	her
notebook,	pressing	together	 the	pages,	they	 would	 nearly	 kiss	again—features
overlapping	each	other’s.

171
    Mina

Winter	1988

172
       WITH	MR.	PARK,	LUPE,	AND	MR.	KIM	GONE,	THE	DAY	passed	with	a	silent	and
intense	melancholy.	Word	 had	gotten	out,	 and	although	no	one	 said	a	thing,	no
one	acknowledged	what	happened	or	what	 could’ve	 happened,	Mina	could	 feel
the	tension,	the	sadness	as	thick	and	inescapable	as	the	city’s	smog.
       Everyone	 sensed	that	neither	 Lupe	nor	 Mr.	 Kim	  would	 ever	be	back	 and
that	if	they,	too,	wanted	to	keep	their	jobs,	 they	better	avoid	getting	in	the	way	 of
Mr.	Park.	 Perhaps	it	had	been	that	way	all	 along	and	Mina	 only	 noticed	it	 now,
naively.	 When	she	 thought	about	 everyone’s	 interactions	 and	air	 around	him,
they	each	had	already	 been	taking	 their	precautions	 as	most	people	do	 around
powerful	people	in	 even	the	tiniest	universe	of	a	supermarket.	Perhaps	they	each
silently	 knew	 that	 their	 positions	 were	 always	 tenuous,	that	 they	 could	 each
become	someone’s	prey.
       Standing	 at	 the	register,	 heavy	as	 a	sack	of	 grain,	 she	 tried	not	 to	 think
about	Mr.	 Kim	 or	 Lupe,	or	 the	gun	that	 she	had	taken	from	 him	 this	 morning.
She	had	 crept	 up	 to	 him,	  still	  snoring.	 She	yearned	 to	 smooth	 the	 creases
between	his	brows	where	she	kissed	him,	inhaling	his	morning	 breath,	which	she
had	never	minded.	It	 was	the	smell	 of	his	comfort,	 his	 rest.	She	slid	the	drawer
open	beside	his	bed.	The	gun	bag	was	lighter	than	she	had	expected.	As	she	rode
the	bus	 to	 work,	 she	kept	 her	 large	 brown	 purse	 on	her	 lap,	 cautious	 about
putting	any	pressure	on	it,	 as	if	it	 possessed	a	wild	animal,	a	snake,	tranquilized
for	now	but	vicious	 and	unpredictable.
       Now	  Mina	 listened	for	 the	 beeping	sound	and	stared	off	  into	 space,	only
paying	 attention	 when	 she	 received	 cash	 from	 the	 customer	 and	 doled	 out
change.	At	this	point	she	had	memorized	most	of	the	produce	and	could	enter	the
codes	without	having	to	look	 at	the	keypad.
       During	  her	 break,	 she	 called	 Mr.	 Kim	  on	 a	 pay	 phone	 outside	 of	 the
supermarket.	No	 one	answered.	Who	 knew	 what	 he	was	 going	 through	now?
Was	he	already	in	jail?	 She	wanted	to	contact	Lupe	but	didn’t	  have	her	number.
She,	too,	must	have	been	figuring	 out	 what	to	 do,	how	 she	would	find	 work	 to
help	Mario,	to	feed	her	kids.
       Mina	  wished	she	had	a	 cigarette	to	 smoke	so	that	 she	had	a	reason	to	be
outside,	feeling	self-conscious	 after	a	few	 minutes	of	standing	 as	if	waiting,	 but
waiting	for	 what?	She	went	inside.	Avoiding	  the	rear	of	the	store	altogether,	she
didn’t	even	use	the	restroom.	She	would	wait	all	day	until	 she	got	home.
       Later	 that	night	at	the	bus	stop,	she	stood,	light-headed	and	nauseous,	by	the
transit	sign	 alone.	 She	had	 almost	forgotten	  about	the	 gun	 in	 her	purse.	 She
sensed	that	things	would	never	 be	the	same	again,	that	Mr.	 Kim	 would	 have	to
find	a	new	job,	 that	she,	who	wouldn’t	 be	able	to	look	 at	Mr.	 Park,	had	to	find	 a
new	one,	too.	How	could	 she	get	into	this	kind	of	 disaster	so	quickly,	after	being

173
in	America	for	 less	than	a	year?
       As	 the	headlights	 of	 the	bus	approached,	she	had	the	 sudden	urge	to	step
out	in	front.	Just	one	foot.
       Like	 a	deer	in	the	road,	crossing,	unaware.	It	would	be	that	simple	and	pure.
An	erasure.	Another	body	in	the	morgue.
       The	 bus	swerved,	screeching	to	a	halt.	The	driver,	her	eyes	wide	and	mouth
open,	appeared	shocked,	sad,	then	upset.
       Mina	 thought	to	run	away	but	 where?	How	could	she	keep	running?
       Instead,	she	got	on	the	bus	with	her	head	hanging,	eyes	on	the	ground.
       “What	   are	you	  doing?”	  the	 driver	  demanded.	“Are	  you	  trying	  to	 get
yourself	killed?	 You’re	trying	 to	get	us	all	killed?”
       Mina	  walked	 through	the	 center	aisle,	 past	the	perked	 ears,	the	watching
eyes.	She	wedged	herself	between	 two	passengers,	one	who	 didn’t	 care	at	 all,
and	the	other	an	older	woman	who	was	in	shock.
       Mina	  glanced	forward	  to	 see	the	driver	  raise	her	 hands	in	 exasperation,
letting	 them	fall	 at	 her	thighs	 with	 a	slap.	 In	 the	rearview	 mirror,	 the	 driver’s
face	softened	into	 a	broken	heart,	as	she	mouthed,	“Fuck,”	  to	herself.	 She	shut
the	heavy	doors,	driving	toward	the	next	stop.
       In	 the	kitchen,	Mrs.	Baek	stood	at	the	stove,	stirring	a	pot.
       Trying	  to	go	unnoticed,	 Mina	slipped	 off	 her	shoes	and	headed	toward	her
room.	She	yearned	to	disappear.	She	hadn’t	slept	at	all	last	night.	But	 before	she
could	reach	her	door,	Mrs.	Baek	asked,	“Did	you	 eat	dinner	yet?”
       “No,	 not	yet.	I’m	 very	 tired.”
       “You	  don’t	look	 so	good.	Are	you	getting	sick?”
       “Maybe.”
       “Do	 you	want	 to	join	me?”
       “That’s	 okay.	 I	have	a	phone	call	to	make.”
       Mrs.	  Baek	 suspended	the	 wooden	 spoon	 in	  the	 air,	 like	  a	 baton	 in	 a
marching	band.	“Why	 don’t	you	join	 me	after	your	phone	call?”
       “Um	 .	.	.”
       “I	 can	wait.	 Go	ahead	and	make	your	call.”
       Without	 any	energy	left,	 Mina	unlocked	 her	bedroom	door,	and	once	inside,
dropped	all	  her	belongings	 on	 the	 ground.	 She	picked	 up	 the	 phone	 on	 her
nightstand	 and	spun	 by	 memory	  Mr.	 Kim’s	  number	 on	 the	 rotary	  dial.	 No
answer.
       After	  using	the	 restroom,	 she	sat	in	 the	breakfast	 nook	across	from	 Mrs.
Baek,	who	had	been	sipping	on	a	mug	of	barley	tea,	waiting.
       “You	  don’t	look	 good	at	all,”	she	said.
       “I’ve	  been	working	a	lot,”	 Mina	 replied.	“Stomach	problems.”

174
       “Like	  what?”
       “When	 I	 get	stressed	out,	I	have	trouble	 eating.	And	 when	I	 do	eat,	I	want
to	throw	up.”
       “Your	  boyfriend—everything	 okay?”
       “Yes.”
       “You	  sure?”	 Mrs.	 Baek	 placed	her	 hand	on	 top	 of	 Mina’s.	 “Maybe	  you
have	some	kind	of	stomach	bug?	You	look	very	pale.”
       “Yes,	 that’s	probably	 what	it	is.”
       “Let	 me	make	you	some	rice	porridge,”	 Mrs.	Baek	said,	standing	up.
       “Don’t	  trouble	yourself.	 Thank	you.	No,	really.”
       “Don’t	  worry.	 It	 won’t	 take	long.	Why	 don’t	you	 go	back	to	bed?	I’ll	 wake
you	up	when	it’s	ready.”
       Mina	  dragged	herself	 to	 her	room	 again	 where	 she	lay	 down	 and	cried,
blotting	 the	corners	of	her	 eyes	with	her	 blanket.	She	didn’t	 want	 Mrs.	Baek	 to
see	her	that	way—just	 another	woman	sobbing	in	 a	room	 by	herself.	 But	that’s
what	she	was,	wasn’t	she?	She	had	this	crushing	feeling	that	she’d	never	see	Mr.
Kim	again.	How	 could	she	feel	like	this,	how	 could	she	allow	this	to	happen?
       She	closed	her	eyes	and	drifted	 off	to	 sleep	until	she	heard	a	knock,	maybe
ten	or	thirty	 minutes	later,	she	couldn’t	 tell.	Before	 she	could	say	anything,	Mrs.
Baek	poked	her	head	in	through	the	door.
       “Sorry	 to	wake	you	 up,”	she	said.	“I	have	your	porridge.”
       “Oh,	  that’s	okay.	 Thank	 you.”	 Mina	 tried	 to	 rise	up	 from	 the	bed	on	 her
elbows	in	time	to	meet	Mrs.	Baek,	but	her	arms	collapsed	beneath	her.
       “Oh,”	  Mrs.	 Baek	said,	 approaching	to	 help.	“When	 was	 the	last	time	 you
ate?”
       “I	 don’t	 remember.	I	don’t	 think	I	 ate	yesterday.”
       “You	  have	to	eat	something	before	you	fall	asleep	then.”
       Mina	 slumped	over	on	the	bed,	leaning	against	the	wall.	 Mrs.	Baek	held	the
bowl	of	porridge	 with	a	metal	spoon,	contemplating	Mina’s	 face.
       “Here,	 take	a	bite,”	she	said,	holding	the	spoon	up	to	Mina’s	 mouth.
       The	 tenderness	of	the	gesture	made	Mina’s	 eyes	water	 again.	Tears	rolled
down	her	cheeks,	and	she	couldn’t	help	but	cover	her	face,	as	if	 to	shield	herself
from	the	kindness	of	someone	else.
       The	 phone	 rang,	waking	 Mina	  from	 a	deep	sleep	 she	had	achieved	 only
after	a	few	hours	of	 tossing	and	turning	and	pounding	the	 mattress	with	her	fists
in	sadness	and	in	rage.	She	grabbed	the	receiver,	suddenly	wide	awake.
       “Mr.	  Kim?”	 she	asked.
       “Yes.”	  His	voice	was	weary.
       “Are	  you	 okay?	 Where	 are	you?”	  she	cried.	 “Where	  are	you?	 Are	 you

175
leaving	me?”
       He	 took	a	deep	breath.	“I’m	.	.	.	I’m	 at	the	airport.”
       “What?	 What	 are	you	doing	there?”	She	couldn’t	 control	 herself.	She	knew
what	 he	 was	 about	to	  say.	 She	knew	  this	 was	 going	 to	 happen.	 She	 kept
repeating	this	 over	and	over	 again	to	 punish	 herself,	to	 teach	herself	a	 lesson.
Just	like	the	women	 at	the	orphanage	who	would	 punish	her	when	she	was	bad,
when	they	caught	her	 stealing,	when	she	spoke	up	against	them.	 She	knew	this
was	going	to	happen.	This	is	why	nobody	wants	you,	they’d	say.
       “I	 can’t	 talk	long.	I	 went	to	see	Lupe	yesterday.	She’s	going	to	be	okay.	She
has	some	people	at	church,	family	 to	 help	her,	so	don’t	 worry	 about	her,	okay?
She’s	going	to	be	fine.	Worry	 about	yourself,	okay?”
       “What	 about	you?	Where	are	you	going?”
       “I’ve	  got	a	cousin	in	Chicago.	I’m	 going	to	.	.	.	leave	for	 a	little	while.”
       “How	  long?”	she	asked.
       “I	 don’t	 know	yet.”
       “A	  while?”
       “Maybe.”
       “Can	 I	come	with	 you?”
       “No,	 I	 don’t	think	 that’s	best	for	now.”
       “Why	  don’t	you	 take	me	with	you?	Why	 don’t	 you	take	me	with	you?”	 Her
voice	rose,	echoing	throughout	 the	house.	She	didn’t	care	who	 heard	her.	“Why
don’t	you	take	me	with	 you?”
       “It’s	  not	 that	easy.	I	would.	 There’s	 just	.	.	 .	It’s	 too	 dangerous	right	now.
I’m	 sorry.”	  She	could	 hear	him	 crying.	  “I	 never	 wanted	to	 hurt	 you.	 I	 never
wanted	to	hurt	anyone.	I	didn’t	 think—”
       “Then	 take	me	with	you.	 I	have	nothing	here.	Take	me	with	you.”
       “I	  can’t.	 It’d	 be	easier	to	 hide	by	 myself.	 It’s	 safer	for	 you	this	 way.”	 He
paused,	gulping	breath.	“Did	you	take	the	gun?”
       She	didn’t	 answer,	heart	racing.
       “Be	 careful	 with	 that.	It’s	 loaded,	okay?	Don’t	 take	it	out	 of	the	bag	unless
you	need	it.	Protect	yourself,	okay?	Be	careful.”
       “I	  can	handle	 him	 myself.”	  Her	 voice	 shook	like	  an	earthquake,	rattling
every	bone	in	her	body.
       “Just,	 be	careful.	I’m—I’m	  sorry.	I	love	 you.”	He	hung	up	the	phone.
       She	threw	 the	receiver,	which	 hit	 the	wall	 with	 a	loud	crash.	The	 sound	of
the	dial	tone	drove	her	to	pick	 the	receiver	up	and	smash	it	into	the	phone	with	 a
crack,	crack,	 a	hollow	  plastic	 sound.	She	didn’t	 care	 anymore	if	 she	broke	 it.
This	was	the	time	now.	This	 was	the	time	to	end	it	 all.	She	could	hang	herself	in
her	room.	She	had	sheets.	She	could	tie	them	around	the	door,	slip	 them	around

176
her	neck	and	end	everything,	the	way	she	should’ve	ended	things	before	coming
to	this	strange	country,	before	Mr.	Park	could	ruin	 all	of	 them,	before,	before	.	.	.
       Before	 the	Ferris	wheel,	before	the	salt	in	 the	air,	the	taste	of	hot	chocolate,
once	again,	falling	prey	 to	the	dazzling	deception	of	the	world,	 the	blush	and	the
bloom	inside	her	chest.
       But	 she	could	kill	  Mr.	 Park	before	taking	 her	own	life.	 She	could	find	 him
in	his	office.	 She	had	the	gun.	She	could	end	him.	She	could	end	him	 in	front	 of
everyone.	 Who	  knew	  how	  many	 he	  had	 terrorized?	  How	  many	  he	 had
cannibalized	for	his	own	gain?	How	 many	of	them	had	he	hurt?	How	many	more
lives	could	he	ruin?	She	had	nothing	to	lose	now.
       Someone	pounded	on	the	door.
       Mina	 cried	out,	“Not	 now.”
       “Are	 you	 okay?”	Mrs.	Baek	asked.
       “Go	 away.”
       She	could	 tell	 that	Mrs.	 Baek	still	 stood	on	 the	other	side,	waiting	 for	 her,
for	anything.
       “Go	  away,”	 she	screamed.	She	grabbed	a	pillow	and	threw	it	at	the	door.
       Mrs.	 Baek	tried	the	knob.	Finding	 it	locked,	she	pushed	her	way	through	the
flimsy	wood.
       Shock	 and	 terror	distorted	 Mrs.	 Baek’s	 face	 at	the	 sight	 of	 Mina	 on	 the
floor.
       Mina	 saw	herself	through	Mrs.	 Baek’s	eyes.	She	wanted	to	kill	 herself	even
more.
       Mrs.	 Baek	knelt	to	the	ground	beside	her,	trying	to	 help	her	stand	up.
       “Get	  your	hands	off	  me.”	Mina	  vomited	 a	yellowish	 fluid,	  right	 onto	her
own	chest.
       Mrs.	 Baek	 wrapped	 her	arms	around	 Mina,	 dragging	 her	to	 the	restroom
where	she	had	 her	sit	 on	 the	 f	 loor	 beside	the	 toilet.	 Mina	 threw	 up	 the	 sad
remains	of	 last	 night’s	 paltry	 dinner,	 the	 rice	 porridge.	 Mrs.	 Baek	 grabbed	a
towel	and	wiped	 down	Mina’s	 face,	covered	in	tears	and	snot	like	 a	child’s.	 She
then	handed	the	towel	to	Mina,	who	blew	her	nose.
       She	couldn’t	 stop	crying,	her	breath	rushing	in	and	out.
       Both	 of	 them	knew	as	they	sat	on	 the	floor	 beside	the	toilet	 that	Mina	 was
pregnant.

177
  Margot

Winter	2014

178
       THE	MONDAY	BEFORE	CHRISTMAS,	MARGOT	WAS	FINALLY	feeling	better.	She
had	been	in	 bed	for	 the	past	several	days,	 overcome	by	 weakness	and	nausea.
Was	it	 simply	  grief	 and	 exhaustion,	the	 beginnings	 of	 the	flu,	  or	 poisoning?
Miguel	 had	 offered	 to	 drive	 her	to	 a	 clinic	  or	hospital,	 but	 she	 had	refused,
unwilling	 to	deal	with	 the	worries	of	insurance,	inor	out-of-network.
       And	 for	 the	first	 time	 in	a	while,	 she	woke	 up	early	 this	morning	 with	 the
urge	to	prepare	breakfast,	sunny-side	up	eggs	on	rice.	Afterward,	she	cleaned	out
her	mother’s	 kitchen,	 emptying	 cupboards	and	drawers,	still	 sticky	 from	 a	 life
rushed	between	work	and	home.	The	nutty	dark	amber	of	sesame	oil—heavy	and
clinging—remained	 in	a	half-full	 bottle.	 A	squeeze	bottle	of	honey—crystallized
into	sugar,	rough	on	the	tongue—had	glued	itself	 down,	leaving	a	dark	footprint,
a	sweet	oval	on	the	lining	of	a	shelf.
       Margot	  had	 already	 touched	 most	 of	 everything	  in	 the	 kitchen	  with	 a
practical	 intimacy	  her	 entire	 life—no	  secrets,	 no	 other	 lives.	  But	 even	 the
utensils,	 a	 hodgepodge	 of	  stainless	 steel,	 became	 tiny	  monuments—sharp,
reflective,	serrated,	and	curved	with	feeling.
       Growing	  up,	she	had	hated	using	chopsticks.	She	had	refused	them,	seated
at	the	 table	 with	 her	 mother—different	  instruments	 in	 their	 hands—as	if	  the
inches	between	them	were	as	expansive	as	a	continental	 divide,	 the	dark	rift	 of
an	ocean.	And	 yet,	despite	 this	daily	  breach,	this	rupture	 between	mother	 and
daughter,	hands	posed	around	shapes	foreign	to	each	other,	she	remembered	the
bowls	of	 rice	her	 mother	had	fed	 her,	the	banchan,	the	stews,	the	 fruit	 she	had
meticulously	 peeled	and	sliced,	 and	 how	food	 was	 perhaps	the	most	 practical
and	necessary	means	by	which	 Margot	 could	access	the	stories	and	 memories,
the	sap	running	inside	her	mother.
       They	 had	spoken	different	 languages—drifting	 further	 and	further	 apart	as
Margot	 had	 gotten	 older.	  Margot’s	  mother	 never	 learned	 much	  English	 in
Koreatown,	didn’t	 have	to,	and	Margot,	 who	spent	so	little	 time	with	 her	mother
besides	working	long	 hours	at	the	 store,	distanced	herself	from	 Korean	culture,
which	she	associated	with	alienness	and	poverty	and	war.	She	wanted	to	live	like
“real	 Americans”	  on	television	  with	 their	 clean	 surfaces,	their	  walls	 without
cracks	and	chipped	paint,	their	dishwashers	and	shiny	appliances.	She	wanted	to
live	like	 they	did	in	 books—those	precarious	and	fragile	skylines	 in	Mrs.	 Baek’s
apartment,	paper	like	 teeth	once	white,	 now	yellow—with	   beauty	and	complex
feelings,	agency,	choice	interrupted	by	fate,	and	vice	versa.
       Her	 mother’s	 life	 seemed	to	 have	little	  self-determination	 at	all,	 only	 the
burden	of	 getting	 by,	 knowing	 that	 no	 matter	how	 hard	 she	had	worked,	 she
would	 never	leave	 that	 apartment.	And	 that	 was	 exactly	 what	had	 happened,
wasn’t	it?	 Her	 mother	never	left	 that	 place.	A	 woman,	 alone,	fallen	 to	tragedy

179
and	fate,	men	who	would	leave	and	destroy	her.
       She	was	like	a	lot	of	us.	Lonely.	But	 that’s	what	it’s	 like	for	 women	like	us.
       The	foul	 stench	of	the	body—bile	 and	rotting	fruit.
       But	 was	 it	an	 accident?	Or	intentional?	 There	was	 still	 Mrs.	 Kim	 and	her
driver,	 Sungmin.	 The	 surprising	 push	 of	 his	 hand,	as	 if	 Margot	 was	 just	 an
animal	who	had	wandered	in	off	 the	street.	And	where	was	the	landlord	still?	 He
couldn’t	be	trusted	either.
       Retiring	 to	the	couch,	Margot	 sketched	in	her	notebook	a	single	fork	on	one
page	and	a	set	of	 chopsticks	 on	the	next	 so	that	 she	could	 flip	 between	them,
their	shapes.	She	wanted	to	live	somewhere	in	that	movement,	 like	the	beat	of	 a
dove’s	wing.
       There	were	so	many	things	that	she	could	never	explain	to	her	mother.	Even
if	they	had	spoken	the	same	languages,	the	chasm	that	divided	them	would	have
still	  been	too	  great.	 In	 some	 ways,	  Margot’s	  success	in	 this	  country,	  her
independence,	relied	  on	  this	  distance	 from	  her	 mother—her	  poverty,	  her
foreignness,	the	alienation	 of	her	 life,	 the	heaviness	of	 her	thankless	work,	 the
hours	and	minutes,	 ignored	and	 even	reviled	 by	the	 world.	 And	 there	were	 so
many	ways	 to	 be	crushed,	 to	 have	your	 heart	 broken	navigating	  that	canyon
between	them—what	 they	 could	 not	 say,	what	 they	 had	 said	to	 wound	 each
other.
       But	  maybe	only	  here	in	  these	pages,	in	 these	 drawings,	 if	 Margot	  had
shown	 more	 commitment	 to	 their	  relationship,	 if	  she	 had	 been	unafraid	  of
commitment,	could	 her	mother	have	understood:	that	Margot	 would	 never	leave
her	in	the	end,	that	she	would,	despite	the	distance	that	separated	them,	never	let
go	of	her	hand.
       After	  finishing	 the	kitchen,	 Margot	 cleaned	her	mother’s	 room,	where	 she
once	again	found	the	sneakers	covered	in	fine	dust,	the	condom	wrapper	beneath
the	bed.	She	threw	the	discarded,	forgotten	objects	away	and	placed	the	shoes	in
the	garbage	bag,	knowing	now	that	these	were	remnants	of	her	mother’s	reunion
with	her	father,	Mr.	 Kim.
       On	 her	mother’s	bed,	that	 sad	teddy	bear,	dingy	with	 time,	 clung	to	 a	satin
red	heart	attached	 to	its	 round	 cartoon	paws.	 She	squeezed	the	heart	 and	felt
something	hard	 inside.	 Her	 pulse	 began	 to	 pound.	 She	tore	 apart	 the	seam,
sloppy	and	hand	stitched.
       A	 piece	of	paper	with	 a	box	number	and	a	bank’s	name	and	a	small	key	fell
out.
       She	 ripped	 open	the	 rest	 of	 the	 bear	but	 didn’t	  find	 anything	 else.	 She
scavenged	through	  her	 mother’s	 belongings,	  checking	 the	 pockets	 and	  the
linings	even	more	 carefully	 now	for	 anything,	any	clue	 that	could	somehow	 not

180
eliminate	but	ease	the	pain,	the	barrage	of	questions	clawing	inside	her	head.	She
wanted	answers	now.	She	wanted	her	mother	to	be	alive	so	that	she	could	finally
ask	her	all	 the	 things	 she	had	always	 wanted	to	 ask,	all	 the	 things	 she	found
herself	too	 frightened	 to	 ask	 before	 this.	 Her	 mother’s	 life	 and	 her	past	 had
always	been	 so	carefully	  guarded.	It	 always	 felt	  like	 the	 wrong	 move,	 look,
touch,	or	words	would	break	her	mother	forever.
       As	 a	child	 of	four	 or	five	 seated	in	the	lukewarm	 tub	of	 milky	 Dove	 soap–
scented	water,	scratching	the	petals	of	the	anti-slip	 stickers	beneath	her,	Margot
had	asked,	“Where	is	my	father?”
       Her	 mother,	knees	on	the	bathroom	floor,	 had	winced,	pausing	to	reflect.	 “I
don’t	know.	 He	left	us	a	long	time	ago.”
       “Where	  did	 he	go?”	 Margot	  asked	the	ceiling	  above,	sloshing	 the	water
with	her	feet.
       “I	  don’t	 know.”	  Her	mother	 adjusted	her	legs,	 hands	covered	in	 foam.	 “I
never	had	a	father,	too.	You	ask	too	many	questions.”	 A	tear	slid	 down	her	face,
quick	and	silent.
       Tilting	  her	head	back	as	her	mother	poured	water	from	above,	careful	not	to
splash	her	face,	Margot	 yearned	to	push	the	 tears	back	in	her	 mother’s	eyes.	It
was	excruciating	 to	 watch	her	 mother,	who	 worked	 tirelessly	 and	silently	  day
after	 day,	 emote,	 expose	 herself	 at	  once.	 In	 these	 rare	 moments	 of	  great
tenderness	and	fragility,	their	sanity	 rattling	 like	glass	cups	in	a	cupboard	during
a	quake,	Margot	learned	that	 families	were	 our	greatest	source	of	pain,	whether
they	had	lost	or	abandoned	us	or	simply	scrubbed	our	heads.
       All	  of	these	feelings	had	turned	into	 a	kind	 of	rage	when	Margot	 became	a
teenager,	when	the	 world	 demanded	answers:	 Where	is	 your	 dad?	 You	don’t
have	a	dad?	 What	does	your	 mom	do	 for	 a	living?	  You’ve	been	living	  in	that
apartment	for	 how	 long?	 Questions	that	were	 judgments	around	 what	she	and
her	mother	could	not	afford	or	control.
       It	 was	all	about	control,	wasn’t	 it?
       Money	 could	make	the	world	 intimately	 spotless.	That	was	the	illusion.
       Kneeling	  on	the	 carpet,	Margot	  contemplated	the	 small	key	 on	 the	table
beside	her	mother’s	bed.	A	key	 was	such	an	obvious	symbol,	 yet	sometimes	the
truth	 was	always	 there,	 right	 in	 front	  of	 your	 face,	 until	  you	 were	ready	 to
swallow	 its	shape	and	all	 its	edges,	until	 you	 knew	you	 were	strong	enough	 to
bear	its	weight.
       It	 had	been	eight	years	since	she	had	moved	to	Seattle,	eight	 years	of	half-
understood	conversations	 over	 the	 phone	and	 visits	 during	  the	holidays	  that
revolved	around	work.	 Margot	 had	believed	 they	could	 go	on	this	 way	forever,
that	this	distance	hurt	them	both	the	least.

181
       But	 she	now	knew	there	was	so	much	truth	undisclosed.	Like	a	tree	that	had
lost	its	 leaves,	silently	  bracing	 itself	 against	wind	 and	 cold,	 the	sap	inside	 of
them	could,	under	the	right	 conditions,	 push	the	green,	those	tender	revelations,
out	of	them	once	more.
       With	  her	 mother’s	  safety-deposit	 key	 and	 papers	in	 her	 purse,	 Margot
opened	the	apartment	door	and	looked	behind	her	to	observe	the	condition	of	her
mother’s	home—donation	bags	everywhere	and	piles	of	 junk	in	 the	center	of	the
room.	The	scene	both	satisfied	and	terrified	 her	at	once.	She	had	finally	 found	a
way	to	get	rid	 of	this	 place,	this	apartment	that	had	taunted	her	with	 its	sadness,
its	poverty,	  with	 the	 dirty	 windows,	  the	misshapen	and	 faded	 couch	and	 the
coffee	 table	with	  rings	 from	 mugs	 like	  wet	 footprints	 that	 had	 dried	 on	 the
surface.	But	then	another	part	 of	her	wanted	to	 throw	 her	body	onto	 those	piles
and	stay	there	forever	like	 a	waiting	  room	until	 her	mother	 came	back,	or	until
the	universe	somehow	delivered	the	answers	that	she	needed	to	make	decisions,
get	on	with	life	 like	the	rest	of	the	world.	 She	locked	the	door	behind	her.
       In	 the	dark	and	musty	stairwell,	 the	landlord	climbed	 the	steps,	gripping	the
handrail.
       “Excuse	 me,”	she	said.	“I	left	 you	a	message	about	my	mom?”
       “Oh,	 yes,	yes,	sorry.	I’ve	 had	so	much	going	on—”
       “Why	  did	you	lie	to	 the	police	officer?”	 Margot	interrupted.
       “Lie?”
       “The	 police	 officer?”	 She	folded	 her	arms	across	her	chest.	“Officer	 Choi?
He	said	that	you	 didn’t	 hear	a	thing	 from	 my	mother’s	 apartment.	You	 told	me
—”
       He	 smiled	 as	if	 amused	and	combed	his	hand	through	 his	thick	 gray	 hair.
“Didn’t	  I	say	that	 the	police	 weren’t	 going	to	 do	anything?	 There’s	no	 need	to
get	them	involved.	 I	 don’t	 need	them	hanging	 around	the	building,	  scaring	my
tenants.	What	good	is	that	going	to	do	for	your	mom?”
       “But	 don’t	 you	think—”
       “We	 don’t	 need	police	around	here.”
       “Yeah,	  but	 what	 about	my	 mom?	 Don’t	  you	 think	 if	  someone	could’ve
killed	her,	that	your	tenants	would	care	about	finding	 the	guy?”
       “Shhh,”	  he	said,	 annoyed.	He	 came	up	 the	stairs	closer	 to	 her.	“I’m	  just
trying	to	run	a	business,	okay?	It’s	not	like	 I	don’t	 care.”
       For	 a	few	seconds,	she	imagined	pushing	him	 down	the	stairwell.	 His	 thin-
limbed	 body	 tumbling	  to	 the	 ground.	 His	 head	 cracked	 against	a	 step.	 She
flinched	at	the	image,	the	cruelty.	It	 would	look	 like	an	accident.
       “I	  just	don’t	 think	 you	 can	trust	 the	police,”	 he	 said.	“Why	 risk	 yourself?
Why	 get	 involved?	 Don’t	  you	think	  enough	people	 have	 been	hurt?	 Enough

182
people	have	been	hurt	already.”
       “You	  made	me	look	like	a	liar.”
       “Listen,	  I’m	 sorry	about	that.	I’m	  trying—”	  His	voice	 cracked.	“I’m	 trying
really	 hard	to	 keep	things	 together.	Believe	 me.	I’m	  always	about	 to	lose	 this
place.”	Tears	filled	 his	 eyes.	“If	 I	thought	 talking	 to	the	police	 would	 help	your
mother,	I	 would,	  I	 really	 would,	 but	 I	 honestly	 don’t	 think	  it	 would	 make	 a
difference.	I’ve	 seen	a	lot	in	my	years.”
       Margot	  hesitated.	Her	mother	 might’ve	  done	the	same.	She	might’ve	  felt
the	same	way.
       “Maybe	  I	 don’t	 do	the	 best	job	 around	here,	but	 I’m	 trying	  my	best,”	 he
continued.	“I	 know	 no	one	likes	the	landlord.	 I	 didn’t	 even	want	to	 get	into	any
of	this—it	 was	my	wife’s	 idea.	And	 now	I’m	 stuck	like	 everyone	else.	What	else
can	I	 do?	No	 one	would	 hire	 me	now.	 Nobody	 wants	a	 guy	like	 me.	 Nobody
wants	any	of	us,	you	see?”
       “What	 do	you	mean?”	Margot	 asked.
       “If	  they	 could	have	 their	way,	 they’d	 tear	 down	the	 whole	thing,	 make	 it
into	fancy	condos	or	something.	Get	rid	 of	us	all.	 They	like	 the	work	that	we	do,
but	they	don’t	like	 our	faces	or	language,	you	see?	It’s	a	big	conspiracy	and	now
we’re	all	 stuck.	 There’s	an	episode	of	 Twilight	 Zone—you	 wouldn’t	  remember
—but	the	 one	with	 the	toys	 that	are	all	 trapped	in	 a	bin,	 a	big	cylinder.	 That’s
us.”
       “Well,	  I	 can	 see	that,”	 she	said.	It	 was	obvious	 that	 she	had	reached	the
limit	 of	 what	 the	landlord	 could	 provide	 regarding	 her	mother’s	 death	 and	he
didn’t	 seem	particularly	guilty	 or	 capable	of	harm	himself.	 And	now	 she	needed
to	get	 to	 the	 bank,	 before	it	  closed,	with	  the	 safety-deposit	key	 and	 papers,
ripped	from	 the	teddy	 bear’s	heart.	She	climbed	 down	the	stairs	 past	him.	“Let
me	know	if	you	 remember	anything	else,	okay?”
       “She	 has	a	friend,	right?	Lady.	Red	lipstick.	 Maybe	she	can	help	you?”
       She	paused,	turning	to	face	him.	“She	has.	She	already	has.”
       “She	 has	problems,	too,	or	something,	right?”
       “What	 are	you	talking	 about?”
       “I	 just	 remember,	one	time,	she	was	here—maybe	in	September	or	October,
something	like	that.	 I	saw	her	park	 on	the	street	and	it	looked	 like	an	older	 man
was	sitting	in	his	car,	waiting	 for	her.	You	 know?	Like	he	was	following	  her.”
       “An	  older	man?”
       “Yeah,	 a	different	 one.	Not	your	mom’s	boyfriend.”
       “Did	  he	have	a	kind	of	.	.	.	square	head,	big	white	teeth,	big	gold	watch—”
       “Exactly.”
       “So	 he	followed	 the	woman	with	the	red	lipstick	 to	this	apartment?”

183
       “I	 think	 so.	Yeah,	I’m	 pretty	sure	of	it.”
       Margot’s	  heart	 pounded	in	 her	 chest.	Mr.	  Park	 knew	 where	her	 mother
lived.	But	 would	 he	want	to	 hurt	her?	Unless	somehow	 her	mother	had	tried	 to
intervene	in	 his	behavior,	 tried	 to	stand	up	 to	him?	 Maybe	he	 had	gone	to	 her
apartment,	asked	her	where	Mrs.	Baek	lived	or	worked	now,	 and	she	had	refused
to	answer.	Her	mother	would	do	anything	to	protect	 Mrs.	Baek.
       Would	 this	be	enough	for	him	 to	fight	with	 her?	Push	her?
       Margot	 couldn’t	 go	to	 the	restaurant	and	confront	him	now.	 It	might	 be	too
dangerous	and	could	jeopardize	 the	waitress	as	well.	 If	 she	needed	to	question
Mr.	Park,	 she’d	have	to	find	 him	 somewhere	else	and	she’d	have	to	ask	Miguel
to	 go	 with	 her	 just	 in	  case.	Where	 would	 he	 be	 other	 than	 the	 restaurant?
Someone	had	to	know.	 She	couldn’t	 ask	 Mrs.	 Baek	because	she	would	 be	too
concerned	for	  Margot.	 Perhaps	Margot	  and	 Miguel	  together	 would	 have	 to
follow	 him	after	work.
       She	 ran	down	 to	 the	 parking	 lot	 and	 opened	the	car	 door.	 Catching	 her
breath,	she	glanced	at	the	rearview	mirror	to	make	sure	she	was	alone.	Chills	ran
down	her	 spine	as	she	thought	 of	the	 driver’s	 hand	on	 her	shoulder,	 the	push.
Maybe	 that’s	 all	 it	 had	taken.	 There	 was	blood	 that	 had	 pooled	 and	pressed
against	her	mother’s	 brain.	She	 was	getting	too	 close.	Mr.	 Park	 followed	 Mrs.
Baek	to	her	mother’s	apartment.	The	net	had	wrapped	around	her	ankles.
       A	  safety-deposit	 box.	 A	  bank	 that	 would	  soon	 close.	 A	 door	  closing.
Margot	was	on	her	own.
       There	were	 now	too	many	people	who	 might	be	angry	at	her	mother—Mrs.
Kim	 and	her	driver-slash-lover,	 Sungmin,	also	Mr.	 Park—too	many	 people	who
might	want	to	hurt	her.	Perhaps	that	was	the	life	of	any	woman	like	 her	mother,	a
woman	who	was	poor	 and	in	so	many	ways	powerless	but	nonetheless	persisted
like	a	kind	of	 miracle,	a	defiance	against	the	world.
       But	 who	would	 want	her	mother	dead	the	most?

184
    Mina

Spring	2014

185
       AFTER	A	DINNER	OF	DOENJANG	GUK,	MYULCHI	BOKKEUM	and	kimchi	as
banchan,	Mina,	in	an	automatic	 gesture,	turned	on	the	television.	As	 soon	as	the
elderly	 faces—wrinkled	  and	 scrunched	in	 pain	 beneath	 men’s	 hats	covering
balding	heads,	grandmothers	in	hanboks	squeezing	out	tears	from	behind	glasses
—appeared	(footage	 of	 last	month’s	  daylong	 reunion,	the	 first	 in	  three	years
between	families	 separated	in	North	 and	South	 Korea),	she	fled	 to	 the	kitchen
where	she	slumped	down	onto	the	laminate	floor.
       News	 of	the	seemingly	endless	negotiations	between	governments	for	these
fleeting	reunions—the	lunch,	 the	afternoon,	when	these	families	who	 had	waited
their	 whole	 lives,	 sometimes	over	 sixty	 years,	for	  each	other—had	 this	 time,
more	than	any	other,	driven	 her	to	 the	brink.	 She	pressed	her	forehead	and	free
hand	against	one	of	the	 cabinets	as	she	inhaled	all	 the	years	in	 this	place,	as	if
this	apartment	had	been	a	kind	of	lover,	who	 kept	a	roof	over	 her	head,	who	had
no	opinions	 but	 provided,	 despite	its	 sorrow,	 a	certain	 kind	 of	 strength.	 How
long	had	it	been?	Over	twenty	years.
       Time	 was	wearing	 her	down.	 She	was	approaching	seventy	years	old	 now
and	could	 see	herself	in	 the	 faces	of	 the	elderly	 reunited,	 the	hair	 around	 her
temples	whitening.	 She	 could	see	herself	 in	 those	reunions—her	 vulnerability
and	pain—rubbing	the	sadness	away	from	her	already	worn	face.
       How	 much	could	the	body,	how	 much	could	the	heart	take?
       Twenty-six	  years	ago,	not	 long	after	 she	had	first	 arrived	in	 Los	 Angeles,
she	 had	  caught	 a	  similar	  TV	   special	  on	  these	 painfully	   scarce	 family
reunification	 efforts	with	 Mr.	 Kim	 on	 his	couch	after	a	dinner	 of—what	 was	it?
—something	simple	 like	shigeumchi	 or	baechu	doenjang	guk.	Like	 the	memory
rising	now,	 the	crimson	 crept	up	 the	smooth	skin	 of	 his	neck,	his	 face	as	tears
welled	in	his	eyes,	which	she	had	yearned	to	push	back	inside	of	him.
       Do	 you	 ever	wonder	if	 your	 parents	might	 still	 be	there,	 in	North	 Korea?
Mr.	Kim	 had	asked.
       No,	 I’ve	never	thought	of	that.
       But	 maybe	that’s	why	they	never	found	you,	he	said.
       That	 was	the	evening	before	 the	end.	On	the	floor	 of	 her	kitchen	 now,	she
sat	leaning	against	the	cabinets,	eyes	closed,	breathing	hard	through	 her	mouth,
tending	to	 images	 from	 the	 past:	Lupe’s	  face	on	 that	 day	that	 she	 had	been
attacked	by	Mr.	 Park,	how	she	sobbed	in	the	front	 seat	of	the	station	wagon,	the
red	blood	running	 down	the	side	 of	Mr.	 Kim’s	 face,	 the	smell	of	 iron,	Mr.	 Kim
seated	in	the	low	glow	of	the	lamp,	holding	 a	gun—small,	black,	and	matte.
       Mina	 still	 had	that	gun.
       She	had	never	 heard	from	Lupe	 again.	She	prayed	that	she	and	Mario	 had
been	reunited	somehow,	but	no	 one	knew.	No	 one	at	the	 supermarket	spoke	of

186
them,	as	if	silence	was	a	form	of	protection.
       Mr.	 Park	had	mostly	ignored	 her.	Every	now	and	then,	she	would	catch	him
glancing	 at	her,	 but	 he	 never	said	 a	 word,	 as	if	  she	were	 now	 invisible,	  an
inanimate	object.	 She	had	no	 idea	if	 he	knew	 of	 her	involvement	 in	 what	 had
happened	to	Lupe	that	day,	but	he	had	been	suspicious	about	her	relationship	 to
Mr.	Kim	 perhaps.
       She	had	worked	 at	the	supermarket,	his	supermarket,	up	 until	 the	very	day
that	her	water	broke.	That	late-June	morning	had	begun	like	most	others	with	her
lumbering	 to	 the	bathroom,	 eating	 breakfast	alone	 in	 the	kitchen’s	 nook,	 and
making	her	way	through	a	gray	malaise	of	smog	to	the	bus	stop.	She	climbed	the
stairs	onto	the	bus	and	eased	herself	onto	 one	of	the	 seats	up	front.	Staring	 out
the	windshield	relieved	her	nausea.
       After	  only	 an	hour	 at	the	cash	register,	 her	stomach,	already	 bulbous	and
uncomfortable,	 hardened	into	 a	 fist.	 A	  sharp	bright	  pain	sparked.	 Her	 water
broke	as	she	hobbled	 to	the	 back	of	 the	store.	 The	warmth	 ran	down	 her	 legs
onto	the	 f	  loor.	 She	placed	 a	 maxi	 pad	 on	 her	underwear	 in	 the	 bathroom,
collected	 her	 belongings	 for	  the	 very	 last	 time.	  Exiting	  the	 rear	 door,	 she
waddled	around	the	 building	 to	 the	front	 of	 the	supermarket,	where	 she	called
Mrs.	Baek	 at	the	 pay	phone.	Breathing	 through	 the	pain,	 she	waited	 for	 thirty
minutes	under	a	hard	sky	 of	 sun	and	haze,	the	color	of	 laundry	 water,	for	 Mrs.
Baek	to	drive	her	to	the	hospital	downtown.
       During	 two	 days	of	 agony,	mostly	 alone	except	for	 when	Mrs.	 Baek	could
get	off	  of	 work,	  except	 for	 the	 few	 hours	 when	 Mrs.	  Baek	 held	 her	hand,
consoling	her,	Mina	 screamed	at	the	world	 that	threatened	every	day	to	tear	her
apart.	Her	body	was	consumed	in	flames,	like	 a	saint’s	burned	at	the	stake.	Until
finally,	 she	held	her	baby,	red	and	howling,	covered	in	white	wax.
       A	 monster.
       A	 monster,	like	 her,	 born	into	 a	world,	 hollow—without	  a	family,	  without
aunts	and	uncles,	cousins,	grandparents,	without	  even	gravestones	to	call	 their
own.
       Mrs.	 Baek	named	the	baby	Margot,	a	name	that	she	loved.
       Mina	  had	 already	 suffered	 months	 of	  the	 other	 Korean	 women	 at	 the
supermarket,	observing	the	 stretch	of	 her	stomach	into	 a	bulb.	 Of	 course,	they
gossiped	about	  what	 kind	  of	  lewdness	 would	  lead	 to	  her	 pregnancy,	 the
pregnancy	of	 a	single	 Korean	 woman	in	 her	 forties.	 Mina	 had	quit	 church	 as
soon	as	she	 began	showing,	 out	 of	 fear	 of	 the	shame	she	 would	 bring	 upon
herself	among	the	women	there,	even	Mrs.	Shin,	whom	 she	trusted,	but	couldn’t
expect	to	understand	what	 it	 would	 be	like	 to	come	 to	this	 country	 as	a	single
woman,	a	widow,	 and	fall	 in	love,	 despite	all	the	best	intentions,	 only	to	end	up

187
again	alone.
       At	 home,	Mina	 cried	in	 bed	while	 Mrs.	Baek	cared	for	 the	baby.	She	never
thought	she	would	ever	stop	crying,	 as	if	 she	could	exhaust	herself	to	death	that
way.	 Weeks	 passed,	and	 she	 would	  still	  burst	 into	  tears,	without	  warning
sometimes,	as	she	waited	her	life	out,	unable	to	work.	She	had	enough	savings	to
pay	for	rent,	groceries,	formula,	diapers	for	 a	few	months,	and	Mrs.	Baek	and	the
landlady	helped	by	preparing	her	meals,	tending	to	the	baby	while	she	slept.
       She	couldn’t	 get	out	of	 bed	some	days.	With	the	light	 outside,	the	blue	sky,
the	birds	she	could	hear	in	the	backyard,	chirping,	 the	world	 seemed	to	move	on
without	 her,	as	 she	cried,	 hardly	 able	to	 bathe	and	feed	 herself,	 let	alone	 her
baby.	She	contemplated	leaving	the	baby	somewhere	safe	and	running	away,	but
where	would	she	turn	to	next?
       Argentina?	 The	San	Fernando	Valley?	New	York?
       She	didn’t	 have	the	energy	anymore.
       Yet	  how	 could	 she	raise	this	 baby	 by	 herself?	She	 couldn’t	 rely	  on	the
kindnesses	of	 Mrs.	 Baek	 and	the	 landlady	 who	 had	their	 own	 long	 hours	 of
work,	their	own	 worries,	forever.
       After	  almost	 two	 months	 at	 home,	she	 dropped	 her	daughter	 off	 at	 the
apartment	of	 a	local	 grandmother	 she	would	 pay	 to	take	 care	of	 Margot.	 She
worked	for	 a	year	washing	 dishes,	and	then	at	a	fast-food	 restaurant	where	she
assembled	chili	   dogs,	 deep-fried	 corn	  dogs—bizarre	  American	  foods.	 She
worked	and	worked	 and	worked	 until	 she	could	figure	 out	 what	to	 do	with	 her
life.
       But	  as	the	 years	 passed,	and	the	 landlady	 died,	 her	 house	 sold	 by	 her
children,	and	Mina	 lost	her	first	 store	in	the	riots,	 and	Mina	and	Mrs.	 Baek	went
out	 on	 their	 own	 and	 lost	 touch	 with	  each	other,	 and	 her	 daughter’s	 limbs
became	long	and	loved	to	 draw,	and	her	face	grew	 into	questions	and	thoughts,
Mina	forgot	 Mr.	Kim’s	 face.
       She	saw	 only	 herself	in	 Margot,	 as	if	 she	could	not	 bear	to	see	her	in	 her
entirety,	as	if	 she	was	a	puzzle	 with	 pieces	missing	forever.	 She	refused	to	see
the	entire	girl.
       She	 had	moved	on	 that	 way.	When	 she	had	saved	enough	 money	to	 buy
another	store,	she	didn’t	have	to	 worry	 about	a	babysitter	when	Margot	 was	not
at	school.	She	could	bring	 her	to	 work.	 She	could	teach	the	girl	 to	 help	her.	At
the	swap	meet,	Margot	would	make	friends.	Margot	 would	become	a	woman	one
day,	and	she	would	leave	Mina,	 too.	They	would	 all	 leave	her.	Her	daughter,	an
American,	who	 spoke	English,	could	 hardly	say	anything	 with	 depth	in	Korean,
who	would	 go	 to	college	 in	 Seattle.	Her	daughter	had	 not	forgotten	 about	her,
but	Mina	 knew	that	she	wanted	to	forget.	Who	 wouldn’t	 want	 to	forget	all	 those

188
years	of	 work	 and	 pain?	To	 her	 daughter,	this	 apartment,	 her	apartment	 was
dirty,	not	suitable	to	her	new	tastes,	her	new	life	as	an	actual	American.
       Something	 about	this	 country	 made	it	 easy	to	forget	 that	 we	needed	each
other.
       The	 phone	rang	and	she	sprang	from	the	kitchen	 floor	 into	the	living	  room
where	she	gripped	the	receiver	in	her	hand.	It	 was	her.	Mina’s	body	 tingled	as	if
reanimated	by	Margot’s	voice,	 which—despite	its	 clear	frustration	in	 its	struggle
to	mix	Korean	and	English—tethered	Mina	 back	to	this	world.
       “What	 did	 you	eat	for	dinner?”	Mina	 asked.
       “Some	 pasta.	Spaghetti,”	Margot	said.	“What	 about	you?”
       “Doenjang	  guk.”	 For	 years,	Mina	 would	 wake	up	 before	sunrise	 to	make
her	daughter	 a	large	 pot	 of	 soup	or	 stew	 for	 the	 day.	 She	couldn’t	  bear	her
daughter	coming	home	from	school	 and	not	having	anything	 nutritious	to	 eat,	so
she	filled	  her	 food	 with	  as	many	 vegetables	 as	she	 could	 afford—zucchini,
carrots,	peppers,	and	onions.	Even	though	her	daughter	craved	American	 meals,
she	wanted	 her	 daughter	to	 always	 think	  of	 their	  home	as,	 if	 not	 the	 most
comfortable	place,	a	 shelter	in	which	 she’d	 never	go	without	 food.	 Wasn’t	 that
the	most	heartbreaking	 thing	for	 any	 parent	in	 the	world?	 To	 know	 their	child
was	hungry.	Sometimes	she	wondered	if	 perhaps	being	separated	from	her	own
mother	might’ve	 protected	them	from	 enduring	 the	pain	of	 watching	each	other
whittle	 away	until	 they	became	nothing—bones	in	the	dirt	 that	would	 be	broken
by	bombs,	by	soldiers’	boots.
       But	 no,	nothing	 was	worse	than	losing	 each	other;	nothing	 was	worse	than
being	lost.	It	 was	as	if	she	and	her	parents	were	both	 half	dead	and	half	alive—
haunting	each	other	at	once.	It	was	almost	worse	than	death.	Purgatory.
       “Everything	  okay?”	Margot	 asked.
       “Yes,	 everything	okay.	 You?”
       “Busy.	 A	 lot	of	work,”	  Margot	said	in	Korean.
       “That’s	 good.	Being	 busy	is	good.”
       “How’s	  the	store?”	Margot	asked.
       She	 didn’t	  want	 her	 daughter	 to	 worry,	  her	 daughter	 who,	 despite	 her
upbringing	and	how	little	 Mina	 could	provide,	 managed	to	go	to	college	and	find
a	nice	office	 job.	She	knew	 that	her	daughter	had	college	loans	to	 pay,	her	own
rent	and	bills.	 And	 Mina	was	 proud	of	 her,	too.	At	 church	or	 at	the	swap	meet,
she	bragged	 about	  her,	 the	 one	  that	 got	 away,	  concealing	 the	  wound	 of
abandonment	beneath	her	pride.
       “Business	 is	slow,	but	 it’s	 okay,”	Mina	 said.	“I	 get	bored	a	lot.	 Not	a	lot	 of
customers	these	days.”
       “Why	  don’t	you	 learn	English?	Do	 you	want	me	to	buy	 you	some	books	so

189
that	you	can	learn?”
       “It’s	  too	hard	for	me	now.”
       “Why	  don’t	 you	 try?	 You	can	 learn,”	 Margot	 said	in	 English.	 “You	 have
time.”
       Her	 daughter	would	 never	 understand	why	 she	couldn’t	 make	the	 time	to
learn	a	language	that	would	 never	accept	her—especially	at	 her	age	now.	What
would	 be	the	 point?	She	 was	in	 her	sixties	 and	 couldn’t	 find	 a	 job	 anywhere
except	at	a	swap	meet	or	at	a	restaurant	in	Koreatown.	She	didn’t	 know	 a	single
English	 language	speaker	except	for	 her	 daughter,	who	 only	  visited	 once	per
year.	What	was	the	point	of	learning	 a	language	that	brought	you	into	the	fold	 of
a	world	 that	 didn’t	 want	 you?	Did	 this	 world	 want	 her?	No.	 It	 didn’t	 like	  the
sound	of	her	voice.
       “Why	  don’t	you	learn	Korean?”	 Mina	asked	sharply.
       “I’m	    not	 bored.”	  Margot	   paused,	 formulating	  her	  words	  in	  Korean.
“There’s	no	time.	I	 don’t	have	a	use	for	it.”
       Mrs.	 Baek	 laughing	flashed	 in	 Mina’s	 mind:	 I	have	 music.	I	 don’t	 need	a
boyfriend.	I’m	 busy.	I’m	not	bored.	I’m	 never	bored.
       Would	  Margot	 ever	realize	 that	when	 Mina	 said	 she	was	bored,	 she	was
trying	to	 say	that	she	was	lonely?	Bored	 was	a	much	easier	word	to	say,	wasn’t
it?	She	was	 tired	 of	fighting	  with	 her	 daughter	to	 move	back	 to	LA,	  to	 come
back	home.	 And	 she	 didn’t	  need	her	 daughter	to	 lecture	 her.	 She	 had	been
through	enough	 already.	 What	 did	 her	daughter,	 American-born,	 know	  about
time,	 about	survival,	  about	 usefulness?	What	 did	 she	know	  about	boredom?
About	loneliness?
       Mina	  had	 spent	so	 many	 years	dedicated	 to	 her	 business,	growing	  and
tending	 the	 inventory	 like	  her	 own	 garden,	 earning	 pride	 in	 something	  she
owned.	But	now	that	there	were	fewer	customers,	she	had	little	to	distract	herself
anymore.	She	couldn’t	  afford	 to	 replace	broken	 or	 old	hangers	anymore.	 The
racks	 and	 rounders	 had	 grown	  bare	 of	 clothes.	  Now	  only	 the	  poorest	 of
customers	remained,	the	ones	who	haggled	and	walked	away	because	they	could
sense	her	desperation,	her	fear	 that	she,	 in	 her	age,	would	 have	 to	again	 find
another	way	 to	  keep	the	 roof	  over	 her	 head.	For	 their	  essentials,	the	 other
customers	drove	to	 big-box	 stores	where	they	 knew	they	 could	 always	get	 the
best	deals,	where	they	might	become,	in	some	ways,	finally	American,	 where	the
exchange	of	 items—money	 for	 shampoo,	a	 new	 dress	for	 a	 first	 date,	cough
syrup,	a	 sweater	for	 Grandma—might	  come	without	  any	emotional	  response,
familiarity,	 or	bond.
       She	had	felt	 the	slow	 creep	of	 sadness	overwhelm	her	as	she	realized	now
that	all	 she	 had	built	  could	 not	survive.	  Her	business	 had	become	her	 child,

190
hadn’t	it?	 What	would	 or	could	 she	do	next	in	this	 life	 with	 so	little	 money	and
so	little	time?
       “Okay,	  well,	 take	care	of	 yourself.	Get	 some	rest	soon,”	 Mina	said	 before
hanging	up	the	phone.
       She	had	diverted	 herself	with	 work	 all	 these	years.	How	could	 she	tell	 her
daughter,	who	had	such	 a	limited	 understanding	of	 Korean,	what	 she	had	been
through,	why	  she	couldn’t	  learn	 English,	 why	 she	had	 chosen	this	 life,	  how
much	she	loved	Margot,	how	 much	she	was	both	proud	of	and	frightened	 by	her
daughter,	who	 was	 sharp	and	 quick	 and	 strong?	Her	 daughter	 had	 to	be,	 of
course,	because	of	how	 she	had	 been	raised.	They	 had	raised	each	 other	in	 a
way.	She	loved	her	daughter.	She	would	do	anything	for	her.
       But	 she	would	never,	ever	learn	English.	She	didn’t	 care.	She	hated	the	way
the	language	sounded	in	her	 mouth,	out	 of	 her	lips—stilted	 and	 childlike.	 And
when	she	did	 attempt	to	 speak	to	 someone	on	the	phone,	 or	at	 the	DMV,	  she
often	 got	 dirty	  looks	 or	 harsh,	 condescending	responses.	She	 didn’t	  need	a
language	that	wasn’t	big	enough	for	her,	didn’t	 want	to	make	room	for	her.
       She	had	 been	through	enough,	hadn’t	 she?	She	had	church.	She	had	God.
She	was	fine.	She	didn’t	need	anyone	at	all.	This	was	her	language.	This	was	the
story	she	told	herself	to	survive.

191
       AFTER	ANOTHER	SLEEPLESS	NIGHT,	MINA	RUSHED	BACK	to	her	shop	from	the
restroom,	washed	coffee	mug	 and	dish	 soap	in	hand,	and	 bumped	into	 a	small
yet	powerful	figure.	 She	appeared	out	of	nowhere	like	a	sudden	earthquake.
       Mina’s	 insides	swayed	like	 hanging	lights.	The	mug	smashed	to	the	ground.
“Mrs.	Baek?”
       Together	  they	 bent	  to	 recover	 the	  pieces	 scattered	along	  the	 painted
walkway	 where	  merchandise	hung	  above	or	  leaned	 on	 display	 carts	 in	  an
explosion	 of	 goods	 from	 children’s	  toys	 to	 sneakers,	diet	 green	teas,	 herbal
tinctures.
       As	 she	 cradled	the	 half-broken	 mug,	 filled	  with	 its	 shards,	in	 one	hand,
Mina	 unconsciously	 grabbed	Mrs.	 Baek’s	 arm	with	 the	 other.	 It	 surprised	her
how	tight	 her	grip	 was	on	this	 now	stranger,	and	Mrs.	 Baek	didn’t	  even	flinch.
She	was	that	strong.
       “Do	 you	work	 here?”	Mrs.	Baek	asked,	eyes	wide.
       “Yes.”	  Mina	 could	feel	herself	slipping	 below	 the	surface	of	the	water.	She
had	tried	not	to	think	about	their	past	for	 so	long—and	here	she	was	now.
       “I	 opened	a	store	around	the	corner,”	Mrs.	Baek	said.	“A	 sock	shop.”
       How	  many	 years	had	it	 been	 since	they	 had	last	 seen	each	other?	 Over
twenty.	Her	 voice—urgent	 and	husky—had	 remained	familiar	 but	 her	face	had
ripened	into	 a	theater	 of	surprising	 beauty	 with	 lips	 perfectly	 lined,	 a	striking
shade	of	red.	 They	 seemed	to	float	 in	 the	 sky	 toward	 Mina	 like	 an	 object	of
surrealism	in	 a	mind	 that	had	become	so	heavy	 and	gray,	thick	 as	the	smog	 in
LA.
       She	must	have	used	makeup	to	conceal	the	circles	 under	her	eyes,	the	dark
circles	that	Mina	 had	seemingly	always	had,	even	in	her	twenties.	 Or	Mrs.	 Baek
had	been	blessed	with	good	genes,	or	the	ability	to	sleep	well	 at	night,	or	 maybe
because	she	didn’t	have	children.	 How	 much,	despite	the	 years	of	Mrs.	 Baek’s
intimate	knowledge	 of	Mina’s	  life,	 the	care	of	Mina’s	  own	baby,	did	 she	really
know	about	Mrs.	Baek?	Where	had	she	been	since	they	last	saw	each	other?
       And	 what	was	she	doing	here	now?
       “You	  left	 Hanok	House?”	 Mina	 asked,	a	pang	of	sorrow	 in	 her	chest.	She
remembered	her	first	date	with	 Mr.	 Kim—the	  slabs	of	dark	 wood	as	tables,	the
Hahoetal	masks	that	laughed,	grains	of	 ahl	on	 her	tongue—and	how	 later,	after
Margot’s	 birth,	 Mrs.	 Baek	would	 invite	 them	 there	for	 a	free	 meal,	piping	 hot
jjigaes	and	tangs,	brothy	and	slow-cooked.	 How	much	Mrs.	 Baek	had	nourished
them.	It	was	a	house	after	all,	 wasn’t	 it?	It	 was	a	home	that	none	of	 them	could
have,	where	food	was	safety,	 temporary	shelter	from	 the	darkness	of	the	world,
the	hours	of	mindless	work,	 the	fear	 that	it	 could	all	 be	taken	away,	any	day,	at
any	moment.

192
       “Yes,	 I	left	 Hanok	House.	Earlier	this	year.”
       Mina	  wanted	 to	 ask	 why	 but	  didn’t.	 There	 were	 many	 reasons	 why	 a
woman	fled—boredom,	fear,	 frustration,	a	desire	to	get	ahead.	But	it	was	hard	to
tell	 whether	 owning	 a	 sock	shop	 was	 for	 Mrs.	 Baek	 an	improvement	  in	 the
quality	of	 her	life	or	 a	type	of	banishment.	Surely	she	couldn’t	 make	much	more
here	than	she	had	at	Hanok	House	where	at	least	she	would	always	be	fed.
       “I’ve—I’ve	    wondered	 about	you,”	  Mrs.	 Baek	 said,	her	 eyes	filling	  with
tears.
       Mina	 nodded.	“It’s	 strange	that	we	ended	up	under	the	same	roof	again.”
       “There	 aren’t	many	places	left	these	days	for	a	small	business,	I	guess.”
       “Yes,	  yes,	that	 makes	sense,”	Mina	  said.	“I	  should	 .	.	 .	 get	back	 to	 my
store.”	 She	forced	 a	smile	 to	 obscure	 the	quickening	  of	 her	heart,	 the	 rising
nausea,	the	cold	sweat	on	her	neck.	“I’m	sure	I	will	 see	you	around?”
       Not	 that	Mrs.	 Baek	had	wronged	her	in	any	way,	 but	rather	she	represented
a	 time	 that	 Mina	  had	 no	  reason	 to	 relive,	  a	 time	 during	  which	  she	 was
particularly	 vulnerable,	 when	 she	had	 first	 moved	 to	America,	  when	she	 had
been	so	naive	 to	 think	 that	she	 could	 run	away	 from	 the	 past,	when	 she	had
replaced	the	 sorrow	 of	 losing	 her	 husband	 and	daughter	 with	 the	 sorrow	 of
losing	a	lover,	a	father	to	her	child,	 when	all	 the	sorrows	in	her	life	 threatened	to
undo	her,	and	Mrs.	Baek,	the	entire	time,	 appeared	so	put	together,	so	confident,
educated,	and	thoughtful.
       As	 soon	as	she	 entered	her	store,	Mina	 sat	down	 on	 the	floor	 behind	 her
counter,	tending	to	that	history:	It’s	 not	your	fault.	 None	of	this	is	your	fault,	 how
she	had	longed	to	say	 this	to	 Lupe	in	 the	station	 wagon	on	that	 day,	the	blood
running	down	the	side	of	Mr.	 Kim’s	 jaw,	how	 she	had	thrown	up	in	the	toilet	and
Mrs.	Baek	wiped	down	her	face	like	 a	child’s	after	his	 final	phone	call.
       Mrs.	  Baek	 had	entered	 her	life	  one	more	 time,	 like	  a	ship	 that	 passed,
churning	water.	But	perhaps	what	terrified	 Mina	 the	most	wasn’t	a	resurgence	of
what	 happened,	what	 could	  have	 happened,	what	 had	 never	 happened,	 but
instead	something	that	Mrs.	Baek	threatened	to	offer—friendship	again.
       Why	 had	Mrs.	Baek	fled	 Hanok	House?	Did	she	need	her	now?
       Later	 that	afternoon,	Mina	searched	the	swap	meet	for	Mrs.	Baek’s	store—a
sock	shop—which	turned	out	 to	be	less	than	a	minute	away,	around	a	corner	she
never	passed,	down	 one	 of	 the	 aisles	 toward	 the	 rear	of	  the	building.	  Both
conservative	pajama	 sets	and	lacy	 lingerie	 hung	 outside	 the	store’s	 perimeter
constructed,	like	Mina’s,	 of	 gridwall	 panels.	She	caught	a	glimpse	of	Mrs.	 Baek
near	her	glass	counter,	organizing	bundles	of	athletic	socks.
       “Mrs.	  Baek,”	 Mina	 called	 from	 the	center	of	 the	walkway.	 Her	 heart	was
racing,	as	if	she	had	been	walking	 straight	into	 the	waves	for	 someone	who	had

193
been	washed	away,	who	couldn’t	swim	 back	to	the	shore	by	herself.	For	the	past
several	hours,	she	had	been	steeling	herself	for	this	moment.
       Mrs.	 Baek	lifted	 her	face,	and	upon	seeing	Mina,	 motioned	for	 her	to	come
forward.
       Trembling,	 Mina	 threaded	between	tables,	piled	with	 undergarments,	to	the
glass	counter.
       Her	 eyes	 couldn’t	 resist	 the	pull	  of	 Mrs.	 Baek’s	 lips—red	 and	 perfectly
lined.	Now	 she	remembered.	A	poster	of	a	painting	 that	she	had	seen	once.	The
long	lips	 stretched	across	a	 wide	 sky	spotted	 with	 clouds	in	 a	 faint	 snakeskin
pattern.	Women	like	 herself	rarely	 wore	red	lipstick,	 not	 only	because	a	woman
who	wore	it	 called	attention	 to	her	face—carved	 with	lines	 by	a	life	 of	 working
long	hours—but	 because	red	 lipstick	 required	 the	wearer	 to	 be	vigilant	  about
where	they	placed	 their	hands	on	 themselves,	so	as	not	 to	mess	up	or	 smudge
their	mouths,	 vigilant	  about	the	lining	  of	 their	 lips	 so	that	 the	color	 wouldn’t
bleed	into	 the	 tiny	 cracks	 that	formed	 as	 time	 went	by,	 as	 they	had	 on	 both
Mina’s	and	Mrs.	 Baek’s.
       But	 she	admired	 the	effort	 Mrs.	 Baek	 had	put	into	 herself,	 apparently	for
herself.	Mina	 wondered	with	 what	color	 she	would	adorn	 her	lips.	Not	 red.	She
always	preferred	soft	pinks	and	berries—like	 the	ones	she	used	to	wear	when	she
was	young.
       “Everything	  okay?”	Mrs.	 Baek	asked.
       Mina	  could	 not	 feel	 her	feet,	 as	if	 her	 torso	 and	head	 levitated,	 legless,
above	the	dull	gray	carpet.	For	a	moment,	she	fixed	her	eyes	on	an	English	novel
on	top	of	the	glass	counter—Thomas	Hardy,	Tess	of	the	d’Urbervilles.
       “Yes,	 it’s	 been	such	a	long	 while,”	 Mina	 said.	“I—I	  was	wondering	 if	you
wanted	to	get	 dinner	sometime?”	 The	 shyness	of	her	own	 voice	 surprised	her.
Why	was	she	so	afraid?
       “Yes,	 of	 course,”	Mrs.	 Baek	said,	as	if	she	had	been	waiting	all	 these	years
for	Mina	 to	ask.
       A	 weight	 lifted	  off	 Mina’s	 chest.	“How	  about	tonight	  or	tomorrow?”	  she
asked.
       “Yes,	 yes,	anywhere	is	fine,”	 Mrs.	Baek	said.	“Just	not—”
       “Hanok	 House.”	 Mina	smiled.
       “Yes.	  Somewhere	else.”	 Mrs.	 Baek	smirked.	 “Tonight	  is	fine.”	  Her	 neck
appeared	to	grow	red.	 “I	 was	only	 planning	 on	finishing	  that	book.”	 She	tilted
her	head	toward	the	counter.
       “Is	  it	 any	 good?”	 Mina	  thumbed	through	 the	 pages,	impressed	 by	 Mrs.
Baek’s	ability	 to	 read	so	many	English	 words.	She	didn’t	 know	 a	single	person
who	loved	novels	like	 her.

194
       “Yes,	 I	 read	it	 a	long	 time	 ago.	In	 college,”	 Mrs.	 Baek	said.	“It’s	  sad	but
beautiful.”
       Mina	  set	the	book	 back	down	 and	rested	her	 hand	on	the	 cover	as	if	  she
could	absorb	through	its	flesh	some	of	her	friend.
       “But	  it’s	 full	  of	terrible	  men,”	Mrs.	 Baek	 said,	shaking	 her	head.	“And	  I
always	hated	the	end.”
       Short	  ribs,	 sugar,	 sesame,	and	garlic	  caramelized	 over	 flames,	 sizzling
around	them,	 accentuated	by	 the	 sharpness	of	 kimchi	  jjigaes	 and	 fish	 stews
boiling	 in	 earthenware	pots.	Mina	 hadn’t	 had	a	 meal	at	 a	restaurant	in	 ages	it
seemed,	not	  since	 she	 had	  dined	 with	   her	 daughter	 last	  Christmas.	 The
assortment	of	banchan—seasoned	soybean	sprouts,	acorn	jelly,	potato	salad,	tofu
jorim,	 fried	 fishcake,	 grilled	  gulbi,	 kkakdugi—strummed	  her	senses	like	 pure
sunlight	pressing	on	seedbeds.
       “Do	  you	 remember	the	banchan	I	 used	to	 bring	 home	from	  work?”	 Mrs.
Baek	asked.
       “Yes,	 of	course.	They	were	always	 the	best.”	The	potato	salad	melted	like	a
mousse	in	Mina’s	mouth.
       “I	 loved	 working	 there,	in	a	way,”	 Mrs.	Baek	 said.	“I	could	 just	cook	and	it
was	simple.	I	guess	everything	was	simpler	back	then.”
       “The	 hours	were	very	hard,	though,	right?”
       “Yes,	 but	I	didn’t	 mind.”
       Mina	  tasted	the	soybean	sprouts—that	 delicate	crunch	 between	her	 teeth,
the	gentle	sting	of	garlic	 and	green	onion,	the	mouthwatering	 sesame.	“Why	did
you	leave?	I	thought	maybe	you	were	tired	of	the	restaurant.”
       Mrs.	 Baek	sipped	ice	water,	 staining	the	edge	of	the	glass	with	 her	lipstick.
How	she	left	her	mark,	 a	signature	of	sorts,	wherever	she	went.	Mina’s	 own	lips
felt	dry	 as	she	rubbed	them	together.	She	peeled	a	bit	of	 dead	skin	off	 with	 her
teeth.
       “It’s	  complicated.”	 Mrs.	Baek	tapped	the	ends	of	her	chopsticks	on	the	table
before	gripping	a	cube	of	kkakdugi	 that	disappeared	in	her	mouth.
       An	 unease	ripened	between	them	in	the	pauses	of	their	speech.
       “What	 is	Margot	 up	to	these	days?”	Mrs.	Baek	asked.
       “She	 lives	in	Seattle	now.	She	went	to	college	there.	She	works	in	an	office,
a	nonprofit.”
       “That’s	 wonderful.”
       The	waitress	set	the	green	bottle	of	soju	and	two	glasses	on	the	table.
       “Would	  you	mind	 bringing	 us	some	more	banchan?”	Mrs.	Baek	asked.	She
poured	the	soju	with	two	hands.	“Do	 you	think	she’ll	 move	back	to	LA?”
       Mina	  hadn’t	 had	a	 drink	 in	 years,	not	 since	leaving	 Korea,	 but	 with	 her

195
heart	pounding	  now,	 her	 palms	 sweating,	 she	 gulped	 down	 the	 clear	 fluid,
bolting	toward	some	relief,	 the	comfort	of	a	blunted	mind.
       “I	 don’t	 know.	She	seems	to	like	it	there,”	 Mina	said.
       “Kids	  will	 do	what	they	please	these	days.	But	she’ll	be	back,	I	bet.	I’d	 love
to	see	her	again.”	Mrs.	 Baek	grinned.	 In	the	 overhead	light,	her	 eyes	were	dark
and	dull	as	charcoal.
       Mina	 filled	 both	their	glasses.
       “Did	  you	ever	hear	from	 her	father?”	Mrs.	 Baek	nudged	the	plate	of	grilled
gulbi	 toward	 Mina,	 who	 shook	her	 head.	The	 fish’s	 open	mouth	 revealed	the
tiniest	teeth.	“What	have	you	been	doing	these	past	years?”
       “Working.	  Going	to	church.	What	 about	you?”
       “Same.	 No	 church,	 though,	 of	 course.”	 Mrs.	 Baek’s	 chopsticks	 split	 the
skin,	gathering	a	 bite	off	 the	bones.	She	laughed.	“I	 never	understood	how	 you
could	hang	out	with	 the	women	there.	So	judgmental.”	 She	slipped	a	translucent
bit	of	bone	out	of	her	mouth.
       Mina	  adjusted	 herself	 in	  her	seat.	 “I	  never	 see	them	 really	  except	 on
Sundays.”
       “That’s	  right.”	  Mrs.	 Baek	nodded.	“What	  ever	happened	to	the	 lady	 who
was	your	friend	back	then?	Your	friend	 from	Seoul?”
       “Mrs.	  Shin?”	 Mina	  asked.	A	 pang	 of	 sadness.	“While	 I	 was	 pregnant,	I
stopped	 going	 to	  church	 for	  a	 while,	  remember?”	  She	 exhaled	 out	  loud.
“Eventually,	  I	 changed	 churches.	 We	 didn’t	  keep	 in	  touch	 after	 that.”	  An
unacknowledged	 tension	 had	 risen	  between	 her	 and	 Mrs.	  Shin	  as	 Mina’s
growing	stomach	became	more	and	more	apparent.	The	disgrace	of	it	all.	Even	if
she	cared	 for	  Mina,	  Mrs.	 Shin	  couldn’t	  have	 a	 woman	 like	  Mina	  around
influencing	her	children.	 She	was	ruined,	wasn’t	she?
       But	 with	 Mrs.	 Baek,	Mina	 could	be,	for	 once,	human.	They	 cared	for	each
other	despite	their	f	laws,	or	 idiosyncrasies,	which	were—in	 a	certain	light,	 even
in	 the	 smallest	gestures	 like	 Mrs.	 Baek’s	  red	 lipstick—acts	 of	  defiance	and
courage.	They	need	not	erase	themselves.
       “Will	  you	retire	 soon?”	Mrs.	Baek	asked.
       “To	  be	 honest,	 I’m	  not	 sure.	 I’ll	  probably	  have	 to	 work	  until	 I	  can’t
anymore,	until	I’m	 too	old.	I	 can’t	really	 afford	to	retire.”
       “Same	here.”	 Mrs.	Baek	sighed.
       The	  waitress	 carried	 two	  heavy	 earthenware	pots	 of	  soon-dubu	 jjigae.
Steam	rose	between	them,	clouding	the	air	with	 the	scent	of	kimchi,	  sesame	oil,
garlic,	 anchovy,	 shrimp.	 They	 cracked	their	 eggs	 onto	the	 jjigaes.	 The	 yolks
throbbed	on	top.
       Mina	  rubbed	 the	 space	between	her	 brows,	 partially	  covering	 her	 face.

196
“You	know,	I	have	to	be	honest.	When	I	first	saw	you,	I	was	sort	of	terrified	of
the	memories	that	you	might	bring	up.	I’ve	grown	so	accustomed	to	being	alone
after	Margot	left,	you	know?”
       “Yes,	I	understand.	I	felt	the	same	way,	I	think.”
       Mina	pressed	her	palms	on	the	wooden	bench	below	her.
       “I	 don’t	know	if	you	know	this,”	Mrs.	Baek	said,	eyes	low.	“But	back	then,
when	you	were	going	through	so	much,	that’s	how	I	 survived	in	 a	way—by
helping	you	and	Margot.	That	way	I	didn’t	have	to	think	so	much	about	my	own
problems	anymore.	I	felt	like	I	had	escaped	mine	and	that	I	had	to	be	strong.	For
you	two.”	She	sighed,	crinkling	the	paper	sleeve	of	her	chopsticks.
       Mina	wanted	to	thank	her	for	helping	all	those	years	ago.	When	having	a
child	should	have	been	impossible,	Mrs.	Baek	had	fed	her	and	tended	to	Margot
when	Mina	 couldn’t	 do	 so	 herself.	Maybe	 that	 was	what	 made	Mina	 so
uncomfortable	about	Mrs.	Baek.	She	had	never	experienced	this	kind	of	love
before;	this	was	family.
       And	yet	she	realized	that	she	had	never	known	much	about	Mrs.	Baek.	In
the	past,	Mrs.	Baek	had	mentioned	a	husband	in	Texas.	What	problems	had	she
escaped	by	helping	Mina	and	Margot?	Mina	couldn’t	ask	her	about	them	now,
could	she?	Maybe	one	day	she	would.	She	wanted	to	help	her,	to	be	of	some	use
to	her,	too.	Who	had	Mrs.	Baek	left	behind,	or	who	had	she	been	fleeing	from	all
those	years	ago?
       “Did	 you	ever—your	husband—did	you	ever	speak	to	him	again?”	Mina
asked.
       Mrs.	 Baek’s	eyes	darkened	into	coal.	 “No,	 no,	of	 course	not.	He	 was
terrible.”	She	sighed.	“Thank	goodness	we	never	had	children	together.”
       “Did	you	want	to	have	children?”
       “No,	I	did	not,”	she	said.	“To	be	honest,	I	never	wanted	my	own.”
       “Is	that	why	you	had	to	leave?	Did	he	want	them?”
       “Yes,	he	did,	but—that’s	not	why	I	left.	When	we	first	met,	he	was	so	much
fun.	Isn’t	that	how	they	all	are?	But	once	we	married,	I	realized	he	was	very	bad.
He	.	.	.	he	couldn’t	control	himself.”	She	shook	her	head.	“But	I	didn’t	have	a
way	out	until	I	became	a	citizen,	so	I	stayed	with	him	for	years.	I	had	to	survive,
you	know?”
       “Yes,	of	course,”	Mina	said.	Sadness	crept	up	from	her	chest	into	her	face.
She	wondered	how	many	 women	had	 been	trapped—in	terrible	marriages,
terrible	jobs,	unbearable	circumstances—simply	because	the	world	hadn’t	been
designed	to	allow	them	to	thrive	on	their	own.	Their	decisions	would	always	be
scrutinized	by	the	levels	at	which	they	were	able	to	sacrifice	themselves,	their
bodies,	their	pleasures	and	desires.	A	woman	who	imagined	her	own	way	out

197
would	always	be	ostracized	for	 her	own	strength.	Until	 one	day	they	 found	each
other	by	some	kind	of	magic	or	miracle	 or	grace—here	now.	They	were	safe.
       Tears	filled	 her	eyes.	“You’ve	 done	well,”	 Mina	 said.
       “Me?”
       “Yes,	 we’ve	 done	well.	Don’t	 you	think?”
       Mrs.	 Baek	smiled	with	 a	dull	glint	 in	her	eyes.	Pulling	the	rest	of	the	gulbi’s
flesh	 off	 the	 bones,	she	 said,	“You	  and	 I,	 we’ve	 always	 been	 stronger	than
anyone	else.”	She	nudged	the	plate	of	fish	 toward	Mina.	 “At	 least	we	have	each
other.”
       Mina	 stared	at	the	objects	in	front	 of	her—the	banchan,	the	jjigae,	the	metal
spoons,	the	chopsticks.	For	a	moment,	as	Mrs.	Baek	delicately	spooned	her	soup,
Mina	  contemplated	 the	 matte	 rouge	 that	  managed,	 despite	 the	 eating	 and
drinking,	 to	remain	 perfectly	lined	 with	 only	 a	patchy	fade,	a	 charming	pinkish
stain	on	the	lips.
       So	 much	of	 Mina’s	 life	 had	been	driven	by	 the	need	to	survive	 in	 a	world
created	by	and	for	someone	else.	What	would	 the	world	 look	like	 if	 she	made	it
her	own,	even	temporarily,	 for	a	moment,	f	 leeting,	so	that	she	could	experience
again	the	throb,	the	hunger	of	being	alive,	eyes	wide,	teeth	showing?
       The	 color,	the	mark	on	 the	rim	of	 a	glass	of	water.	I	am	here,	I	 was	here,	it
said.	Makeup	expressed	a	desire	to	be	seen	while	providing	some	camouflage	as
well.	But	 what	else	was	Mrs.	Baek	hiding?	And	how	could	 Mina	help	her	now?

198
  Margot

Winter	2014

199
       ON	THE	FLOOR	OF	HER	MOTHER’S	BEDROOM,	MARGOT	pored	over	the	contents	of
the	safety-deposit	 box—a	 large	envelope	 of	documents	 in	 Korean	and	 mostly
black-and-white	photographs	extending	over	 decades.	For	the	first	time,	she	saw
her	mother	as	a	small	child—her	oval	face	and	clever	gaze—posing	by	herself	 in
front	of	 a	traditional	 Korean	 house	with	 its	elegant	tiled	 roof	 and	dark	 wooden
beams,	then	her	mother	as	a	young	teenager,	defiantly	unsmiling	 at	a	communal
dining	table.	 All	 of	 these	images	had	faded	through	 the	years,	which	 reminded
Margot,	 almost,	of	 the	Seattle	 sky	in	 winter,	 all	 those	 layered	gray	 washes	of
muted	softness	and	light.
       She	could	 begin	to	 imagine	what	her	 mother’s	life	 might	 have	been	like	 at
the	orphanage,	 from	 which	 she	 had	 never	been	 adopted	and	 which	 she	 had
almost	never	discussed.
       But	 what	 stood	out	most,	 what	startled	 Margot	with	 waves	 of	uncertainty,
were	several	color	photos,	in	particular	 one	of	her	mother	as	a	woman	in	her	late
thirties	 with	  a	husband	 and	child,	  a	 pigtailed	 daughter	 in	 a	 red	 T-shirt	 and
leggings.	With	 its	 yellowish	 tint,	 warped	surface,	the	photo	 had	been	thumbed,
touched	through	the	years	repeatedly	like	a	worry	stone.
       The	 husband	had	 a	long	 sensitive	 face	 and	an	easy	 smile,	 standing	in	 a
relaxed,	open	stance	with	one	hand	on	his	daughter’s	shoulder	and	the	other	arm
around	Mina,	 fashionable	in	her	 wide-legged	jeans	and	floral	 blouse.	She	stood
stiffly	 with	 a	slight	smile	 on	her	face	that	shone	without	a	single	wrinkle	 or	 line.
In	the	background,	a	tree-covered	hillside	revealed	a	slip	of	blue	sky	at	the	top	of
the	frame.	 A	 sunny	 remarkable	 day	in	  the	woods	 or	 the	 country.	 Dust	 from
ambling	on	trails	covered	their	shoes.
       The	 little	 girl	 in	the	 photograph	resembled	Mina	with	 her	 high	cheekbones
and	narrow	chin,	 more	than	Margot	 did	 herself.	And	 the	strangers,	the	husband
and	child,	had	 an	innocence	and	clarity	 about	them,	untouched	 by	the	hardness
of	Mina’s	 orphan	past	and	her	future	immigrant	life.
       Margot	  had	 always	  thought	 of	  Koreans	 as	 workaholics,	  religious	  and
pragmatic,	yet	at	times	showy	and	status-oriented	when	they	had	the	means.	But
studying	those	relaxed	faces	in	the	photographs,	those	dusty	shoes,	Margot	could
see	someone	else,	Koreans—not	 Korean	Americans,	 not	 immigrants	 hardened
by	the	realities	 of	 living	 in	 a	foreign	 country,	 who	like	 her	 father	in	 Calabasas
had	stubbornly	“succeeded,”	achieving	a	sheen	of	perfection	while	 obscuring	his
actual	complexity,	  an	 isolation	  from	 the	 self.	 Or	 like	  her	 mother,	 who	 had
worked	tirelessly	 yet	had	never	 amounted	to	more	 than	the	long	 days,	the	long
hours,	alone.
       What	  did	 this	 country	  ask	 us	 all	 to	 sacrifice?	 Was	 it	  possible	 to	 feel
anything	 while	 we	 were	 all	  trying	 to	 get	 ahead	of	  everyone	else,	 including

200
ourself?
       And	  how	 could	 her	mother	 have	 abandoned	this	 other	 family	 to	 live	  in
America,	where	 her	life	 had	been	tough	in	 this	cramped	apartment,	working	 an
often	soul-crushing	job,	as	she	yelled,	Amiga!	Amiga!	 to	strangers	walking	away,
as	she	 raised	 Margot	 day-to-day,	  month-to-month,	 by	  herself	 ?	 Unless,	 for
whatever	reason,	the	 husband	in	this	 photograph	 had	been	worse,	 this	family,
this	life	had	been	worse.	But	how	could	that	be	possible?
       Of	 course,	her	mother	might’ve	  wanted	to	tell	 Margot	 about	all	of	 this	one
day—another	family,	  another	country,	 a	half	 sister	 somewhere.	But	 when	and
how?	 Perhaps	her	  mother,	 like	  herself,	 didn’t	  know	  what	 to	  do	 with	  life
sometimes,	hadn’t	made	any	 decisions	yet.	Her	 mother	had	kept	 the	key	 to	the
safety-deposit	box	inside	the	teddy	bear’s	 silly	 heart,	which	she	had	assumed	no
one	would	 ever	steal	or	 touch.	She,	too,	 might	 have	been	under	 that	spell,	 the
illusion	 that	delaying	one’s	 decisions,	one’s	actions	was	the	same	as	prolonging
life.	But	 then—unexpectedly—she	died.
       Who	 could	help	Margot	 understand	this	all	now?
       In	 the	stairwell,	 the	 landlord	had	said	 Mrs.	Baek	 had	been	at	her	mother’s
apartment	in	September	or	October,	when	 he	had	seen	Mr.	Park	waiting	 for	 her
outside.
       We	all	 lived	in	 the	same	house	together	until	you	were	maybe	three	or	four.
Your	mother	used	to	bring	 you	to	the	restaurant	 that	I	worked	 at,	Hanok	House.
Do	you	remember?
       Only	 one	person	knew	her	mother	well	enough.

201
     Mina

Summer	2014

202
       IN	HER	BATHROOM	MIRROR,	MINA	APPLIED	THE	DUSTY	rose–colored	lipstick	that
she	had	purchased	with	 Mrs.	 Baek	from	 one	 of	the	 swap	meet’s	 dollar	 stores.
Earlier	 that	 day,	 as	 they	 were	 sharing	 a	lunch	  of	 rice	 and	 various	 leftover
banchan	on	top	of	the	display-case	counter	of	 Mina’s	 shop,	Mrs.	Baek	had	said,
“You	 look	so	tired	 these	days.	Remember	back	in	the	day,	how	much	you	 cared
about	your	looks?”	 She	smiled.	“I	 remember	you	even	wore	those	long,	 flowing
skirts	to	work.	Weren’t	 you	stocking	 shelves?”
       Mina	  couldn’t	 help	but	 laugh	at	 herself,	how	 naive	she	had	once	 been.	“I
wanted	to	make	a	good	impression,”	 she	had	replied,	recalling	 the	first	 time	she
had	seen	Mr.	Kim—the	 edges	of	his	fingertips	as	he	had	dropped	the	change,	the
cold	hard	 coins,	in	 her	open	palm,	 the	pink	 flyer	 that	 spelled	help	 wanted,	his
eyes,	smiling.
       “Why	   don’t	 you	 wear	 some	 makeup?”	 Mrs.	  Baek	 asked,	snapping	 her
Tupperware	 closed.	  “You	   look	  like	   a	 grandma	  and	 you’re	   not	  even	 a
grandmother	yet.”
       “Do	 you	know	 how	old	I	 am?”
       “So	 what?	Do	you	know	 how	old	I	 am?	I’m	older	than	you.”
       “What	 do	my	 looks	matter?”
       “Maybe	  when	you	look	 in	the	 mirror,	 you	might	 be	happy.	I	feel	 that	way.
When	I’m	 drawing	 my	lips	 or	my	 eyebrows,	I	feel	alive,	 like	 I’m	 taking	 care	of
myself.	I	feel	like	 I’m	 controlling	 my	life	 in	some	way.	Like	 I’m	 in	control.”
       “Maybe	 you’re	 right,”	 Mina	 said.
       “Let’s	  go	to	the	dollar	store	over	there	and	get	you	some	color.”
       Together,	 they	stood	close,	the	sides	of	their	arms	touching	as	they	lingered
over	the	small	selection	of	lipstick	 on	a	stand	covered	in	cosmetics—foundation,
powders,	and	blushes.	Mina	tested	several	shades	on	the	back	of	her	hand	until	a
flash	of	dusty	rose	appeared	and	Mrs.	Baek	said,	“That	one.	That’s	it.”
       “You	  think	so?”
       “Yes,	 it’s	 subtle	but	pretty,	don’t	 you	think?	You	 could	start	off	slow.”
       “Eventually,	  maybe	I’ll	  graduate	to	red.”	 Mina	placed	her	 fist	on	her	 waist
and	popped	out	her	hip.
       Mrs.	  Baek	 laughed.	 “Maybe,”	  she	 said.	 “But	  by	 then	 we’ll	  be	 on	 our
deathbeds.	Twins,	I	guess.”
       Now,	  in	 the	 mirror’s	  reflection,	 Mina	  inserted	 an	index	  finger	 into	 her
mouth,	puckered,	and	 pulled	 the	finger	 back	out	 through	 her	lips—a	 trick	 that
Mrs.	Baek	had	taught	her	to	keep	the	color	from	her	teeth.	She	smeared	the	waxy
color	onto	 her	cheeks,	brightening	 her	face.	All	 she	needed	was	a	bit	 of	under-
eye	concealer,	and	 despite	her	 age,	she	could	 be	 beautiful,	 or	 at	 least,	lively
again.

203
       Through	 an	open	window,	 she	could	 smell	a	neighbor	 grilling	  carne	asada
—the	smoke	of	animal	 fat,	citrus,	and	garlic.	 Her	stomach	grumbled.	With	 toilet
paper,	she	wiped	the	color	off	her	mouth.
       The	 phone	 rang.	Was	 it	 her	 daughter?	Or	 was	 it	 some	 pesky	salesman,
trying	to	sell	her	something	in	 English?
       She	rushed	to	the	living	 room.	“Hello?”
       “Mrs.	 Lee?”	 a	man	said	roughly.	“Mrs.	 Lee.”
       It	 was	him.	She	would	know	 that	voice	anywhere.
       She	gasped	and	slammed	the	receiver	down	with	a	crash.
       Mina	  had	grown	 terrified	 of	 the	sound	of	 unexpected	knocking	 on	 doors,
which	 would	  always	 remind	  her	 of	  when	 the	 police	  officers	  came	to	  her
apartment	in	Seoul.	 And	 so	when	she	heard	a	knock	 the	next	 day,	she	stepped
back	for	a	second,	thinking	 that	she	could	 pretend	she	wasn’t	here,	but	then	 the
knock	 came	 again,	  and	 she	 realized	 that	  whoever	 it	  was	 could	  hear	 her
television.	 She	 crept	  toward	 the	 door,	  avoiding	  the	 fisheye,	  knowing	  that
whoever	it	was	might	see	her.
       A	 minute	passed.	“Who	is	it?”	 she	asked.
       “It’s	  me.”	A	 throat	cleared.	“Mr.	 Kim.”
       Oh,	 no,	oh,	 no,	oh,	 no.	“Go	 away,”	 she	screamed,	surprising	 herself.	“Go
away.”
       She	 slumped	onto	 the	floor,	 crawling	 on	 her	hands	and	 knees	toward	her
bedroom,	where	she	waited	 until	 she	could	 not	hear	a	thing	 anymore,	only	 the
drip	of	 the	 faucet	in	 the	bathroom,	 the	flush	 of	 a	neighbor’s	 toilet.	 She	 didn’t
know	for	how	 long	she	hid.
       When	  was	 the	last	 she	 had	 seen	him?	 Over	  twenty-six	  years	ago.	 He
seemed	to	be	speaking	to	her	from	the	past,	from	the	Ferris	wheel	where	she	had
opened	her	eyes,	 observing	the	 beauty	of	  this	world	  that,	for	  a	few	 minutes,
promised	not	to	 harm	her.	 Like	 the	Ferris	 wheel,	the	entire	 world,	 her	life	 had
pulsed—ripe	and	bright—with	  the	smell	of	the	ocean	bathing	away	her	pain,	 the
grief	that	kept	her	up	most	nights.
       Over	 twenty-six	 years	ago,	she	had	taken	the	gun	from	 Mr.	 Kim’s	  drawer,
slipped	it	into	 her	purse,	and	gone	to	the	supermarket	like	any	other	day	at	work.
She	could’ve	killed	 Mr.	 Park	 then,	but	he	wasn’t	 there.	The	gun	bag	was	in	 her
closet,	which	she	had	hidden	in	an	attempt	to	keep	Margot	safe,	to	submerge	that
part	of	her	life	as	best	as	she	could.
       After	 a	long	bout	of	 silence,	she	checked	the	fisheye.	He	was	gone.
       He	 had	pushed	a	note	through	the	bottom	of	the	door.
               Please	call	me.	I	don’t	 have	a	lot	of	time	 left.	I	 have	cancer.	I’m	dying.
       I	 can	help	you.	I	want	to	help	you	 with	your	 family.

204
       She	 turned	toward	 her	coffee	 table	and	slapped	the	 Virgin	 Mary	 statue,	a
twin	to	 the	one	at	her	store.	The	statue	tipped	to	its	side,	tumbling	 to	 the	ground
with	a	crack.

205
       AS	DAYLIGHT	ENDED	IN	THE	GRAPEFRUIT-AND-ORANGE	glow	of	sunset,	Mina
called	 him	 almost	 two	 weeks	 after	 his	 visit.	 A	  part	of	  her	hoped	 he	 would
disappear	and	die,	unable	to	bear	the	idea	that	he	was	alive,	 and	another	part	of
her	could	not	tolerate	the	idea	of	him	not	existing	 in	this	world	 at	all.
       Within	  these	two	weeks,	trapped	in	 this	limbo	 between	calling	 him	 or	not,
she	avoided	Mrs.	 Baek.	 She	thought	 all	 day	and	 night	 about	what	 choice	 she
would	most	regret.	 Would	 he	help	her?	What	would	 that	mean?	Could	she	trust
him	enough	to	let	him	in	 her	life	again?	Or	was	this	all	 a	ruse	to	humiliate	her,	as
he	had	done	when	he	abandoned	her,	as	he	had	done	when	he	had	failed	to	meet
her	in	 Las	 Vegas?	What	 was	 the	 excuse	then?	How	  much	more	 humiliation
could	she	take?
       Twenty	 years	ago,	she	had	driven	 to	the	desert	for	 him.	He	 had	found	her,
in	their	apartment,	mailed	her	a	letter	asking	 her	to	meet	him	in	Las	Vegas	if	 she
could.
       I	 am	going	to	 be	in	Las	Vegas	for	one	week.	Can	you	come	and	meet	me?	I
will	be	at	this	hotel.	 Ask	for	me	at	the	front	desk.	Please	do	not	let	anyone	know.
       She	 planned	to	 introduce	 him	 to	 Margot,	  six	 years	old	 then.	 She	didn’t
understand	what	he	had	been	doing	in	Vegas,	or	why,	 but	she	remembered	their
trip	 there	 together	 a	 long	  time	 ago,	 when	 they	  had	gorged	  themselves	on
American	food	 at	the	 buffets,	gambled	 on	penny	slots	 until	 the	crack	of	 dawn,
made	love	in	the	dim	light	 of	the	sun	still	rising,	 and	slept	soundly	until	lunch.
       Mina	  had	packed	 up	 the	car	 with	 her	 daughter,	who	 sat	 in	 the	back	 by
herself,	unaware.	She	had	no	idea	what	 to	tell	 Margot	 and	decided	to	not	 say	a
word	about	Mr.	 Kim,	 in	 case,	for	whatever	 reason,	he	either	didn’t	 show	up,	or
he	had	changed	or	didn’t	want	 to	have	anything	 to	do	with	 them,	or	perhaps	the
correspondence	had	all	been	a	terrible	mistake.
       That	 had	been	the	 first	 and	last	time	 she	had	ever	 driven	on	 the	freeway.
She	drove	below	 the	limit.	  Despite	the	 cars	around	her	 honking,	 all	 she	could
remember	was	not	 the	dry	 arid	 landscape	and	the	 fear	 that	she	should’ve	 felt
driving	 alone	for	  such	a	long	 distance,	but	 the	 way	her	 heart	throbbed	 in	 her
throat	thinking	 about	Mr.	 Kim,	 their	time	together	in	 bed	or	on	the	Ferris	wheel,
and	the	pleasure,	 the	joy	 she	had	 felt	 around	him	 for	  the	first	 time	 since	 her
husband	and	daughter	had	died.
       But	  he	never	 showed	up.	 The	 hotel	 where	 they	 were	 supposed	to	meet
didn’t	recognize	his	name.	She	hadn’t	heard	from	him	since.
       Until	  now.	Chewing	her	fingernails,	 she	dialed	the	long-distance	number	on
the	note	that	he	had	slipped	under	the	door.	What	had	overcome	her?	Perhaps	at
the	end	of	his	life	and	toward	 the	end	of	hers,	she	needed	to	hear	his	voice	again.
She	needed	to	know	 that	 their	 time	 together	was	 not	 an	illusion	  that	she	had

206
tucked	somewhere	inside	 of	 her	brain.	 She	needed	to	 know	 that	it	 was	 all,	 in
some	way,	real.
       “I	 didn’t	 think	 you’d	 call.”	His	 voice,	worn	and	raspy,	startled	her.
       Did	 she	dial	the	wrong	number?
       “Hello?”	  he	asked.
       She	remained	silent.
       “Mrs.	 Lee?”
       She	placed	the	receiver	 down	on	her	lap,	 contemplating	if	 she	should	hang
up	the	phone.	She	couldn’t	  stand	to	be	 reminded	of	 the	life	 that	 she	had	lived
without	 him,	yet	 she	couldn’t	 bear	to	let	 him	 go	again.	She	hated	the	universe,
even	God,	right	 now.	Why	 couldn’t	 He	make	life	 simple	 and	clean?	Hadn’t	 she
suffered	enough?	Enough,	she	wanted	to	scream.
       “Mrs.	 Lee?”	 She	could	still	hear	his	voice,	muffled	 on	her	lap.
       Trembling,	 she	lifted	 the	receiver	to	her	ear	again.	“Yes?”
       “Can	 we	talk?	I	can	help	you,	I	 think.	I	 can	help	you.”
       “How	  did	you	get	my	number?”	 she	asked.	“How	did	you	find	 me?”
       “The	  house	that	you	 used	to	 live	 in?	The	 landlady	 who	 died,	her	 kids?	I
called	them.	You	 bought	a	store	from	 them,	right?	 They	 had	your	new	address,
your	number.”
       “Why	  would	they	have—”
       “I	  told	them	 I	was	dying,	 that	I	 wanted	to	reach	you,	 that	I	could	 help	you
before—”
       “I	 don’t	 want	your	help.”
       “I	 know	 that—you	probably	 wondered	all	these	years.”
       “What	 about	Vegas?”	Her	voice	 cracked.	“What	about	then?”
       “Yes,	 I	know.	 I’m	 sorry.	We	were	.	.	.	so	young	then.”	He	cleared	his	throat.
“I	 was—I	  was	in	  Chicago	 at	the	 time.	 There	 was	 a	conference	 in	 Vegas.	 I
worked	for	my	 cousin’s	import	business.”	He	sighed.	“But	 my	wife—”
       “I	 don’t	 want	to	know,”	 she	said.	Her	heart	raced.
       Breathing	 deeply,	 he	said,	“Okay.	 But	 I	 can	help	you,	 before	it’s	 too	 late.
Your	parents.	What	if	they	are	still	 alive?”
       Your	 parents.	She	almost	dropped	the	receiver.
       “I	  don’t	care	anymore,”	 she	said,	her	voice	rising.	 “I’ve	 already	 moved	on.
What	if	they’re	 dead?	What	is	the	point?”
       “I	  can	help	you	 find	 them.	I	 have	someone,	an	investigator	in	 Seoul	that	I
use.”
       “I	  don’t	  want	to	 know.”	  She	 hung	up	 the	 phone.	“Don’t	   you	think	  if	 I
would’ve	 wanted	to	know,	 I	would’ve	 tried	 myself,”	 she	said	out	loud	to	no	one
but	herself.	“I	 would’ve	 stayed	in	Korea	 and	waited	like	 your	mom.	Why	 would

207
I	want	 to	 know	 them	now?	 For	what?	 So	I	 can	bury	 them,	 visit	 their	 graves?
What	 is	 the	 point?”	  Tears	streamed	 down	 her	 face.	 She	 wanted	 to	 throttle
someone.	She	wanted	to	throttle	the	universe.
       The	phone	rang.
       “What?”	  she	asked,	relieved	that	he	had	called	back.
       “Meet	 me,”	 he	said.	“Why	don’t	 we	go	somewhere?”
       She	breathed	hard	through	her	mouth.
       “We	 can	talk.	That	is	it.	 I	promise	.	.	.	I’ll	  be	there.	It’s	different	 this	time.”
       She	 didn’t	  want	  to	 ride	  in	 his	 car,	 nor	  did	 they	  want	 to	 be	 seen	 in
Koreatown	 together,	so	 she	agreed	to	 meet	at	 the	end	 of	 the	pier	 on	 Sunday
night.	Of	course,	she	knew	that	he	had	chosen	the	place	not	for	its	seclusion,	but
because	of	the	memories	aroused	by	the	air,	the	salt	of	the	ocean,	the	lust	of	 the
carnival	 lights,	 and	 the	 rough	 wood	 boards	 that	 squeaked	beneath	 her	 feet,
providing	the	illusion	 of	 walking	out	on	water.
       She	didn’t	 know	 if	 she	would	 even	recognize	him	and	kept	thinking	  to	run
away	before	it	 was	too	late,	before	he	would	 pull	 her	in	like	 the	waves,	out	into
the	ocean	again.	She	had	agreed	that	she	would	only	meet	him	if	he	did	 not	ever
bring	 up	the	 past,	if	  he	did	 not	 ever	 bring	 up	where	 he	 had	gone,	 what	had
become	of	his	life	 since	he	had	left	LA,	 how	long	 he	had	been	living	in	the	area,
why	he	never	made	it	to	Vegas—especially	his	wife.	 She	didn’t	 want	to	hear	any
of	it.	All	  she	wanted	to	know	was	what	he	could	offer	 her	now,	what	he	knew	 or
could	know,	and	how	he	knew	it.
       As	 she	walked	closer	to	the	end	of	the	pier,	the	screams	on	the	roller	coaster
whooshed	by,	 and	she	 stared	up	 at	the	 Ferris	 wheel,	 flashing	 red	and	 white.
Tears	filled	her	eyes.	She	hadn’t	expected	to	cry.	She	hadn’t	been	to	this	pier	 for
years.	Her	 daughter	would	 sometimes	come	 on	her	 own,	 but	Mina	  refused	to
step	foot	again	in	 this	place,	where	 she	had	let	herself	feel	 again.	And	 here	she
was	once	more,	overcome	with	an	emotion	 that	made	her	mouth	dry,	hungry	 for
the	sweet	burn	of	the	hot	chocolate	she	could	smell	by	memory,	the	first	time	 she
had	had	hot	chocolate	in	her	life.	She	thought	for	 a	second	she	must	turn	around,
or	jump	 off	 the	side	of	the	 pier,	amid	 the	jostle	of	 bodies	around	her,	the	 street
musicians.	The	water	was	calling	her	name.
       But	 before	she	knew	it,	 she	had	reached	the	end	of	the	pier.	Underneath	the
white	glow	 of	a	tall	lamp,	a	man	sat	on	the	bench,	shriveled	in	a	large	black	wool
coat.	 She	 walked	 closer	 to	  him.	  He	 turned	 around	  and	 she,	 alarmed	 and
desperately,	sadly	happy,	caught	a	glimpse	of	 his	face.	The	world	 tilted	 beneath
her	feet.	They	bowed	their	heads	at	each	other.
       She	could	 collapse,	but	she	gripped	the	back	of	the	bench	as	quickly	 as	she
could.	She	sat	two	feet	away	from	him	as	if	they	were	strangers.

208
       She	crossed	her	arms	in	front	of	her	belly,	 ashamed	of	her	body,	and	wept.
       She	 could	 sense	him	  trying	 not	 to	  look	 at	 her,	 although	 he	 wanted	 to
comfort	her.	He	reached	into	his	coat	pocket	and	offered	her	a	handkerchief.	She
wiped	her	 eyes	at	only	 the	corners	to	 not	disturb	 her	eyeliner,	 the	makeup	 she
wore.	 The	 tears,	 springing	  from	  her	 heart’s	 heaviness,	 the	 heaviness	of	  a
lifetime,	 almost	 seventy	years,	streamed	down	 her	face,	and	 she	didn’t	 care	if
anyone	could	see	her.
       She	 faced	the	 ocean.	The	 moon	glowed,	 shimmering	  on	its	 surface.	She
couldn’t	glance	at	him	again.	She	couldn’t	 see	his	face.
       “You’re	  still	 cute,”	he	said.
       Surprised,	she	couldn’t	 help	but	smile.
       “You’re	   still	  pretty,”	  he	 said.	 “I	  don’t	  know	  if	  you’re	  nice	 anymore,
though.”
       She	 laughed,	 gently	  dabbing	 her	 cheeks	 with	  his	 handkerchief.	  “Why
should	I	be?”	she	asked.
       “You	  are	right	about	that.”	He	sighed.	“I’m	 so	sorry	for	 .	.	.	everything.”
       A	 tightening	 in	her	throat.	She	fell	silent	 for	a	while.	 From	the	corner	of	her
eyes,	she	watched	him	cross	and	uncross	his	 legs.	The	water	 lapped	the	pillars
beneath	them.	She	tried	not	to	shiver	or	appear	cold	in	front	of	him.
       Finally,	 she	asked,	“Did	you	 ever	find	your	father?”
       “Yes,	 I	 did,”	  he	said.	“But	 it	 turns	 out,	he	died	 .	.	 .	a	long	 time	 ago.”	He
cleared	his	throat.	“Actually,	 I	 found	out	 that	he	died	shortly	after	we	 left	him	 in
the	North.	A	bomb	had	been	dropped	near	our	house.”
       Mina	 gasped	and	closed	her	eyes	momentarily.
       “I	  never	had	the	 heart	to	tell	 my	 mother	 that,”	 he	said.	“I	 always	 thought
it’d	 be	best	to	.	.	.	let	her	 wait	it	 out.	So	.	.	.	 she	died	thinking	 that	he	might	still
be	alive	somewhere,	or	maybe	she	would	meet	him	 in	heaven.	But	I	 couldn’t	 let
her	know	 that	 she	had	 waited	 all	 those	years	 for	 him	 .	 .	 .	for	  nothing.	 That
would’ve	 broken	her	heart,	more	than	anything	else,	don’t	you	think?”
       She	could	 feel	him	watching	 her.	For	a	second,	she	glanced	back.	The	sight
of	him,	 old	 and	small	 in	 his	long	 coat,	 pained	her.	She	remembered	his	 arms,
how	she	loved	his	arms,	and	she	could	see	that	he	had	grown	thin,	wasting	away.
She	could	hardly	 recognize	him	 except	for	 the	softness	of	 his	eyes	beneath	his
curved	brows,	the	gentle	line	of	his	lips.
       He	 cleared	his	throat.	 “Do	 you	.	 .	.	do	 you	want	to	 know	 the	truth?	About
your	parents?”
       Your	 parents.	The	words	 stung,	stirring	 the	ashes	inside	her	heart.	“I	 don’t
think	the	truth	matters	anymore.”
       “How	  is	that?”

209
       She	 held	 back	tears.	 “Like	  for	 your	 mother.	 Why	  would	 the	 truth	 have
mattered	to	her?	Why	would	the	truth	matter	now?”
       “Because	you	have	time.”
       “There’s	  hardly	 any	time.”	  She	wanted	 to	say,	 I’m	 almost	 seventy.	What
time	do	I	 have	left?	She	wiped	 her	eyes	with	the	 soft	white	 handkerchief	balled
up	in	her	fist.
       “You	  still	have	time.”
       How	 did	 we	measure	what	we	had	left?	 Not	in	 days	or	years	for	 Mina,	but
with	 what	strength	remained.	His	 days	were	 numbered.	He	had	said	the	 cancer
would	 overtake	him	 before	 the	end	 of	 the	year.	 She	wanted	to	 hold	 him,	 but
didn’t	 know	 how,	 after	all	 this	 time	 had	passed.	Their	 bodies	had	changed	so
much.	She	could	hardly	recognize	themselves	under	the	weight	of	all	the	years—
twenty-six	of	 them—and	what	time	could	do	to	the	body	 and	the	heart.
       He	 placed	his	face	into	his	hands,	shaking.
       “What	  is	worse	than	 the	truth	is	 where	your	 mind	goes,”	 he	said.	“How	  it
wanders,	 how	 it	  refuses	 to	 let	  go.	 The	 things	  you	 imagine	  that	 could’ve
happened.	At	least	you	have	an	answer.	At	 least	you	can	stop	 thinking	 at	night.
My	 mother	was	at	the	point	 where	there	was	no	more	 moving	forward—all	  she
had	left	were	her	dreams	to	keep	her	alive.	You	still	 have	time.	You	 still	 have	so
many	years	left,	 but	also,	no	one	 has	enough	time.	I	 just	wish	 .	.	.	 I	wish	 I	 had
come	here	sooner.	I	could’ve	tried	to	help	you	earlier,	but	 .	.	.	life	.	.	.”
       “You	  didn’t	know.”
       Of	  course,	she	couldn’t	  tell	 him	 now	 about	Margot.	  What	 would	 be	the
point?	Judging	by	 the	gold	band	on	his	 finger,	he	was	married	 now,	might	 have
kids	of	 his	 own.	 The	idea	 of	 Margot	 might	 shatter	him.	 She	would	  keep	him
from	 that	 knowledge,	 as	he	 had	 protected	his	 mother	 before	 her	 death.	 She
would	spare	him.
       And	 for	Margot	 to	have	a	father	now,	how	could	 that	help	her,	when	he	was
on	his	way	out	 of	this	 world?	She	couldn’t	 trade	the	grief	 of	not	 having	a	father
for	the	grief	 of	 one	dying.	At	 least	she	had	gotten	used	to	the	former,	 a	familiar
sadness	rather	than	something	frightening	and	unknown.	Mina	would	 spare	them
both.	And	she	would	allow	 him	back	into	her	life	 on	her	own	terms.
       Mina	  stared	out	 into	 the	 wide	 ocean	of	  obsidian,	scintillating	  under	 the
white	moonlight.	 Once,	 behind	them,	they	 had	ridden	the	Ferris	 wheel	in	 a	riot
of	light	 flashing	in	the	still	 blue	glow	 of	night.	 Back	then,	every	delicious	second
mattered.	Every	single	breath.

210
  Margot

Winter	2014

211
       AFTER	MARGOT	HAD	GONE	THROUGH	THE	CONTENTS	of	the	safety-deposit	box
on	Monday	 night,	she	resisted	the	temptation	 to	rush	 to	Mrs.	 Baek’s	 apartment
and	 sleeplessly	waited	  until	  the	 morning.	  Only	  Mrs.	 Baek	  could	 help	 her
understand	the	photograph	from	the	safety-deposit	box—her	mother,	a	woman	in
her	late	thirties	with	 a	husband	and	child	 in	Korea.	Where	 was	the	other	family,
the	pigtailed	daughter	in	the	red	T-shirt	and	leggings?
       But	  yesterday,	  when	 Margot	   knocked	 at	  Mrs.	  Baek’s	  door,	 no	  one
answered.	And	now,	Wednesday,	Christmas	Eve,	Margot	had	only	 one	place	left
to	search.
       Margot	 and	 Miguel	 drove	past	houses	decorated	with	 holiday	 string	lights
and	plastic	 Santas	to	  her	mother’s	  church,	 which	 would	  be	having	  separate
services	in	 Spanish,	Korean,	 and	English.	 Afterward,	  they’d	 have	 dinner	 at	a
Oaxacan	restaurant	that	neither	of	 them	had	been	to	 but	had	heard	good	things
about—rich	red	and	black	moles	and	live	music	in	 an	oilcloth	setting.
       Despite	 the	circumstances,	both	of	 them	 felt	the	 need	to	do	something	 for
Christmas.	In	a	place	as	warm	and	bone-dry	 as	Los	Angeles,	the	holiday	 season
still	 seemed	chilly,	  especially	 at	 night,	 when	 locals	 donned	 boots	and	 down
jackets	 and	  sweaters.	 And	  the	  festivities	   provided	  at	  least	 a	  hearth	 of
togetherness	and	activity—shopping,	 cooking,	 the	 resurrection	of	 plastic	 trees,
the	ribbons,	the	lights.	 The	 smell	of	 pozole	and	birria,	 meats	long-simmered	 in
chilies	and	herbs,	and	 traces	of	Korean	 food	with	 its	 piquant	kimchi	  and	stews
and	bulgogi	  filled	  the	 hallways	  of	  her	 apartment	 building.	  Christmas	 cacti
decorated	drab	balconies	in	fuchsias.	Supermarket	poinsettias	flourished,	 brazen
and	flaming	red.	The	children	off	 from	 school	ran	around	at	all	hours.
       Outside	 of	Margot’s	 car,	men	on	 bicycles	zoomed	by	in	 traffic;	 commuters
chatted	at	the	bus	stop,	plastic	 bags	bulging	 with	 groceries;	street	vendors	sold
everything	from	 oranges	and	peeled	 mangoes	served	on	a	stick	 to	shiny	 boom
boxes	and	soft	polyester	blankets	printed	with	teddy	bears	and	cartoon	hearts.
       “Do	  you	think	 it	 might	be	time	 to	call	 Officer	 Choi	 again?”	Miguel	 asked,
sitting	in	 the	passenger	seat.	“I	mean,	we	 know	what	 we	know	 about	Mr.	 Park,
right?	 He’s	  been	 stalking	  Mrs.	  Baek.	 He	  was	 apparently	 at	  your	  mom’s
apartment.”
       “I	  would	think	 that	if	 Mrs.	 Baek	wanted	the	police	 involved,	 she	would’ve
called	 them	already,”	  Margot	 said.	 “She	 might	  be	 scared	that	 he’d	 retaliate
somehow.”
       “But	  he	already	could’ve	 hurt	your	 mom.	Isn’t	 that	 enough	for	us	all	 to	be
scared?”
       “We	  don’t	 know	 that	 for	 certain	 yet.	 I	 just	 hope	Mrs.	  Baek’s	 at	church
tonight.	If	 we	 see	her,	we	could	let	 her	know	 that	the	landlord	 saw	Mr.	 Park	at

212
my	mom’s	 apartment.	I	 don’t	 even	have	to	 mention	 what	the	 waitress	told	 me
about	him	buying	 the	restaurant	and	stalking	Mrs.	Baek,	right?	 I’ll	 ask	her	about
Mr.	Park,	if	 I	can	call	the	police.	 I	just	don’t	 want	to	do	anything	that	could	 harm
her.”	She	sighed.	“I	  wish—I	 wish	 this	wasn’t	 happening	all	 at	once.	I	 feel	 like
I’m	falling	 behind,	like	 I’m	 not	fast	enough.	I’ll	 never	be—”
       “You	  were	sick	last	week,”	 Miguel	 said.	“Your	 mom	died.	You	 just	figured
out	the	identity	of	 your	dad.	This	would	be	too	much	for	 literally	 anyone.”
       Tears	filled	 her	eyes.
       “It’s	   a	miracle	  that	 you’re	 still	  standing	 after	 all	 you’ve	  been	through.
You’re	tough.”
       It	 was	the	first	time	 anyone	had	told	her	that,	and	she	believed	him.	She	had
always	thought	of	 herself	as	sensitive,	fearful,	even	passive	at	times,	but	 he	was
right.	 She	had	 gotten	 her	strength	 from	 her	 mother.	 Her	 mother	 was	bold—
moving	to	 this	country	 where	she	didn’t	 know	the	 language	and	laws,	falling	 in
love,	raising	a	daughter	by	herself.
       And	  in	 these	 past	few	 weeks,	 Margot	  alone	had	 knocked	 on	 unknown
doors,	sold	her	mother’s	store,	stood	up	to	a	police	 officer—actions	 she	couldn’t
have	imagined	doing	even	a	month	ago.	Her	life	 had	seemed	so	banal	back	then:
managing	to	avoid	Jonathan,	her	coworker	 with	 whom	she	had	that	relationship
last	year,	 sorting	 years	 of	 paperwork	 in	  her	 boss’s	office,	  scrolling	  through
endless	dating	 profiles	 online,	 editing	 and	 obsessively	 adjusting	 clip	 art	 in	 a
program	newsletter.	Now	she	was	driving	 around	the	city,	searching	for	the	truth
of	herself,	the	truth	of	her	mother,	of	 whether	she	was	murdered.
       “So	 when	I	got	 sick	last	week?”	Margot	 said.	“I	 have	a	sneaking	suspicion	.
.	.	I	 know	 this	sounds	really	 paranoid,	but	it’s	 almost	 like	that	 guy—the	 driver,
the	hot	one?—it’s	almost	like	 he	poisoned	me.	That	tea	didn’t	taste	right.”
       Miguel	  covered	his	 mouth	 in	shock.	 “I	 swear	 to	God,	 I	 was	thinking	  the
same	thing	when	you	told	me.	But	I	didn’t	 want	to	 scare	you.”
       “Shit.	 You	 can’t	trust	people	who	are	that	good-looking.”
       “Do	  you	 plan	on	 calling	 her,	 too?”	 Miguel	 asked.	“Mrs.	  Kim?	 I	 mean,	I
know	this	could	 all	be	separate,	but	.	.	.	I	guess,	if	you	wanted	more	info	 on	your
dad?	Or	are	you	too	creeped	out?”
       “I’ll	   call	her.	I	 was	thinking	 after	 the	holidays,	let	 her	settle	down	a	little.”
Margot	sighed.	“For	 now,	I	think	 it’s	 best	that	we	find	Mrs.	 Baek.	She’s	the	only
one	who	could	 know	about	 my	mom’s	 other	family,	  the	husband	and	daughter.
And	I’m	 afraid	 that	because	of	Mr.	 Park,	she	might	 disappear	or	go	somewhere
else.”
       After	  circling	  the	block	  a	few	 times,	 they	 nudged	 their	 way	 into	 a	tiny
parking	spot,	questionably	 close	to	 a	defunct-	looking	  hydrant.	Walking	 up	 the

213
front	steps	of	the	Spanish-style	church,	they	went	inside	to	 see	it	was	completely
full	 of	families	 dressed	in	their	best.	Heads	bowed,	everyone	listened	as	the	Irish
priest,	speaking	Korean,	led	them	in	prayer.
       At	 the	rear	 of	the	church,	 Margot	and	Miguel	  wedged	themselves	between
strangers	and	leaned	against	the	cold	walls.	The	smell	of	incense,	old	paper,	and
dust	intermingled	 with	  the	personal	 fragrances,	the	perfumes	 around	 them—a
heady	mix	 of	 florals,	 evergreen,	and	spice.	This	 devotion	 to	 the	senses,	to	the
sounds	of	scripture	 and	song,	the	 fragments	of	 color	 that	could	 barely	be	 seen
from	the	stained	glass	windows	at	night,	 coalesced	in	this	space	where	ritual	and
practice	among	strangers	created	a	 community.	 This	 was	why	 her	 mother	had
returned	here	each	Sunday,	because	she	could	insert	herself	and,	without	a	word
or	even	a	glance,	belong.
       The	 last	time	 they	had	 gotten	into	 an	argument	about	church,	 Margot	 had
been	fifteen	or	sixteen	years	old,	mutinous	 and	loud	enough	to	scare	her	mother.
That	was	about	the	same	age	when	she	had	fully	  given	up	 on	learning	 Korean,
too,	the	same	age	when	 her	defiance	 was	the	only	 thing	 she	had	to	 feel	 alive.
And	   anything	   about	   her	   mother—her	   foreignness,	   her	   poverty,	   her
powerlessness—became	only	a	mirror	  for	 what	 Margot	 did	 not	want	 to	 be	or
become.
       “I	  don’t	believe	 in	God,”	 Margot	 had	said	in	 English,	washing	 dishes	after
dinner.	“I	 don’t	want	to	go	to	church	 tomorrow.”
       “You	  don’t	  believe	 in	 God?”	 her	 mother	 replied	 in	 Korean,	 wiping	  the
table.	“Do	you	know	 what	happens	to	people	who	don’t	believe	in	God?”
       “Yes,	 of	course.”
       Her	 mother	approached,	cornering	Margot.	“Do	 you	want	to	go	to	hell?”
       Despite	 her	fatigue	after	a	long	 day	of	 work,	twelve	 hours	or	so	of	 running
around	downtown	 for	  inventory,	 courting	 customers	who	 mostly	 ignored	 her,
who	 sometimes	called	  her	“china,”	   laughing	 at	 her	 face,	 her	mother,	  in	 an
argument,	drew	words	from	her	deepest	well,	her	deepest	fears.
       “I	  don’t	 believe	 in	hell.”	  Already	 exhausted,	Margot	 rinsed	the	 pot	under
the	hottest	water,	steam	rising,	tickling	her	face.
       Her	 mother’s	hand	slapped	the	counter.	“Do	you	want	to	go	to	hell?”
       “If	  there	was	a	God,	He	wouldn’t	 let	us	suffer,”	Margot	 shouted,	turning	off
the	tap.	“He	wouldn’t	 let	so	many	of	 us	be	poor.”	Her	voice	had	risen	in	English,
and	she	 couldn’t	 tell	  how	 much	 her	 mother	 would	 understand,	but	 it	  didn’t
matter.	She	needed	to	say	this	out	loud.	 “He	 wouldn’t	 make	life	 so	hard	 for	us.
There	wouldn’t	 be	war.	He	 wouldn’t	 make	life	 hard	for	 so	many	people.”	 Tears
gushed	out	of	her	eyes.	She	couldn’t	stop	herself	now.
       “What	  about	when	you	 die?	Uh?”	 Her	mother	gestured	to	 the	ground	as	if

214
they	would	  all	 be	buried	 right	 on	 the	 spot	under	 the	 beige	linoleum	  of	 their
floors.
       “When	 I	die,	 I’ll	 be	dirt.	It	 doesn’t	matter.”
       “What	  about	 when	you	 die?”	  Her	index	 finger,	  shaking,	pointed	 toward
Margot’s	 chest.	“How	 will	 people	find	 you?	 Uh?	How	 will	 you	 find	 the	people
you	lost?”	Her	 mother,	who	rarely	 cried,	sobbed.	“How	 will	 you	 find	 the	people
you	lost?”
       At	 the	sight	of	 her	mother’s	face	cracked	open,	Margot	 rushed	past	her	into
the	bathroom	where	she	perched	on	the	toilet,	weeping	about	the	impossibility	 of
living	  with	  her	 mother,	  tyrannous	 but	  every	 now	  and	 then,	  unexpectedly
transparent,	leaking	light	 from	 the	disasters	of	her	life—her	  single	motherhood,
her	childhood	 as	an	orphan,	the	war,	 the	hours	and	hours	without	  a	proper	day
off,	without	 a	vacation,	that	she	put	into	the	store.
       Margot	 never	 knew	what	 to	do	 with	 the	bright	 flashes	of	 who	 her	mother
was	that	would	threaten	to	burn	them	all	to	the	ground.
       She	could	hear	the	squeak	of	the	carpeted	f	loor	as	her	mother	stood	outside
the	bathroom,	listening	 to	 Margot	 cry.	 Margot	 imagined	 her	now—her	 fingers
pressed	against	the	closed	door,	her	head	leaning	forward,	 her	hand	 curled	in	 a
fist	to	knock,	but	 then	she	retreated.
       How	 afraid	 they	were	of	each	other.	How	 impossible	they	seemed	together.
But	if	 only	her	mother	would’ve	  knocked,	and	Margot’s	 response	wouldn’t	have
been,	Go	away.	If	 only	 they	 had	a	way	to	 embrace	each	other	and	say,	I	 don’t
understand	you,	but	I’m	trying	 my	best.	I	am	trying	my	very	best.
       And	 now	 being	in	her	mother’s	 world	 was	like	stepping	into	 a	wildfire,	  the
edges	of	which	 she	might	 not	 ever	contain	 or	even	know.	 An	 immolation	  that
might	clear	dead	brush,	bring	seed	trapped	in	perfect	pine	cones	down	to	the	soil.
       At	  the	end	of	 the	prayer,	 the	crowd	 stood,	flipping	  through	the	 onionskin
pages	of	black	 vinyl-covered	 books,	clearing	 throats	to	sing.	 The	gentleness	of
their	song	above	organ	music	elevated	the	room,	as	if	their	spirits	could	 skim	the
vaulted	ceiling,	  filling	  the	 rib	 cage	of	  the	church.	 She	 didn’t	 understand	 the
words,	but	her	body	hummed	with	the	sound,	a	sound	of	kindness	and	belonging,
maybe	even	forgiveness,	 too.	Tears	 filled	 her	 eyes	and	she	wiped	 the	 corners
with	the	sleeve	of	her	sweater	before	they	could	fall.
       When	 she	looked	up,	she	saw	the	side	of	a	familiar	face	about	twenty	feet	in
front	of	them.
       The	red	mouth.
       Margot	 nudged	Miguel	 urgently.
       “What?”	  he	 whispered.	 The	 sermon	had	 begun.	 The	 priest	 in	 his	 robes
spoke	with	 gentle	but	 firm	 words,	 stirring	 the	church	like	 a	 fire.	 Margot	 could

215
only	catch	in	the	net	of	her	mind	the	Korean	words	 for	giving,	love,	 and	God.
       “Mrs.	 Baek,”	 she	said.	“Over	there.”
       “Where?”
       “Gray	 scarf.”	 A	man	standing	beside	Margot	shot	her	a	dirty	look.
       When	 communion	 commenced	 and	her	row	  had	been	called,	 Mrs.	 Baek,
who	wore	a	deep	navy	 blouse,	rose	from	the	pew.	 Her	long	 blue	skirt,	 closer	to
indigo,	 swayed	 with	 her	 body.	 She	 bowed	 when	 receiving	 the	 wafer	 in	 her
mouth.	Margot	imagined	 the	taste	and	texture,	the	dryness	before	it	dissolved	on
the	tongue,	down	 the	throat.	 She	leaned	against	the	wall,	 looking	 at	 the	gilded
altar	above	which	Jesus	hung,	pale	and	lanky,	arms	spread	on	the	cross.
       Returning	  to	her	 row,	 Mrs.	 Baek	 glanced	 up	 and,	for	 a	 second,	Margot
thought	that	 she	had	seen	her	and	Miguel.	 Of	 course,	they	 stood	out.	But	 then
she	picked	  up	 her	 songbook	 and	 seated	herself	  as	if	  nothing	  unusual	 had
happened.
       At	  the	 end	 of	 the	 service,	 Margot	 watched	 as	Mrs.	  Baek	 gathered	her
belongings	in	 a	 black	 canvas	bag	from	  which	 she	pulled	 out	 her	 cell	 phone.
Reading	her	screen,	she	stumbled	out	of	the	nave,	oblivious	to	her	surroundings.
       Margot	 signaled	 to	Miguel,	  and	they	followed,	  maintaining	 their	distance.
Before	exiting	 the	 building,	 Mrs.	 Baek	 turned	and	descended	a	flight	  of	 stairs
into	the	church’s	 basement.	Stepping	as	quietly	as	possible,	Margot	 and	Miguel
went	down	 into	a	 dusty	storage	area	and	waited	behind	 several	tall	 columns	of
cardboard	boxes.	They	could	 hear	Mrs.	Baek	 speaking	with	 someone,	a	man	in
Korean	whose	voice	sounded	familiar.
       “You	  look	 so	nice	tonight,”	  he	said.	“Let	  me	take	you	 out	for	 dinner.	 It’s
Christmas	Eve.”
       Margot	 and	Miguel	  glanced	at	each	other	as	they	crouched	 down	lower	 to
the	ground.
       “How	  did	you	get	my	number?”	 Mrs.	Baek	asked.
       The	man	laughed.	“What’s	 wrong	 with	you?	Come	here.”
       “Stay	 away	from	me.	Don’t	 ever	call	me	or	come	here	again.”
       “I	  thought	maybe	 you	might	 be	looking	  for	 a	job,”	 he	said.	 “I	 could	 help
you	find	a	new	one.”
       “I	 don’t	 need	anything	from	you.	 Why	won’t	 you	leave	me	alone?”
       “Shhh,	 lower	 your	voice.	 You’re	 like	 an	animal,”	 he	said.	“Ha,	 that’s	what
women	are	like	when	they	don’t	 have	men	around.	They’re	like	animals.”
       Mrs.	 Baek	said	something,	 which	Margot	 couldn’t	 understand,	through	 her
teeth.
       “What	 do	you	mean	by	that?”	 he	asked.
       “Mrs.	 Lee.”	 Her	voice	cracked.

216
       “Ha,	 which	 one?”
       “Lee	 Mina.”
       “I	 don’t	 even	know	who	that	is,”	 he	said.	“Come	here.”
       Swiftly,	  she	grunted.	He	yelped	in	pain.
       “Don’t	  touch	me,”	she	spat.	“I’ll	  kill	 you.”
       Margot	 peeked	around	the	boxes	to	see	Mrs.	Baek	rushing	out	and	Mr.	Park
following	 her,	cradling	his	shin.
       “Shit,”	  Margot	said,	looking	 at	Miguel.	 “Let’s	 go.”
       They	 ran	up	the	stairs	and	out	of	the	building	 into	the	cold	 night,	which	 had
rapidly	 blackened	into	a	 street	almost	empty	of	 people.	At	 the	other	 end	of	 the
church’s	parking	 lot,	 Mrs.	 Baek	slammed	the	door	 of	 her	battered	gray	Toyota
Camry	and	drove	off.	Mr.	 Park	had	disappeared.
       “She’s	  probably	  going	 home,”	  Margot	  said,	 catching	 her	 breath.	 “We
should	make	sure	she’s	okay?”
       Why	 did	she	say	her	mother’s	name?	Did	he	kill	 her?
       Driving	  toward	 Mrs.	 Baek’s	apartment,	 Margot	 remembered	the	stacks	of
books	and	magazines	in	 the	living	  room,	the	 layers	of	 paper	and	text,	 tenuous
skyscrapers,	and	Mrs.	Baek’s	 face	without	 makeup,	 the	wash	of	 pale	skin,	 and
the	eyes—intense,	defiant,	a	little	terrified.	 A	steady	and	slow	state	of	shock.	She
had	imagined	her	in	that	apartment,	poring	over	books,	completely	alone.
       But	 Margot	 had	been	wrong	about	both	her	and	her	mother:	their	loneliness
was	not	special,	 or	 any	worse	 than	anyone	else’s.	 In	fact,	 they	 each	had	their
own	universes,	small	 but	constructed	in	 their	own	 way.	Who	 was	to	say	that	 in
their	devices,	in	their	plots,	they	were	different	 from	 other	people?
       Margot,	 who	could	 only	see	her	mother	as	the	impossible	foreigner	with	her
rapid-fire	 Korean	and	embarrassing,	halting	 English,	who	 could	only	 see	her	as
an	oppressive	 prop	 in	 Margot’s	  own	 story,	 realized	 more	 and	 more	that,	 in
actuality,	 her	mother	was	 the	heroine.	 She	was	the	one	 who	had	 been	making
and	breaking	and	remaking	 her	own	life.	 And	 in	 the	end,	she	might’ve	 paid	for
it.

217
  Mina

Fall	2014

218
       ON	THE	SATURDAY	PRIOR	TO	THANKSGIVING,	ALMOST	one	month	after	Mr.
Kim’s	 death,	Mina	 entered	her	daughter’s	musty	bedroom,	 folded	newspaper	in
hand.	She	had	attempted	to	 snag	a	copy	of	 the	paper	every	 day	on	 her	way	 to
work	while	 stopping	for	inventory	 at	one	of	the	wholesale	businesses	downtown.
Sometimes	there	would	be	an	unread	newspaper	on	a	counter	that	she	would	slip
into	her	purse,	or	she	would	ask	if	she	could	take	a	look	inside	for	 an	obituary.	A
friend	had	 just	died.	 Finally,	 one	of	 the	business	owners	offered	 her	a	stack	of
newspaper	that	he	had	kept	from	 the	past	few	months—saved	for	 the	bottom	 of
his	birdcage	at	 home.	Inside	of	 her	parked	 car,	she	scavenged	through	the	pile
until	she	found	the	one	from	October,	the	one	with	Mr.	 Kim	 inside.
       Now	 on	 top	of	 Margot’s	 desk,	where	Mina	 mostly	 stored	her	own	 records
and	bills,	she	grabbed	a	pair	 of	scissors	from	 a	wide	plastic	 purple	cup	jammed
with	 all	the	 pens	they	had	collected	 over	the	years.	She	imagined	 peering	over
the	shoulder	of	her	daughter,	sitting	at	this	 desk	hunched	over	a	sketchbook	with
pencil	in	hand.
       Mina	  lay	 the	 newspaper	on	 that	 desk	and	 flipped	  carefully	 through	 the
pages	until	she	found	again	the	black-and-white	 photo	of	 Mr.	Kim,	 Kim	  Chang-
hee—a	slightly	 younger	 but	much	 more	vibrant	 manifestation	 of	 the	man	with
whom	she	had	traveled	to	the	Grand	Canyon	two	months	ago	in	September.
       Hand	 in	hand,	they	had	stared	at	the	largest	chasm	they	could	find.
       Dark	  shadows	 pressed	against	 red-	 and	 sand-colored	rock	  striped	 over
billions	 of	 years	 by	 wind	 and	 water.	 The	 purest	golden	 light	 saturated	 large
swathes	of	the	green	brush	and	trees	clinging	 to	walls	 of	hard	mineral	 against	a
soft	and	hazy	azure	sky.	The	warm	breeze	smelled	of	pine.	The	earth	was	rich.
       This	 was	what	she	had	always	 wanted—a	return	to	 feeling	minuscule,	 tiny
yet	safe	somehow	again.	Here	she	was	so	small	that	she	could	elude	the	cruelties
that	she	had	endured.	Here	she	could	go	undetected.	Nature	in	 its	most	extreme
forms	taught	us	that	 there	was	a	design	greater	than	us,	and	we	could	 unburden
ourselves	briefly	   from	 our	  individuality	   in	 this	  world,	  our	 self-importance.
Wasn’t	that	the	relief?
       The	 closest	proximity	 to	which	 she	could	attain	this	feeling	 in	her	everyday
life	 must	have	been	under	God’s	 roof	in	 a	cathedral,	where	 the	vaulted	ceiling,
that	arch,	was	a	 refuge	in	 which	 the	entire	universe,	 in	the	 form	 of	prayer	 and
song,	hummed.	Beauty	was	safety.	Beauty	kept	us	from	harm.
       Cumulus	 clouds	 above	projected	shadows,	dark	 silhouettes,	deepening	the
drama	of	the	peaks.	The	ornate	striations	of	color	and	light	made	the	spectacle	of
yesterday’s	overnight	 stop	 in	 Las	Vegas—which	 they	 had	 finally	 experienced
together	again	after	all	 these	years—laughable.	Standing	 in	front	 of	 this	chasm
was	like	looking	 up	at	heaven	and	into	the	deepest	part	of	the	earth—its	soul,	the

219
violence	and	agony	of	its	billions	 of	years,	and	the	resulting	splendor—at	once.
       And	 then	 three	weeks	 later	in	 early	 October,	he	 had	delivered	 in	 a	clean
manila	envelope	the	information	  on	the	whereabouts	of	 her	parents,	papers	that
she	now	stowed	in	a	safety-deposit	box	 along	with	 what	she	had	left	 of	her	past
—a	 few	 photographs	 from	 her	 time	 at	 the	 orphanage,	her	 old	 identification
documents	in	Korea,	the	only	image	she	had	left	of	 her	husband	and	daughter	on
that	day	they	had	gone	hiking	together.
       Here	 now	in	 front	of	 this	black-and-white	 photo	of	 Mr.	 Kim—his	 face	still
glowing,	  eyes	warm	  and	 soft,	 the	 gentle	 curve	  of	 his	 crooked	  smile—she
experienced	an	unburdening,	a	rush	of	relief	as	this	obituary	 confirmed	what	 she
had	known	 when	he	had	stopped	 answering	his	phone	 weeks	ago:	that	 he	was
gone	forever.	Now,	 she	could	reassemble	her	life,	 placing	Margot’s	 items—any
photographs	or	mementos	of	hers	that	Mina	had	hidden	from	Mr.	 Kim	 these	past
few	months—where	they	belonged	before	Margot’s	 next	visit.
       Margot	  would	 never	know	 he	 had	been	there,	 or	 who	 he	was.	And	  vice
versa.
       Carefully,	  Mina	 cut	 around	 the	edges	of	 the	 obituary’s	  text,	the	 straight
lines.
       In	 their	 few	 months	together,	 despite	his	 weakened	condition,	 despite	the
fact	that	their	bodies	had	changed,	hers	rounding	and	softening,	and	his	revealing
more	bone	and	angles,	they	loved	each	other.	He	kissed	her	on	the	mouth	in	 her
bed.	They	felt	 young	again	as	if	 they	had	just	moved	 to	America,	 as	if	they	had
always	been	in	love.	They	 could	somehow	erase	the	past.	She	had	forgiven	him.
She	did.	She	was	so	relieved	to	forgive	someone.
       But	 nothing	could	 prepare	her	for	the	hole	that	Mr.	Kim’s	  death	could	leave
in	her	life.
       She	 found	an	 empty	envelope,	 folded	 the	obituary,	 and	slipped	 the	paper
inside	for	 safekeeping.	She	opened	the	drawer	and	slid	the	envelope	underneath
the	tray	 of	 her	daughter’s	 art	supplies.	 To	her	 knowledge,	 Margot	 never	went
inside	 that	 desk	 anymore.	 Mina	  had	actually	  not	 seen	 her	 daughter	 sketch
anything	in	a	very	long	time.
       She	closed	the	 drawer,	sat	on	her	daughter’s	 chair,	and	wept	 on	top	 of	the
newspaper	that	 remained	spread	on	 the	 desk.	She	 lowered	 her	face	 onto	 the
empty	rectangle	from	 which	she	had	removed	Mr.	 Kim’s	  life,	soaking	 the	print,
gently	stamping	the	side	of	her	face	with	smears	of	ink.

220
       “MINA?”	MRS.	BAEK	SAID	ON	THE	PHONE,	RELIEVED	AND	angry.	“Where	have
you	been?	I’ve	been	trying	 to	reach	you	 for	days.	Haven’t	 you	been	listening	 to
your	messages?”
       For	 the	past	week	since	she	had	cut	the	obituary	from	 the	newspaper,	Mina
had	been	ignoring	 the	phone,	the	sound	 of	which	 made	her	 heart	pound	in	 her
chest.	She	had	been	overcome	 by	 the	most	 profound	 exhaustion,	recalling	  all
those	days	 of	  relentless	grief,	  years	 and	 years	 ago	when	  her	 husband	and
daughter	died,	like	so	many	waves,	pounding	against	her.
       Mr.	  Kim	 was	gone.	 This	 truth	had	 knocked	her	 down	 into	 the	icy	 water,
tossed	her	body	around,	and	she	found	 herself	gasping	for	 breath	on	 the	shore.
She	needed	sleep.	She	needed	rest	and	warmth.
       “You	  haven’t	been	at	work	in	what—a	week?”	 Mrs.	Baek	asked.
       Until	  today,	 the	 weather	 had	been	 balmy.	 In	 the	 seventies	and	 eighties
during	the	day.	Outside	now,	 the	sky	was	black,	and	the	ground	shimmered,	wet
with	rain.	The	season	was	turning	again.
       “I’m	  fine,”	 Mina	 said,	rubbing	the	space	between	her	brows.
       “Are	  you	 sure?	I	thought	 maybe	you	 might	 be	with	 Margot	 or	 something
for	Thanksgiving	 but	 .	.	.	 it’s	 been	too	long.	I’ve	  been	worried	about	 you	these
past	few	months.	What’s	wrong?	Can	you	tell	 me	what’s	wrong?”
       “You’ve	    done	 enough	 for	  me,	 unnie.”	   Mina’s	  voice	  cracked	 as	 she
remembered,	all	those	years	ago,	Mrs.	Baek	rushing	 through	her	bedroom	 door,
helping	her	to	the	bathroom,	the	toilet.	 How	 many	times	had	Mrs.	Baek	 held	her
hand?	“Please	do	not	worry	about	me.	I	just	 need	some	rest.	I’m	very	tired	 these
days.	I’ll	 be	back	at	work	tomorrow.	 I	promise.	We	can	talk	about	it	then.”
       Silence	on	the	other	end.
       “Hello?”	  Mina	 asked.
       “No.	  No.	 I’ll	  come	 over,	okay?	 Have	you	 eaten	anything?”	  Mrs.	 Baek’s
voice	softened.	“You	sound	weak.”
       “No,	 I	 don’t	need—”
       “I’ll	   bring	you	some	food.	I’ll	  be	over	in	an	hour,	okay?	Wait	for	 me.	I’ll	 be
there	soon.”
       As	 they	sat	on	Mina’s	 couch,	the	broken	figure	of	 the	Virgin	 Mary	 watched
and	Mina,	finally,	 after	twenty-six	 years,	shared	why	Mr.	 Kim	 had	fled.	She	told
Mrs.	 Baek	about	 what	had	 happened	to	Lupe	 that	 day—how	 the	 supermarket
owner	had	assaulted	her	and	Mr.	 Kim	 intervened,	 causing	him	 to	disappear	for
fear	of	 deportation.	Mina	  confessed	about	Mr.	 Kim’s	  reappearance	in	her	life,
their	affair	 over	the	summer,	their	 trip	 to	the	Grand	Canyon,	 the	information	 he
had	gathered	about	her	parents	by	using	a	private	investigator,	his	death.
       “Does	  Margot	 know?”	  Mrs.	 Baek	 asked,	picking	  up	 a	framed	 photo	 of

221
Margot	 as	a	 child,	 six	 or	 seven	 years	old,	 her	 bangs	straight	  across,	on	 the
couch’s	side	table.
       “No,	 she	does	not,”	Mina	 said	with	a	heaviness	in	her	chest.
       “I	  don’t	  remember	 this	 photo.”	 Mrs.	  Baek	 scanned	the	 room.	 “There’s
another	one	there,	too.	I	 remember	thinking	 that	you	 didn’t	 have	any	 photos	of
Margot—the	first	 time	I	came	here.	In	the	summer.”
       “I	 hid	 all	of	them.	I	 didn’t	 want	Mr.	Kim	 to	know.”
       “You	  never	told	him?”	Mrs.	 Baek	appeared	confused.
       “No.”
       “All	  those	years,”	 Mrs.	Baek	said,	eyes	lingering	 on	the	photo	 in	her	hand.
“But	Margot.	 Look	 at	that	face.	Don’t	 you	think	she	would	 want	to	know?	Don’t
you	think—”
       “It’s	  better	this	way.”	 Mina	 mustered	all	the	strength	she	could	to	say	those
words.	Did	she	believe	them?	She	had	but	now	she	wasn’t	so	sure.
       Mrs.	  Baek	nodded,	 setting	the	 frame	 down	 on	the	 table.	 Scrunching	 her
brows,	she	appeared	lost	in	 her	own	thoughts,	 her	own	 memories.	A	 deafening
silence	bloomed.
       What	 would	 Margot	gain	 from	knowing	 that	 her	father	had	reappeared	and
died,	only	months	later?	Margot	 had	already	given	 up	on	him	long	 ago.	She	had
moved	to	Seattle	and	apparently	was	doing	just	 fine	without	 him,	 without	 Mina,
too.	But	what	if	 Mina	was	wrong	about	her	daughter?	What	if—
       Abruptly,	   Mrs.	 Baek	 stood,	 paced	back	 and	 forth.	  She	stopped,	 turned
toward	Mina,	 and	asked,	“The	 owner	of	 the	supermarket,	the	one	who	 attacked
Lupe—whatever	happened	to	him?”
       “Mr.	  Park?”	Mina	 sighed.	“Nothing	 to	my	knowledge.	After	 I	 had	Margot,	I
left.	I	never	wanted	to	think	 about	him	again.”
       “His	 name	was	Mr.	Park?”
       “Yes,	 why?”	 Mina	 noticed	the	quickening	 of	 Mrs.	Baek’s	 breath.	“Are	 you
okay?”
       “I	  just	realized	something,	that’s	all.	 I	need	some	water.”	 Mrs.	Baek	rushed
toward	the	kitchen.	 Mina	 heard	her	grab	a	glass	from	 the	drying	 rack	and	fill	  it
from	the	tap.	A	moan	of	sadness	escaped	Mrs.	Baek’s	mouth.
       Mina	  found	  her	 slumped	 down	  on	 the	 laminate	 floor,	  leaning	  on	 the
cabinets,	and	Mina	was	struck	with	 the	feeling	 of	 staring	at	a	version	of	 herself.
How	many	times	had	she	leaned	on	those	cabinets	alone?
       “Unnie,”	   Mina	  said,	 bending	  down	  to	 the	 ground	  beside	 Mrs.	 Baek.
“What’s	 wrong?”
       Covering	 her	 face,	Mrs.	 Baek	 wept.	 Mina	 had	never	 seen	Mrs.	Baek	 cry
before,	and	she	had	the	sudden	urge	to	hold	her,	to	wipe	the	tears	from	her	face.

222
       “Unnie.”	 Mina	gently	helped	Mrs.	Baek	to	her	feet.	“Unnie,	please	have	a
seat.	Sit	in	the	living	room.”
       Mrs.	Baek	rested	again	on	the	couch,	leaning	forward	with	her	head	in	her
hands.
       “I’m	 sorry,”	Mina	 said.	“I’m	 sorry	if	I	 said	something,	I’m	sorry	if	I	 said
—”
       “No.	It’s	not	you.”	Mrs.	Baek	shook	her	head.
       Mina	grabbed	a	roll	of	toilet	paper	from	the	restroom	and	handed	it	to	Mrs.
Baek.
       “I	  just—I	 just	 realized	something,”	Mrs.	 Baek	said.	 Terrified,	 nostrils
flaring,	she	looked	into	Mina’s	eyes.	“Mr.	Park.”
       “Yes?”
       “I	  think	 he’s	the	 same	man	who’s	 been	following	 me.”	 She	breathed
through	her	mouth.
       “Following	you?”
       Mrs.	Baek	nodded.	“He’s	been	making	my	life	hell.	When	you	said	that	he
owned	the	supermarket,	I	realized	that	the	man—the	man	who’s	been	following
me,	he’s	the	same	Mr.	 Park.	He	told	 me	about	it,	 the	supermarkets	that	he
owned.”	Her	voice	grew	hoarse.	“For	whatever	reason,	I	couldn’t	connect	that
with	where	you	 had	worked—back	when	you	first	 came	to	America.”	Tears
streamed	down	her	face.	“I	never	connected	that	until	now.”
       “What	do	you	mean?”
       “Don’t	 you	just	 hate	how	small	this	world	 is?”	Mrs.	 Baek	asked	with	a
depth	of	sorrow	that	Mina	had	never	seen	in	her	eyes.	Her	red	lipstick	had	been
smeared	to	the	right	of	her	mouth.	Mina	had	the	urge	to	erase	it	from	her	cheek
with	her	thumb.	She	knew	exactly	what	Mrs.	Baek	meant.
       “He	bought	Hanok	House,	you	know?”	Mrs.	Baek	said.	“That’s	why	I	left.”
       Mina	gasped.	“Mr.	Park?	I	thought	.	.	.	Why	didn’t	you	tell	me?”
       “I	 didn’t	realize,	I	hadn’t	made	the	connection—”
       “No.”	 Mina	 shook	her	head.	“Why	didn’t	you	 tell	me	that	someone	was
following	you?”
       “I	 couldn’t.	I	figured	it’d	 be	best	to	not	involve	anyone	else.	I	didn’t	want
you,	or	anyone,	to	worry.	Or	what	if—what	if	he	retaliated	against	me	if	I	did,	or
if	someone	else	called	the	police?	I	thought	I	could	deal	with	this	on	my	own.”
She	blew	her	nose.	“I’ve	been	through	worse.”
       “Does	he	know	where	you	live?”
       “I	 moved	after	I	quit	the	restaurant.	I	had	to	change	my	number,	too,	earlier
this	year.	I’ve	been	hiding.	I	can’t	walk	around	the	park	or	the	lake	anymore.	I
drive	far—all	 the	way	 down	 Wilshire—to	go	 to	 the	pharmacy.	I	 go	to	 the

223
grocery	store	during	off	 hours.	I’m	always	looking	 in	 the	mirror	behind	me.”	 Her
eyes	opened	wide.	 “I	  don’t	 even	 know	 why	 .	 .	 .	It’s	  like	 he	 only	 wants	 me
because	I	rejected	him,	because	I	said	no.”
       Mina	 closed	her	eyes,	remembering	the	fear	on	Lupe’s	 face,	how	Mina	 had
the	gun	in	 her	purse	 at	the	supermarket	the	 next	day,	 how	 she	could’ve	 killed
him	before	she	quit.	She	could’ve	finished	him	 back	then.
       She	 went	into	 her	 bedroom,	where	 she	switched	 on	the	 light.	 Trembling,
muscles	tense,	she	retrieved	the	gun	 holster,	which	 she	had	 recently	moved	 to
the	drawer	 beside	her	 bed.	She	had	 never	intended	 to	 use	it,	 but	 in	 the	 dark
aftermath	of	 Mr.	  Kim’s	 death,	 she	had	become	 fascinated	with	  its	power,	 its
smell	of	 brown	leather,	the	 way	it	 felt	in	 her	hands.	She	could	hear	nothing	 but
her	own	breath.
       On	 the	 tour	 bus	back	 from	 the	 Grand	 Canyon,	the	 sides	of	 their	 bodies
pressed	against	each	other,	their	 fingers	laced,	 Mr.	 Kim	 had	asked,	“What	  did
you	do	with	the	gun?”
       “I	 still	 have	it,”	 she	said,	heart	racing.	“I	never	knew	how	to	get	rid	 of	it.”
       He	 nodded,	staring	ahead	at	the	back	of	the	seats	in	front	of	 them.	“Do	 you
know	how	to	use	it?”
       “No,	 I	 don’t.	I	 always	thought	I	could	figure	 it	out	myself	 if	I	 needed	to.”
       “You	  might	 want	to	 take	it	 to	 a	shop	and	get	 it	cleaned,	checked	 out	one
day.	Just	in	case.	I	could	help	you	do	that.	I	could	show	you	how	to	use	it.”
       Now	 in	 her	hands,	the	gleaming	brown	 leather	appeared	made	for	a	man—
belt	hooped,	redolent	of	cowboys,	the	West.	Although	 still	 strange	and	foreign	to
her	touch,	the	gun	animated	her	with	 thoughts	 of	revenge.	She	could	be	anyone
she	wanted	to	be	with	 this	gun.	She	could	 be	young	and	powerful	 again.	In	 this
country,	it	 was	easier	to	 harm	someone	else	than	to	stay	 alive.	It	 was	easier	to
take	a	life	than	to	have	one.	Was	she	finally	an	American?
       Mina	  remembered	the	 tenderness	with	 which	 Mrs.	 Baek	 fed	 her	on	 that
night	years	 ago,	before	Mr.	  Kim	 had	called,	 leaving	 her	in	 the	 morning.	 That
night,	she	had	dragged	herself	to	her	room	where	she	lay	down	and	wept.
       Sorry	 to	wake	you	up,	Mrs.	Baek	said.	I	have	your	porridge.
       Mina	 had	tried	 to	stand	in	 time	to	meet	Mrs.	 Baek.	But	 her	arms	collapsed
beneath	her.
       Here,	 take	a	bite,	she	said,	holding	the	spoon	up	to	Mina’s	mouth.
       Turning	  toward	 the	 bedroom	door,	 Mina	  noticed	on	 her	 dresser	the	 last
printed	photograph	she	had	taken	 with	 Margot,	 the	one	of	 them	together	at	her
high-school	 graduation.	 How	  proud	  and	 terrified	  Mina	  had	 been	that	  day,
knowing	 that	Margot	 would	soon	be	 on	her	own—all	 the	way	 in	 Seattle.	These
past	eight	 years,	 they	 had	 rarely	 taken	 any	 pictures	 since	 all	  of	 their	  time

224
together	had	been	working	at	the	swap	meet	over	the	holidays.	 Maybe	this	 year,
they	would	 not	only	 pose	at	her	 store,	but	she	would	 ask	that	 Margot	have	 the
image	printed	  and	mailed	 to	 her	 once	 she	returned	 to	 Seattle.	 Mina	 missed
having	something	physical	to	hold.
       She	entered	the	living	 room	with	the	holster	in	 her	hand.
       At	  the	sight	 of	 the	gun,	 Mrs.	 Baek	gasped,	jumping	 to	 her	feet	 from	 the
sofa.	The	 broken	Virgin	  Mary,	 which	 she	had	 been	contemplating,	 fell	 to	 the
rug.	“What	 are	you	doing	 with	 that?”	she	asked.	Her	eyes	were	white.	 “Put	that
away.”	Her	voice	rose.	“Have	 you	lost	your	mind?”
       Mrs.	 Baek	seemed	to	be	talking	 through	water,	 gulping	for	 air.	 The	holster
grew	heavy	in	 Mina’s	  hand.	A	 bomb	whistled	 in	 her	head.	Her	 ears	rang.	She
could	smell	the	sulfurous	earth,	the	blood	that	dripped	down	the	head	of	the	man,
a	stranger	who	carried	her	on	his	shoulders,	the	flash	of	red.	Mrs.	Baek’s	 lipstick
was	still	streaked	on	her	cheek.
       “He’s	 still	 the	same,”	Mina	 said.
       “Mina,”	   Mrs.	 Baek	said.	“Mina,	  please	put	 that	away.”	 Mrs.	 Baek	closed
her	eyes,	mouth	trembling.
       “Who	  knows	how	 many	 people	he	has	hurt?”	 Something	jostled	 inside	 of
her	like	 an	earthquake.	Her	voice	 was	the	glasses	rattling	in	 the	cabinets.	“You
need	this	now,	unnie.	 To	protect	yourself.	 I	 want	you	 to	protect	yourself.	 Don’t
you	think	you	should	protect	 yourself?”
       She	couldn’t	 lose	one	more	person	in	this	life.
       The	 acid	rose	in	 her	 throat.	A	 long	 trail	 of	 ants	devoured	a	snail	 that	had
been	smashed	outside	of	Lupe’s	apartment.	The	spoon	at	her	mouth.	 Back	then,
she	had	imagined	the	thrill	 of	killing	  Mr.	 Park.	She	had	imagined	cornering	him
at	the	supermarket.	 She	could’ve	 ended	him	 in	 front	 of	 everyone.	 Who	 knew
how	many	he	had	terrorized?	 How	many	 he	had	cannibalized	for	 his	own	gain?
How	 many	 of	 them	had	 he	 hurt?	How	  many	more	 lives	 could	 he	 ruin?	 She
needed	Mrs.	Baek	to	save	herself.
       The	 lust	 of	 the	carnival	 lights	 flashing.	 The	 salt	air	 and	 the	smell	 of	 hot
chocolate	on	the	breath.	She	and	Mr.	 Kim	 rising.	 A	 stage.	But	they	didn’t	  need
an	audience.
       And	 then	again	underneath	the	white	glare	of	a	lamp,	they	 sat	on	that	bench
at	the	 end	of	  the	pier,	 like	  strangers.	The	 moon	glowed,	  shimmering	 on	 the
water’s	 surface,	and	she	 realized	that	 life	  beneath	a	certain	 light—despite	 its
sadness,	its	tragedies,	its	disappointments—was	often	still	 stirring,	  arousing	the
germ	of	a	fresh	seedling	that	might,	 with	 enough	warmth,	unfurl,	 like	 the	tips	of
Mr.	Kim’s	 fingers	 as	he	dropped	the	change	in	her	hand.
       Holding	 the	gun	holster	still,	 Mina	 said,	“It’s	 loaded.”	 It	was	the	fall,	 nearly

225
one	month	before	winter.	But	her	hands	trembled	like	a	branch	pushing	the	green
buds	out	 of	the	 flesh,	 offering	 itself	 to	 the	world.	  Together,	they	 could	 finish
him.	“Let	 me	show	you	how	it	works.”

226
       Margot

Winter	2014—2015

227
       OUTSIDE	OF	MRS.	BAEK’S	DOOR,	MARGOT	STOOD	TO	the	side	of	the	fisheye,
heart	in	  her	 throat.	 Christmas	 Eve	 revelers	 in	  the	 next	 apartment	 laughed,
blasting	banda	music.	Sweat	glided	down	her	face,	neck,	and	back.	She	knocked
again,	this	time	 with	 more	force,	 as	if	 pounding	 on	a	drum.	 Paint	flecked	 onto
the	floor.	In	 the	basement	of	the	church,	Mrs.	Baek	had	said	to	Mr.	 Park,	I’ll	  kill
you.
       Margot	  and	Miguel	  had	wasted	nearly	 fifteen	 minutes	 finding	  a	spot	 for
their	 car.	The	 evening—its	  voluptuous	 mix	 of	 sermon	 and	 song,	smoke	 and
incense,	houses	netted	by	string	lights—felt	urgent	as	if	an	exit	had	been	closing,
trapping	Margot	in	 the	dark.
       “Who	  is	 it?”	 Mrs.	 Baek	yelled	 from	 a	 distance	inside	the	 apartment.	Her
voice	grew	closer,	asking	again,	“Who	 is	it?”
       Margot	 sighed	with	 relief.	 Mrs.	 Baek	was	home.	Mr.	 Park	hadn’t	 followed
her.
       “UPS,”	  Miguel	said,	startling	 Margot.	“I	 need	your	signature.”
       “Leave	 it	at	the	door.”
       “I	 need	you	to	sign	this.”
       “How	  come	I	can’t	see	you?”
       The	lock	 unlatched.	The	door	cracked	open.
       Margot	   pushed	 herself	  into	  the	  apartment	  as	 Mrs.	  Baek	  screamed,
stumbling	 backward	toward	 the	coffee	 table,	revealing	 a	long	 beige	slip	 under
the	same	gray	dove-colored	 robe.	Margot	 sprung	forward	 to	 help.	Shooing	 her
away,	Mrs.	Baek	wrapped	the	thick	 fleece	around	her	body,	tightened	 the	belt	at
her	waist,	and	groaned.
       “You	  hurt	me.”	She	clutched	her	hand	and	wrung	 it	with	 the	other.	She	had
removed	her	lipstick,	 mouth	 still	 flushed,	but	 her	eyebrows,	the	 dark	crescents,
remained	intact.
       “Sorry,”	   Margot	 said,	 catching	 her	breath.	 Miguel	  shut	the	 door	 behind
them.
       “I	  can’t—I	 can’t	 do	this	 right	 now,”	 Mrs.	 Baek	said,	 squeezing	her	hands
together,	knuckles	whitening.
       Two	  olive-colored	 suitcases	were	 splayed	 open	on	 the	 floor,	 filled	  with
shoes,	clothes,	and	books.	The	apartment	still	smelled	of	paper	and	ink	and	dust,
but	the	stacks	of	newspapers	and	novels	had	disappeared.	Only	the	furniture	and
some	miscellaneous	items—a	 CD	 boom	 box,	the	 flat-screen	television,	 empty
glass	vases—remained.
       “Are	 you	 going	somewhere?”	Margot	asked.
       “None	 of	your	 business.”
       Miguel	 stood	by	the	door	and	shrugged,	unsure	of	what	to	do	next.

228
       “If	   you’re	  going	 to	  leave,”	 Margot	  went	  on,	 “could	  I	  ask	 you	 some
questions	first?”
       “I’m	  in	a	hurry.”
       “Can	 I	contact	you?”	 Margot	asked.
       “She’s	 dead.”	Mrs.	 Baek’s	face	grew	glossy	 and	red	as	she	shook	her	head.
Tendons	in	her	neck	pulsed.	“What	does	any	of	this	matter	to	you?”
       “I	  found	 a	 safety-deposit	box.”	  The	 ache	in	 Margot’s	  chest,	the	 mortar.
“Some	 photos,	 photos	 of	 another	 family.”	   Tears	gathered	 in	 her	 eyes.	 The
apartment	blurred.	 “My	  mother	 with	  another	family—a	  husband,	a	 child—in
Korea.”	 She	 couldn’t	  believe	  those	words:	  another	 family.	  How	  could	 her
mother	have	 kept	 this	information	  from	  her?	Why	 didn’t	  her	 mother	tell	  her
about	this	 family,	 or	 her	father’s	 obituary	 in	 the	 drawer?	Could	 the	past	 have
hurt	that	much?
       Mrs.	 Baek	winced	from	 the	pain	of	 her	hand.	“Hold	 on.”	In	 the	kitchen,	she
opened	the	freezer	 with	 a	 suctioning	 sound.	She	returned,	 plopping	 her	 body
down	on	 the	hunter	green	couch	 with	 a	bag	of	 frozen	 peas	and	carrots	for	 her
hand.
       Margot	 half	 sat	on	the	arm	at	the	opposite	end.	Miguel	 waited	 by	the	door,
swaying	 a	 little	  to	  the	 Christmas	 music	  playing	  through	 the	 walls	  of	  the
neighboring	apartment.
       “There	  was	 another	 family,”	   Margot	  said.	 “Before	  me.	 Do	 you	 know
anything	about	 them?	There’s	a	 photo.”	 She	wiped	 her	eyes	with	 a	sleeve.	“A
husband,	a	little	 girl.	 It	must	 have	been	in	the	seventies,	or	the	 early	eighties—
before	she	came	to	America.”
       “It	  makes	sense.”	Mrs.	Baek	sighed,	closing	her	eyes.	“She	never	wanted	to
talk	about	the	 past.	I	always	figured	 it	 was	because	.	.	.	she	was	an	orphan,	 the
war.”	 She	opened	her	eyes	again	and	looked	 at	Margot.	 “But	  she	mentioned	a
husband	once,	that	he	died	in	an	accident.”
       “What?”
       “That’s	  all	 that	 I	 know.	 I	 didn’t	  press	it	 any	 further	 than	that.	 She	only
brought	it	up	once.”
       “Do	 you	think	 that	she	could	still	 be	alive?	The	daughter?”
       “I—I	  wouldn’t	  know.”	 Mrs.	 Baek	rubbed	between	her	 brows.	“Were	 there
any	papers?	With	the	photo?”
       Margot	 nodded	yes.
       “The	 only	 thing	 I	 know	 about—you	 promise	to	 leave	me	alone	 after	this,
right?	 She	found	  some	papers.	Your	  father	 helped	 her.	 He	 worked	 with	  an
investigator.	He	 helped	her	find	 some	information	  on	her	parents,	the	ones	she
had	been	separated	from	in	the	war.”

229
       “What?	  Her	 parents?”	 Margot	  asked,	breathless.	Her	 mother	 had	 never
spoken	of	them,	as	if	she	had	given	up.	But	she	hadn’t.	She	had	found	them	after
all.
       “Her	  mother	survived,	 I	 think,”	  Mrs.	 Baek	 said.	“Your	  mother	had	 these
papers.	That’s	all	I	know,	okay?	Were	they	in	 the	safety-deposit	box?”
       Margot	 nodded,	 remembering	the	pages	of	 Korean	words,	 illegible,	 inside
that	manila	envelope—forms,	documents,	handwritten	notes.
       “So,	 she	had	another	family,”	 Mrs.	 Baek	said	to	 herself.	“A	 husband	and	a
child	in	 Korea.	That	 makes	sense.”	She	tossed	the	frozen	peas	and	carrots	onto
the	coffee	table	and	squeezed	her	fingers	as	if	they	still	ached.
       Margot	 rose	from	 the	couch	to	find	 something	for	Mrs.	 Baek’s	hand.	In	 the
narrow	kitchen,	 which	jittered	 under	the	fluorescent	 light	 and	smelled	faintly	 of
bleach,	she	filled	 a	plastic	 bag	on	 the	counter	with	 ice	 cubes	from	 the	freezer,
empty	except	for	 some	dumplings	 and	stiff	 gulbi.	  As	she	walked	 by	the	 round
dining	table	 beside	the	kitchen,	 she	noticed	a	red	satchel	had	been	tipped	 over,
exposing	its	contents—a	passport,	lipstick,	pens,	a	wallet.
       Margot	 picked	 up	the	passport.	Neither	she	nor	her	mother	ever	had	one	of
their	 own.	  Mrs.	 Baek	 half	  smiled	  in	 the	 photo.	  The	 name	 read	 Margaret
Johnson.
       “Who’s	  Margaret	Johnson?”	Margot	asked.
       “None	  of	 your	 business,”	 Mrs.	 Baek	 said,	lunging	  toward	 Margot.	 “Get
away	from	 there.”	 Miguel	 came	forward	  from	 the	entryway	 and	grabbed	Mrs.
Baek’s	arm.	“Get	away	from	 that	bag.”	Her	eyes	flared.
       “Margaret	  Johnson,”	Margot	 repeated	in	 a	low	 voice.	 “But	 .	.	 .	isn’t	 your
last	name	Baek?	And	your	first	name	is	Margaret?”
       She	 snatched	the	passport	 out	 of	 Margot’s	 hand.	 “It’s	  my	 legal	 name.	I
never	liked	the	name	Margaret,	but	 my	husband	thought	it	was	a	good	name	.	.	.
Margaret	like	Margaret	Thatcher.”
       “Your	  husband?”
       “Yes,	  but	 .	 .	.	 I	 always	 liked	  the	name	 Margot.”	  Her	 eyes	softened.	 “I
helped	pick	your	name,	you	know.	I	 guess	you	wouldn’t	remember.”
       Margot	 shook	 her	head.	The	 irony	 of	 being	named	by	 a	woman	 who	had
been	named	by	a	man.	How	 many	names	could	one	person	have?	And	why	 did
she	now	refer	 to	 herself	 as	Mrs.	 Baek?	Was	 it	 her	maiden	 name?	Or	a	 fake?
Could	she	have	been	hiding	from	someone	else	besides	Mr.	Park?
       “Remember,	 we	 lived	 together	in	 the	same	house	when	 your	 mother	first
moved	to	America.	I	had	.	.	.	I	 had	just	left	my	husband	in	Texas.”
       The	Southern	twang.	Another	 life	 entirely.	Almost	 another	country.
       Margot	 sat	with	  her	elbows	on	 the	dining	 table,	forehead	 pressed	into	her

230
palms.	“What	happened?	You	just	didn’t	 get	along	with	your	 husband?”
       “No.”	  She	shook	her	head.	“He	was	the	worst	kind	of	person.”
       “And	  Mr.	 Park?	We	overheard	you	 fighting	 with	 him.	 At	 church,”	 Miguel
said.
       Mrs.	 Baek	gasped,	stunned.
       “Has	 he	been	following	 you?”	 Margot	 asked.	“Why	 did	you—why	 did	 you
meet	him	down	there?”
       Mrs.	  Baek	burst	 into	 tears,	covering	 her	 face	with	  her	hand.	 “You	  were
there?”	she	asked.
       “Yes,	 we	heard	everything,”	 Margot	lied.
       “I	  wanted	 to	tell	 him	  once	and	for	 all	 to	 leave	 me	alone.”	 She	 gathered
herself,	wiping	 her	eyes	with	the	sleeve	of	her	robe.	“I	  didn’t	 think	I’d	 be	.	.	 .	in
any	danger	at	church.	I	 didn’t	 even	think	 he	 had	my	number.	 I	changed	it.	 But
during	the	service,	I	got	 a	message	from	him,	letting	me	know	 that	he	was	there,
that	he	wanted	to	talk	to	me.”
       “Is	  that	 why	 you	 closed	the	 store?	Is	 that	why	 you’re	  leaving?”	 Margot
asked.
       Mrs.	 Baek	nodded.
       “Was	  my	 mother	with	  Mr.	 Park?”	 Margot	 asked.	“On	 the	 night	 that	 she
died?	Do	you	 think	 it	 could’ve	 been	Mr.	 Park	who	 pushed	her?	He	seems	like
—”
       “No,	 no.”	 Mrs.	Baek	coughed.
       Margot	 steeled	herself.	“The	 landlord	 of	my	 building	 said	that	he	had	seen
you—and	Mr.	  Park	following	  you—at	 the	 apartment,	my	 mother’s	 apartment.
He	couldn’t	remember	when.	In	 September	or	October.”
       “What?”	  She	opened	her	eyes	wide.
       “So	 Mr.	 Park	knew	 where	she	lived,”	  Margot	said,	 voice	rising.	 “Was	 she
with	Mr.	 Park?	Do	 you	think	 she	could’ve	 been	with	Mr.	 Park	on	 the	night	that
she	died?”
       “No.	 No.”	 Tears	spilled	down	her	cheeks.
       “I	  don’t	  think	 she	 was	alone	 that	 night.	 He	 heard	 yelling,	  the	landlord
thought	he	had	heard	her	fighting	 with	 someone.”	Margot’s	 heart	raced.	“Could
he	have	pushed	her?”
       A	 grimace	of	pain	appeared	on	Mrs.	Baek’s	face,	shattered.
       “Maybe	 he	was	trying	 to	 find	you,”	 Margot	 said.	“He	 could’ve	 pushed	her,
right?”
       Mrs.	 Baek	tossed	her	passport,	slapping	the	surface	of	 the	table.	She	thrust
her	hand	into	the	red	purse	and	pulled	out	a	black	handgun.
       Margot	 jumped.	 The	last	 time	she	had	 been	this	close	to	 a	gun	was	 when

231
she	and	 her	 mother	 had	 been	 robbed	 as	they	 had	 parked	 in	  front	 of	  their
apartment.	Her	mother	had	surrendered	her	purse	to	the	stranger,	whose	face	was
covered.	Any	 wrong	 move	would	  result	in	 bullets,	 blood	sprayed	 on	shattered
glass.	At	ten	years	old,	Margot	 had	remained	in	 the	back	seat,	frozen—still	 as	a
deer	swallowed	in	headlights.
       She	remembered	her	mother	shaking	and	crying	 after	the	man	had	left.	 Her
arms	folded	over	the	steering	wheel,	her	head	down,	her	hair	disheveled.	Margot
had	been	too	terrified	 to	comfort	 her	mother,	 who	could	 never	call	 the	cops	for
help.	She	could	 never	trust	the	 police,	never	 knew	what	 she	could	be	deported
for	and	 when,	what	 could	 happen	to	Margot	 if	  she	were	taken	away.	 She	had
worked	so	 hard	in	 this	 country	 for	 so	 little,	 which	 could	 be	 destroyed	at	any
moment—either	by	criminals	 on	the	street	or	men	in	uniforms.
       “Look	   familiar?”	   Mrs.	  Baek	  asked,	 checking	 on	  Miguel	  behind	  her.
Holding	the	gun,	her	hand	trembled.	“Do	 you	recognize	this?”
       Margot	 shook	her	head.
       “This	 was	your	mother’s.”	 Her	 voice	cracked.
       Of	 course.	Who	else	would	protect	them	but	herself?
       “She	 wanted	me	to	keep	this	in	case—in	case	Mr.	Park—”	 Mrs.	 Baek	wept,
her	face	bright	red.
       “What?”	  Margot	glanced	at	Miguel,	 immobile	 by	the	door,	frozen	with	 fear.
       “She	 tried	 to	 give	 this	 to	me,	 to	protect	 myself,”	  Mrs.	 Baek	said,	 gently
setting	the	gun	on	the	table.	The	 room	relaxed.	Margot	 could	 breathe.	“They	all
worked	at	 the	 supermarket	together,	before	 you	 were	born.	 Mr.	 Park	 was	the
owner.”
       “The	 same	one	where	my	father	worked?”
       “Yes.”
       “So	  my	 mother	 knew	 Mr.	  Park	from	  back	 then?”	 Margot	 stared	 at	the
muzzle	of	the	gun,	lying	 down	but	pointed	in	her	direction.
       “One	 day	 .	.	 .	there	was	 a	woman	 in	his	 office.	 She	had	been	screaming.
Your	mother	said	that	your	father	stopped	Mr.	 Park	as	he	was	attacking	a	woman
named	Lupe.	Your	father	hit	him.”
       Margot	 covered	her	mouth	with	 her	hands.
       “Your	  father	 left	  LA	 after	 that.	 He	 didn’t	 want	 to	 get	 in	 trouble.”	 Mrs.
Baek’s	 eyes	 met	 Margot’s.	   “He	 didn’t	   have	 his	 papers.	 Maybe	  Mr.	  Park
might’ve	reported	him.”
       A	  beat	  of	 silence	  passed	as	 Margot	  tried	  desperately	 to	 absorb	 this
information.	 Finally	  she	asked,	“Did	  you	 know	 the	entire	 time	 that	you	 were
dealing	with	the	same	Mr.	Park,	the	same	Mr.	Park	from	her	past?”
       Mrs.	 Baek	shook	her	head	as	she	sat	down	at	the	table,	where	the	gun	rested

232
between	them	 like	 a	border.	 Margot	 joined	 her	 and	sat	 on	 one	of	 the	 dining
chairs.	She	had	the	urge	to	turn	 the	gun	so	that	 it	faced	 the	wall	 instead	of	her.
But	at	the	same	time,	the	idea	of	touching	 a	potentially	loaded	weapon,	reaching
for	 it,	 and	how	 that	 might	 cause	Mrs.	 Baek	 to	 react,	 unnerved	her.	 The	gun
remained	where	it	lay—silent	 and	volatile.
       Sweat	beaded	on	Margot’s	face.
       Miguel	 backed	himself	 onto	the	couch,	about	ten	feet	away	from	them.
       “When	  did	she	find	 out	 about	what	 Mr.	 Park	was	 doing	to	 you?”	 Margot
asked.
       “After	  your	father	 died,	she	finally	 told	me	about	her	relationship	with	 him.
How	they	reconnected	this	summer,	what	had	happened	to	him	and	her	and	Lupe
before	he	disappeared.	She	never	told	 me	that	story	 before.	I	 don’t	 know	 why.
Maybe	she	was	ashamed?”	She	rubbed	her	forehead	with	her	fingers.	“I	 told	 her
the	truth	about	why	 I	 had	left	Hanok	 House—Mr.	 Park	bought	the	 restaurant	to
be	closer	to	me.”
       “Did	  you	ever	go	out	with	him?”	 Margot	 asked.
       “We	 went	 on	a	few	 dates	at	the	beginning	of	 the	year.	I	 never	returned	his
calls.	He	bought	the	restaurant	and	started	showing	up	everywhere—downtown,
the	park	where	I	used	to	walk.	So	I	 quit	working	 at	Hanok	House.”	 She	groaned,
exhausted.	“I’ve	spent	so	much	of	the	past	nine	months	looking	behind	me.”
       “Why	  didn’t	  you	 tell	  her	earlier?”	  Margot	 asked.	 “Maybe	 she	 could’ve
helped	you	somehow?	Have	you	told	anyone?”
       Mrs.	  Baek	 shook	her	 head.	“We	  hadn’t	 seen	each	other	 in	 over	 twenty
years.	What	could	she	do?	All	 she	would	 do	is	worry	 about	me.	I	 wanted	her	to
be	happy.	I	wanted	us	.	.	.	to	start	over	again.”	 She	placed	her	head	in	her	hands,
elbows	on	 the	table.	“But	  after	your	 dad	died,	 and	she	told	 me	the	 truth,	your
mom	and	I—we	 realized	that	it	 was	the	same	person.	Mr.	Park	is	 the	same	man
who	tried	 to	rape	Lupe	 years	ago.	Who	knows	 how	many	 people	he	has	hurt?”
Her	voice	broke.
       She	lifted	 her	 face,	revealing	the	depth	 of	how	 crushed	she	had	been,	how
so	much	of	 her	life	  had	been	about	finding	 beauty	 and	wholeness,	the	kind	 of
meaning	that	stories	 gave	us,	gluing	 herself	 back	together—the	 perfectly	 lined
red	lips,	the	dark	crescents	for	brows,	the	shimmering	 brown	eye-shadow	on	her
lids—after	being	smashed	by	the	circumstances	of	her	life	over	and	over	again.
       Margot	 closed	her	eyes.	How	each	of	these	women	deserved	so	much	more
from	this	world.
       “She	 told	 me	to	take	the	gun.”	 Mrs.	 Baek	wiped	 her	nose	on	the	sleeve	of
her	gray	robe.	“But	  .	.	.	 every	time	 I	look	 at	it,	 I—I	 feel	 sick.”	 Her	 voice	grew
hoarse.

233
       Margot’s	 heart	thumped.	If	 she	could	reach	for	 the	gun,	what	would	 she	do
with	it	 in	her	hand?	She	had	never	held	a	gun	in	her	life.
       “She	 said	she	didn’t	need	it	 anymore,	that	I	needed	it	to	 protect	myself,	but
I	kept	trying	 to	explain	.	 .	.	I	couldn’t	 explain	 to	her	.	.	.”	 She	cried,	covering	her
face	again.
       “What	 couldn’t	 you	explain?”
       “That	  .	.	 .	that	my	 husband	.	 .	.”	 Mrs.	 Baek	lowered	 her	 hands.	Her	eyes
bore	into	 Margot’s.	 “He	 would	 get	so	angry	 sometimes,	so	angry	at	the	 world.
He	 would—he	 hit	  me	in	  the	 face.”	 She	grabbed	 her	 throat	 as	if	  protecting
herself.
       “God,	 I’m	 so	sorry,”	 Margot	said.
       “One	 day,	he—pointed	 a	gun	like	 that	at	me.”	 She	stared	at	the	gun	on	the
table.	“It	 looked	exactly	the	same.	And	I	grabbed	my	purse	and	ran.	I	never	went
back.	I	left	forever.	 He	was	going	to	kill	 me.”
       Margot	 imagined	 Mrs.	 Baek	 in	her	 car	like	 her	mother,	 eyes	hard,	as	she
steeled	herself	for	the	long	drive,	 that	long	drive	once	to	 Las	Vegas.	Mirrors	and
glass	obscured	by	films	 of	dust.	Margot	 had	never	been	to	Texas,	but	she	could
picture	 the	 bright	  and	 wide	 landscape—all	 yuccas,	 breathtaking	  mountains,
ocher	land,	and	sage—as	Mrs.	Baek	fled	for	her	life.
       There	 was	a	sudden	stillness	as	if	the	whole	room	 was	holding	its	 breath	at
once;	the	silence	before	a	tidal	wave	crashes	down.
       “How	  did	 you	end	 up	with	 the	gun	 if	 you	didn’t	  want	it?”	  Margot	 asked.
She	reached	forward	to	touch	Mrs.	Baek’s	hand,	but	she	pulled	away.
       “I	 was	trying	 to	.	.	.	She	was	reaching	toward	me,	to	give	 me	the	gun.”	Mrs.
Baek	closed	her	eyes,	her	face	crumpling.	“I	 changed	my	mind.	She	.	.	.	she	was
so	stubborn.”
       “Did	  you	push	her?”	Margot	asked.
       “I	 didn’t	 think	 .	.	.	It	all	 happened	so	quickly.”	Her	voice	 broke.
       “Did	  you	push	her?”	Margot	repeated.
       Mrs.	 Baek	nodded	yes.
       Margot	 burst	into	tears.
       “And	  you	left	her	there	to	die?”	Miguel	 asked,	wiping	 his	eyes.
       “I	 didn’t	 know	 what	to	do.	I	 never	wanted	to	.	.	.	I	couldn’t	 .	.	.”	 She	sobbed
weakly,	covering	 her	face	with	 her	 hands.	“There	was	no	 way	to	 save	her.	She
was	gone.”
       Margot	 finally	 knew	the	truth.	 It	had	been	an	accident.
       “And	  you	took	the	gun?”	Miguel	 asked.
       “I	  didn’t	 want	to	 leave	it	there	in	 case	.	.	.	it	 would	 look	 suspicious.”	Mrs.
Baek	hiccuped	through	her	tears.

234
       Margot’s	  ears	rang	 in	the	 exhausted	silence	that	 followed.	  She	was	both
heartbroken	by	 her	mother’s	 death	and	Mrs.	 Baek’s	 life	 and	 relieved	 to	know
that,	in	the	end,	Mr.	 Park	hadn’t	harmed	her	mother,	that	there	was	no	malicious
intent.	In	a	way,	 her	mother	was	now	 free.	She	had	died	trying	 to	help	someone
she	loved,	her	friend.
       “What	 are	you	going	to	do	now?”	 Margot	 asked.
       “I	   don’t	 know.	  I’m	  leaving	  town.”	  Defeated,	 Mrs.	 Baek	 stared	 at	 the
ground.	“Margot,	 I’m	  so	sorry	about	 what	happened.	I	 didn’t	 think—she	 never
mentioned	that	you	 might	 be	coming	 home.”	 She	sniffled,	 wiping	  her	nose	on
her	sleeve.	“If	 only	 that	Mr.	 Park	 would’ve	 just	 left	me	 alone.”	She	gritted	 her
teeth.	“This	is	all	 his	fault.”
       “Should	  we	call	 the	 cops?”	 Margot	 asked.	“I	 mean,	 after	you	 leave.	 We
can’t	just	let	him	 get	away	with	 doing	this	to	everyone.	You	 and	Lupe,	you	can’t
be	the	only	ones,	right?”
       Mrs.	 Baek	shook	her	head.
       “I	  think	we	 have	to	call	 the	police,”	 Miguel	 agreed.	“We	don’t	 have	to	 say
anything	about	 your	mom’s	 death.	It	 could	 just	 be	about	him,	 his	 stalking,	his
behavior.	We	could	just—”
       “You	  don’t	understand,”	Mrs.	 Baek	said.	“It	doesn’t	work	 that	way.”
       “I	 don’t	 think	 you	have	to	leave,”	Margot	 said.	“It’d	  be	better	if	you	stayed.
We	 could	 do	 this	 together.	I’m	  sure	 there’s	 other	 women,	 maybe	 at	Hanok
House,	or	from	the	supermarket	back	in	the	day—”
       Mrs.	 Baek	seized	the	gun	 with	 two	hands,	knocking	 the	dining	 chair	down
behind	her	as	she	stood.	She	pointed	 the	barrel	 at	Margot,	 then	backed	 herself
into	a	corner,	arm	trembling	 from	 the	weight.	It	 was	the	shaking	of	that	arm	that
terrified	 Margot	the	 most,	as	if	Mrs.	 Baek	was	mustering	 all	 her	strength	to	not
shoot	them	all	right	now.
       Margot	 held	her	breath	as	if	underwater.	She	imagined	them	all	 submerged,
tumbling	 in	the	waves,	trying	 to	hold	 on	to	each	other.	But	 this	time	 she	wasn’t
worried	about	her	mother.	She	was	worried	about	herself.	She	was	worried	about
Miguel.	She	would	 do	anything	to	save	them.
       “I’ll	   figure	 it	out,	 okay?”	 Mrs.	Baek	 said,	gasping.	“I	 need	you	to—I	 need
you	to	leave	now.”
       Was	 that	 a	 faint	 smile?	 A	 glimmer	  appeared	in	 her	 eyes	as	 if	 she	had
designed	a	solution.	As	if	 this	 gun,	Mina’s	 death,	had	been	part	of	 her	story,	its
symmetry,	all	along.	Its	purpose	was	clear.
       Mrs.	 Baek	lowered	the	gun	and	said,	“I	am	ready.”

235
       A	DAY	AFTER	CHRISTMAS,	MARGOT	STEPPED	OUTSIDE	of	her	apartment	building
into	a	 bright	 yet	 hazy	late-	 December	light—an	 atmosphere	with	  that	specific
quiet	deflation	 after	a	major	 holiday,	 as	if	 the	air	 had	been	let	out	of	 the	world
until	 the	 impending	 celebration	 on	 New	 Year’s	 Eve.	 The	 sulfurous	 smell	 of
leftover	fireworks	 mixed	 with	 exhaust	added	to	the	afternoon’s	malaise,	like	 the
entire	city	was	hungover.
       Margot	 had	spent	most	of	yesterday	at	her	mother’s	 apartment	with	 Miguel
discussing	what	they	should	do	after	the	incident	 at	Mrs.	 Baek’s.	She	had	a	gun.
She	had	killed	Margot’s	 mother.	But	 they	couldn’t	 call	the	police,	 could	they?	It
was	an	accident.	And	Mrs.	Baek	could’ve	 harmed	them	if	she	had	wanted	to,	but
she	hadn’t.	Instead,	Margot	and	Miguel	 had	slid	out	the	door	 and	run	downstairs
into	the	car	parked	on	the	street.
       Mrs.	  Baek	had	 clearly	 suffered	enough.	 She	needed	freedom.	 She	didn’t
deserve	any	 more	 pain	 than	 what	 had	 already	 threatened	 to	 break	 her—an
abusive	husband,	a	stalker,	a	dead	best	friend.	Crime	and	punishment.	She	would
have	to	live	with	 herself	somehow,	and	escape	Mr.	Park,	this	city	that	sometimes
chewed	you	up	and	spat	you	out.
       Margot	 wished	 that	she	had	gotten	 Mrs.	 Baek’s	number	 so	that	she	could
contact	her	 somehow,	make	 sure	that	 she	was	safe.	 But	 it	 was	too	 late.	 And
although	she	had	been	relieved	to	 finally	 understand	what	had	happened	on	the
night	of	her	mother’s	 death,	she	still	didn’t	 have	answers	about	her	mother’s	life
—the	safety-deposit	box.
       Who	 was	the	other	family—the	 husband	and	child,	pigtailed	in	 a	red	T-shirt
and	leggings?	Did	 Margot	  have	a	half	 sister	 somewhere?	And	 where	was	 her
mother’s	mother,	 Margot’s	 grandmother,	who	 Mrs.	 Baek	said	had	survived	 the
war?	Was	she	still	 alive?	Did	 Mina	 ever	contact	 her?	Would	she	want	 to	know
about	Margot,	or	would	 she	be	ruined	by	the	death	of	her	Mina,	the	daughter	she
had	lost	in	the	war?
       Now	 haunted	by	 the	weight	 of	 these	questions,	Margot	 finally	 felt	 like	 an
adult.
       Choosing	 if	and	when	and	how	to	share	the	truth	might	be	the	deepest,	most
painful	necessity	of	growing	 out	into	the	world	 and	into	yourself.
       Sometimes	we	 wrongly	 guessed	how	much	others	could	bear.	It	 was	in	the
curve	of	 a	question	mark—should	 I	 or	 shouldn’t	 I?—in	 which	 we	all	 lived.	 In
the	end,	her	 mother	had	 decided	to	 keep	Margot	 and	 her	father	 a	secret	from
themselves,	to	protect	 them	both.	 Margot	 would	 need	to	forgive	 all	 of	 them—
Mina,	her	father,	Mrs.	Baek—so	 that	she	could	one	day	begin	to	forgive	herself.
       After	 several	minutes	of	 feeling	the	sun	on	her	face,	Margot	untied	 her	gray
hoodie	from	 around	 her	waist.	 She	walked	 with	 purpose,	although	 she	had	no

236
idea	where	 she	would	  end	 up—which	 direction	  and	 where.	Like	  a	 fire,	 she
needed	air.	She	even	had	the	urge	to	run	for	the	hell	of	it.
       She	passed	a	small	park	 with	 a	playground.	Children	 rode	the	swings	 high
or	chased	each	other	 down	slides,	 laughing	 and	running,	 a	commotion	 of	 joy.
She	walked	in	 front	 of	 a	gas	station,	then	a	 Korean	grocery	 store,	and	found	 a
strip	mall	  with	 several	businesses,	including	  a	salon,	 huge	posters	of	 women
with	’80s	hair	 in	the	windows.
       Her	 mother	 used	to	 cut	Margot’s	  hair	in	 the	 dim	 light	 of	 the	dining	 area
next	to	the	kitchen.	She	laid	sheets	on	the	floor,	 draped	a	towel	around	Margot’s
shoulders,	and,	 with	  a	comb	 and	 scissors	 in	 hand,	 worked	 her	 way	 around
Margot’s	head.
       “Your	  hair	is	so	shiny,”	her	mother	said.	“So	 soft.”
       Margot	 never	knew	 how	 to	receive	her	mother’s	 compliments	 because	she
had	grown	accustomed	to	 her	barbs—about	her	acne,	her	 wrinkled	 clothes,	her
creaseless	eyelids,	the	 beginnings	 of	 a	 double	 chin.	 It	 was	 as	if	  her	mother
believed	that	 any	 ego	at	 all	 would	 be	too	 big	 for	 this	 home,	 too	big	 for	 this
family.	Her	 fundamental	responsibility	 was	keeping	Margot	in	check.
       But	 every	 now	and	 then,	her	mother	 would	 direct	her	 attention	to	 herself,
brandishing	a	quiet	and	devastating	memory—a	 cold	injection,	 almost	a	relief,	 a
reprieve	from	her	gaze,	into	Margot’s	 veins.
       “When	  the	 nuns	cut	 my	 hair,	 they	 never	 cared,”	 her	 mother	 once	said.
“They	never	made	it	pretty.”
       Or:	 “There	 was	a	girl	at	the	orphanage	who	would	 beat	me,”	she	said.	“She
told	me	that	she	was	going	to	destroy	my	face,	set	fire	to	it.”
       Margot	 never	knew	how	 to	respond	to	these	intense	sudden	offerings	of	the
self,	 bottomless	 and	rare,	 as	 if	 the	 statements	had	 been	 at	 the	edge	 of	 her
mother’s	psyche,	the	edge	of	her	mother’s	survival,	 and	any	further	conversation
could	 push	her	 over	 the	 brink,	  plunge	 her	head	 underwater.	 Instead,	as	 her
mother	cut	her	hair,	Margot	 waited	in	 silence	for	the	signal	that	she	had	finished
—removing	 the	towel	 as	a	 cape,	brushing	Margot’s	  shoulders,	picking	 off	 the
bits	stuck	to	her	face.	And	then	Margot	was	temporarily	 set	free.
       Inside	 of	 the	salon,	which	 smelled	 vaguely	 of	hair	 dye	 and	perms,	a	slim
young	 woman	 with	 chestnut-colored	 hair,	  a	French-striped	 shirt,	  and	trendy
chunky	white	sneakers,	greeted	her	eagerly.	Margot	sat	in	the	waiting	area	where
she	noticed,	among	the	one-inch-thick	beauty	and	lifestyle	 magazines,	a	copy	of
the	 local	 newspaper	 in	 Korean.	 On	  the	 cover	 was	 an	 image	 of	 Mr.	  Park,
sympathetic,	genial	with	 his	 Paul-Bunyan-teeth	smile.	 Margot	 seized	the	paper,
trying	 to	decipher	 what	she	could—the	 photograph	 of	 him	and	 the	image	of	 a
silver	Mercedes	sedan	parked	on	a	dirt	road.

237
       “I’m	  ready	 for	you	 now,”	 the	stylist	 said,	both	 gracious	and	curious	 about
Margot,	like	 a	visitor	from	 a	foreign	planet.	She	never	paid	much	attention	to	her
looks	and	it	was	obvious.
       Margot	  held	 out	the	 newspaper.	“Did	  you	 see	this?	 Do	 you	 know	 what
happened	to	this	guy?”
       The	 stylist	 peered	at	the	 front	 page	and	said,	 “Oh.	 They	 found	 him	 dead
yesterday	afternoon.”
       Margot	 gasped.	“On	Christmas?”
       She	 remembered	Mrs.	 Baek’s	arm	 trembling	 from	 the	 weight	 of	the	 gun,
Margot	 holding	 her	breath.	 Her	smile,	 the	 glimmer	 in	 her	 eyes,	as	if	 she	had
figured	out	the	solution	to	 this	mess—Margot’s	mother,	her	friend	 dead,	a	stalker
with	a	past	of	terrorizing	 women,	abusing	his	power.	I	am	ready,	she	said.
       “He	  was	retired	 but	owned	 a	restaurant	in	 Koreatown.	 A	 rich	 man.”	 She
motioned	for	Margot	 to	rise.
       “What	  happened?”	In	 the	black	 pleather	 chair,	 Margot	 faced	herself	 in	 a
clear	mirror,	wide	 and	ceiling-high.
       The	 stylist	draped	a	gray	cape	over	her	body	 and	untied	Margot’s	 long	hair
—releasing	the	tangled	mess	that	it	had	become.	She	grabbed	a	wide-tooth	comb
and	tried	to	break	apart	the	knots	without	tearing	too	much.
       “A	  jogger	 in	Griffith	  Park.	 She	found	some	 clothes	on	the	 road,	a	wallet,
keys,	cell	phone.	So	she	called	the	police.”
       Margot	 tilted	 her	head,	following	the	motions	 of	the	comb.	Her	heart	raced.
       “They	 found	 his	body.	He	was	less	than	one	mile	away,	in	the	bushes.”	The
stylist	 raised	her	 brows	 and	smirked	 as	 if	 amused	by	 the	 calamities	 of	 men.
Margot	liked	 this	woman	at	once.
       “The	 bushes?”	Margot	asked.	She	imagined	the	dense	gray	vegetation	in	the
hills—the	 mixed	chaparral	and	sage	scrub.	The	sunbaked	and	herbaceous	scent.
The	dry	fuel.
       The	hairstylist	 lowered	her	voice.	 “Naked.”
       “What?”	  Margot	cringed.
       “He	  was	 naked.”	  She	 escorted	 Margot	  to	 the	 sink	  to	 wash	 her	 hair.
“Someone	shot	him	in	the	leg.”
       “In	 the	leg?”	 Margot	tilted	 her	head	back.	“But	how	did	 he—”
       “The	 animals	ate	him.”	 The	stylist	 adjusted	the	towel	 under	Margot’s	 neck.
“One	of	 my	 customers	said	that	his	 whole	 face,	arm,	almost	 everything	gone,”
she	said,	before	the	blast	of	warm	water.
       Margot	  could	 feel	they	 were	 both	trying	  their	 hardest	not	 to	laugh.	 Yes,
death	was	sometimes	funny.	Maybe	it	 was	a	Korean	thing,	but	after	 these	weeks
of	pain	and	stress,	she	couldn’t	 help	but	 delight	in	 the	absurdity	of	 it	 all.	It	 was

238
almost	a	piece	of	performance	art.
       Bravo,	 Mrs.	Baek.
       Standing	 on	 the	 sidewalk,	 Margot	 called	 Miguel	 as	 soon	as	she	 left	 the
salon—hair	angling	down	 toward	her	chin	 in	a	sharp	bob.	The	sun	had	begun	its
descent,	blasting	wildly	   from	 the	west.	 She	shielded	 her	 eyes	with	 her	 hand,
inhaling	 the	exhaust	of	 cars	zooming	 by,	 kicking	 up	 the	dirt	 and	 bits	of	 dried
leaves	that	would	stick	to	her	skin.	A	 ragged	palm	tree	across	the	street	basked	in
the	last	of	 the	golden	 light	 before	the	city	 bathed	in	 a	soft	 dream	of	 pinks	and
purples—changing	and	 fleeting—and	 the	brash	glare	 of	 street-	and	headlights,
the	adrenaline,	the	thousands	of	feet	on	the	gas,	ruined	the	romance.
       After	  she	filled	  Miguel	  in,	 he	said,	 “They	 found	 his	 body	 on	Christmas
Day?	Lord.	She	fed	those	animals.”
       “I	 mean,	it	 had	to	be	Mrs.	Baek,	right?”	 She	hurried	down	 the	street	toward
her	mother’s	apartment.	“Not	  to	be	messed	up,	but	 .	.	.	 I’m	 glad	we	 didn’t	 call
the	 police.”	   She	 ducked	  under	  a	  scattering	 of	   pigeons,	 wings	   flapping
treacherously	close	to	her	head.	“I	am	still	worried	 about	her,	though.”
       “What	 do	you	think	 happened?”
       “She	 lured	 him	 somehow	to	 take	her	up	 there.	He	 was	naked.	Ugh.”	 She
shuddered	at	the	image.	“Maybe	 she	tricked	him	 into	 thinking	 that	she	changed
her	mind,	that	 she	was	interested	in	 him	and	wanted	 to	hook	 up	or	something?
People	go	up	into	the	park	for	that,	you	know.”
       “What	 else	is	nature	for?”
       She	laughed.	“Maybe	 she	told	him	that	they	had	to	go	into	the	bushes.”
       “And	  she	shot	him	in	the	leg?”	Miguel	 asked.	“This	story	is	a	gift,	 Margot.”
       She	crossed	the	road	before	a	car	careened	in	front	of	her.
       “And	  no	one	heard	his	cries?”	he	asked.
       “Maybe	  it	  was	 kind	 of	  remote.	 In	 the	 middle	 of	  the	 night,”	  she	said,
catching	her	breath.
       “And	  the	animals	ate	him?”	Miguel	 asked.
       She	tripped	 on	an	uneven	part	of	 the	sidewalk	 and	couldn’t	 help	but	 laugh
at	both	herself	and	the	absurdity	of	 life.	She	had	for	whatever	 reason	imagined	a
Disney-animated	version	 of	 all	the	 wildlife—Snow	  White’s	  friends,	round	 and
wide-eyed—flitting	  and	dancing	around	Mr.	Park’s	body.
       “And	  they	haven’t	caught	her,	right?”
       “Nope,	 not	from	 what	I	can	tell.	 I	googled	it.	He	parked	his	car,	got	out,	and
removed	his	clothes	at	some	point.	 Someone	in	the	 online	comments	thought	 it
might	be	the	mob	or	a	gang	or	something.	Anyway,	I	 hope	she’s	okay.”
       “What	 are	you	gonna	do	now?”
       The	 sun	 disappeared	behind	the	 buildings	 and	 the	world	  appeared	to	 be

239
melting	 around	 her.	 Bathed	in	  the	sharp	 air	 of	 the	 oncoming	 night,	  Margot
inhaled	the	faint	 aroma	of	a	leftover	 pork	pozole	reheated	on	a	stove	through	an
open	window.	She	still	dreaded	returning	to	the	apartment.
       “I’m	  pretty	exhausted,”	Margot	 said.	“I	think	 I’ll	 sleep	until	 the	new	year.”
       “Do	 you	want	 to	go	out	on	New	Year’s	 Eve	next	week?”	Miguel	 asked.
       “I	 don’t	 know.”	 A	 part	of	 her	wanted	to	head	back	to	Seattle	as	soon	as	she
could	get	rid	of	 everything.	She	could	take	the	contents	of	the	safety-deposit	box
with	her.	She	had	Mrs.	Kim’s	 phone	number;	she	could	always	 reach	her	later	to
find	out	more	about	her	father.	She	didn’t	need	to	stay	in	LA	 anymore.
       But	 the	other	part	of	 her	longed	to	 remain	in	this	 city	to	 recover	something
she	had	left	behind—not	 just	history	 or	her	 past	or	her	mother’s,	 but	whom	 she
had	always	dreamed	of	becoming.	 She	had	abandoned	that	side	of	herself	 here,
too.
       “Maybe	  you	  could	 use	 a	distraction?”	  Miguel	  asked.	 “This	  guy	 I	 met
invited	 me	to	 go	drinking	  downtown	 with	 some	friends.	 I’m	  thinking	 dancing
afterward	at	the	salsa	club.	You’ll	 come?”
       Margot	 stood	outside	of	 the	apartment	building	as	the	sky	glowed	 sapphire,
and	she	turned	to	find	 the	sliver	 of	a	 moon.	She	could	see	inside	people’s	 lives
through	 windows—the	  flickering	   of	 television	  sets,	 bodies	 walking	  behind
curtains,	a	little	  boy’s	 mouth,	fishlike,	  pressed	against	the	fingerprinted	 fog	 of
glass.	She	could	imagine	the	gills	on	the	side	of	his	face.	She	laughed.
       “Nah,	 I	don’t	 think	 so,”	Margot	said.	“This	 is	all	 you.”
       He	 paused.	“I	know	 you’ve	 been	through	a	lot,	but	 it’ll	 be	fun.	 You	should
come.	I	want	you	to	 come.	If	the	guy	 turns	out	to	be	a	dud,	I’ll	  need	someone	to
dance	with,	right?”
       “You	  always	dance	with	strangers	anyway,”	she	said.
       “But	  I	want	to	 dance	with	you,”	 he	said.	The	sweetest	words	she	had	heard
in	a	long	while.
       She	closed	her	eyes.	She	felt	 as	if	he	understood	her,	they	understood	each
other,	precisely	at	that	moment.
       There	was	nothing	 left	to	say	except,	“Okay.”
       Wasn’t	 that	the	thing	 with	 words?	It	 wasn’t	just	 their	surfaces—sometimes
serene	and	shimmering,	  others	 violent,	 crashing,	 and	 brash—but	 what	 they,
when	carefully	considered,	conveyed:	we	are	more	than	friends.	We’re	family.

240
       ON	NEW	YEAR’S	EVE,	MARGOT	LOADED	UP	ON	SNACKS	and	booze	at	the	nearest
Korean	supermarket,	whatever	she	could	get	 her	hands	on	to	feed	the	crew	 that
would	 come	over—Miguel	  and	his	new	 friends,	 a	group	of	 five	 or	 six	 people.
Instead	of	 imbibing	 at	 a	crowded	bar,	 they’d	 hang	out	 at	her	 mother’s	 mostly
vacant	apartment	and	carpool	to	the	salsa	club	afterward.
       Growing	  up,	she	and	 her	mother	 had	never	invited	  people	to	 their	home.
There	was	hardly	 any	room,	 both	 physical	and	 spiritual,	 for	 entertaining	when
her	mother	had	 spent	six	long	 days	out	 of	 the	week	 at	work.	 The	seventh	day
was	always	 for	 running	 errands—grocery	 shopping,	 preparing	 meals,	mailing
payments	for	bills,	 or	waiting	 in	lines	 at	the	bank.	There	was	never	time	for	 rest
or	celebration	and	Margot	now	wanted	to	change	that	if	she	could.
       She	maneuvered	a	cart	 through	the	 produce	section,	which	 featured	boxes
of	fruit	 as	gifts,	amping	 up	the	volume	and	variety	 this	time	of	 year.	She	packed
several	Asian	pears	in	a	plastic	 tear-off	 bag,	then	moved	on	 to	the	most	perfect
Fuyu	persimmons,	smooth,	orange,	and	firm.	 She	had	always	been	embarrassed
when	her	mother	 had	given	people	 such	odd	and	practical	 “Korean	 gifts”—the
boxes	of	apples	or	even	laundry	detergent—when	in	 reality,	outside	of	 America,
these	objects	 might	 have	some	 rich	 symbolic	  relevance	that	 perhaps	Margot
didn’t	understand.
       If	 she	thought	of	the	labor	and	resources	that	went	into	each	piece	of	fruit—
the	water,	the	light,	the	earth,	the	training	and	harvesting	of	 each	plant—a	box	of
apples	could	be	special,	a	 sacred	thing.	Perhaps	in	this	 land	of	 plenty,	 of	 myth
and	wide-open	 spaces,	trucks	and	factories,	 mass	production,	 we	 lost	track	 of
that:	the	miracle	of	an	object	as	simple	as	a	pear,	nutritious	and	sweet,	created	by
something	as	beautiful	as	a	tree.
       As	 Margot	 considered	the	large	pile	of	 napa	cabbage,	the	grooved	white	to
pale	green	heads,	a	 hand	reached	over	 in	 front	 of	 her.	 She	jumped	 back	and
turned	to	 see	Officer	 Choi	 there.	He	 looked	 different	 in	 his	 casual	clothes—a
heather	gray	V-neck	sweater,	a	collared	shirt	underneath,	and	a	pair	of	dark	 blue
jeans.
       “Oh,	 I’m	 sorry.	Was	that	your	cabbage?”	He	smiled.
       “No.	 Actually	 .	.	.	yes,	that	was	my	cabbage.”
       “Here,	 allow	 me.”	He	grabbed	the	head,	placing	it	in	a	bag	for	her.
       “Wait,	  that	one	was	.	.	.	I	don’t	know,	 not	cabbagey	enough.	How	about	that
one	over	there?”
       He	 laughed.	“Okay.”	  He	picked	 up	the	cabbage	he	had	placed	 in	her	cart,
put	it	in	his	own.	 He	palmed	another	one	at	the	top	of	the	pile.	“This	one?”
       “Actually,	  Officer	 Choi—the	 other	one,	the	one	with	all	the	leaves.”
       “Oh,	  I	 see.	The	one	with	  all	 the	leaves.”	 He	 crossed	his	arms	across	his

241
chest.	He	 looked	 clean	and	 handsome,	like	 a	 J.	Crew	 model	 that	 wasn’t	 too
snobby	and	also	wore	Hanes.	Boxers	or	briefs?	She	blushed	at	the	thought	of	his
underwear.
       “Call	 me	David,”	 he	said.	“I	 quit.”
       “What?”	  She	gazed	at	him	 and,	for	 a	second,	forgot	 how	 to	 use	language
entirely.	“The	 police?”
       “I	 mean,	it	wasn’t	 easy,	but	.	.	.	new	year,	new	me.”	He	shrugged.
       “How	  come?”	she	asked,	relieved.
       “I	  was	kinda	burned-out	anyway.”	 He	inserted	his	 thumbs	into	his	 pockets.
“And	 something	about	what	you	had	said	to	me	.	.	.	I	realized	why	I	 joined	in	 the
first	place.”	He	 scratched	the	back	of	his	neck.	“You	were	right.”
       Her	 three	favorite	words.	“Really?”
       “That	 first	 phone	call?	Remember	how	upset	you	were?”
       She	nodded,	remembering	 most	of	 the	words.	You	might	 think	 we’re	some
kind	of	 burden	 on	your	 workload,	 but	 my	mother	 worked	her	 ass	off,	 and	she
paid	taxes	like	 everyone	else	.	 .	.	 People	like	 my	mother	 hold	up	 this	sham	as
much	as	you.
       “Because	 you	 wanted	answers,	and	you	 didn’t	  feel	like	  you	were	 getting
any,”	David	 said.	“And	that	your	 mother	deserved	better.”
       “Yes,	 I	remember.”
       “She	  did.	 She	 does.”	  He	 avoided	 her	 eyes.	 An	  ahjumma	 nudged	 her
shopping	cart	into	 Margot’s.	  They	moved	 away	from	 the	 napa	cabbage	as	she
passed	with	a	hmph.
       “Why	  did	you	join?”	 Margot	 asked.
       “I	  had	an	older	brother	who	 died	when	I	 was	a	teenager.	Everyone	thought
it	was	suicide,	 but	.	.	 .	I	couldn’t	  believe	he	killed	 himself.	 So	I	 wanted	to	help
people	if	I	 could.	There	weren’t	 a	lot	of	 Korean	officers—at	 least	not	back	then.
And	 I	 thought	the	 cops	were	 just	blowing	  my	 family	  off	 because	my	parents
didn’t	speak	English.”
       “I	 see.	I’m	 sorry,”	she	said,	a	heaviness	building	inside	her	chest.
       “That’s	 all	 right.”	 He	sighed.	“I’ve	 spent	the	last	couple	years	doing	boring-
ass	paperwork,	busting	people	who	 are	trying—maybe	 in	 not	 the	most	legal	 or
‘moral’	 ways,	 but	trying—to	  survive.	I	 wasn’t	 helping	people	 in	the	way	 that	I
want	to.	And	 to	be	honest	.	.	.	I’m	  tired	all	 the	time.	Really	 tired.”	 He	shook	his
head.	“Anyway,	this	 is	way	too	much—”
       “No,	 it’s	 not.	I’m	 glad	to	know.	 I’m	 just	happy	that	you	realized	all	of	this.”
       “What	 about	you?”
       What	 should	she	tell	 him	now?	 “I	 think	 I’m	 .	.	.	 accepting	it.	My	 mother’s
death.	I’m	getting	there	at	least,	knowing	 what	I	know	 about	my	mom	now.	 I	got

242
a	kind	of	closure	from	 all	this.	Maybe	an	opening,	too.”
       “Good.”	  He	rested	his	hand	on	his	cart.
       Silence	grew	 between	them	and	they	exhaled	at	once.
       “Are	 you	 making	kimchi?”	 he	asked,	pointing	his	chin	toward	 the	cabbage.
       She	could	make	kimchi	 this	 week?	“Ha,	I	 wasn’t	planning	 on	it,	but	I	 guess
now	I	am?	I	wasn’t	even	sure	how	long	I’m	 staying.”
       “Where?”	 he	asked.
       “Koreatown.”
       She	 paused.	 Around	  them,	 last-minute	 shoppers	 perused	and	 collected
vegetables—yellow	and	white	and	green	onions,	chili	 peppers,	knobs	of	ginger.
       “Are	  you	 hosting	tonight?”	  he	asked.	Another	 ahjumma	 bumped	her	 cart
into	Margot’s.
       “I’ve	  got	friends	coming	 over,”	she	said.	“What	about	you?”
       “I	  don’t	 have	any	real	plans,	 so	I’m	 going	 over	to	 my	parents’	 house.	My
other	brother	will	 be	there	with	his	kids.	It’ll	  be	nice	and	chill.”
       How	 does	Officer	Bae	not	have	any	plans?	“How	 many	kids	does	he	have?”
       “Two.	  You	  wouldn’t	  believe	 that	 he’s	actually	  four	 years	younger	 than
me.”
       Two	  grandmothers	turned	 over	the	 heads	of	 napa	cabbage,	disappointed.
One	of	them	 tore	off	 a	piece	 of	leaf,	 popped	it	 in	 her	mouth,	 and	nodded.	Her
hands	were	 powerful	 and	 wrinkled—so	  much	 like	 her	 mother’s.	  How	 much
Margot	loved	 those	hands	that	would	 create	the	long	peel	of	 skin	before	slicing
the	fruit	for	 her.	How	much	she	missed	those	hands.
       “Well,	  I’ve	 got	a	few	 more	things	 to	pick	 up,”	 he	said.	“It	 was	nice	seeing
you.”
       “Likewise.”	  She	couldn’t	 help	but	smile.
       He	 freed	 himself	  from	 a	 traffic	  jam	 of	  carts,	bowed	 his	 head	 to	 other
shoppers,	excusing	himself.
       “David,”	   she	called,	 self-conscious	 about	 her	loud	 English	  voice	 in	 this
space.
       “Yeah?”
       Startled,	 an	 ahjussi	shot	 them	 both	 dirty	 looks.	 Those	 voices.	 American
kids.	How	rude.
       Smiling,	  she	abandoned	her	cart	temporarily,	 threaded	herself	 through	the
crowd,	and	 stopped	a	couple	 feet	 from	 him.	 “Now	 that	 you’re	 unemployed—
could	I	ask	you	a	favor?”
       After	  exchanging	phone	numbers	with	 David,	who	 could	help	 her	translate
her	mother’s	documents,	Margot	 paid	for	 her	groceries	and	headed	back	toward
the	parking	lot	 where	amber	floodlights	 illuminated	 cars	and	customers	pushing

243
carts.	She	had	only	a	few	 hours	to	clean	and	prepare	for	 her	guests,	who	would
arrive	at	nine.	She	rushed	toward	her	car	with	a	sense	of	levity,	a	giddiness	about
the	new	year	and	the	possibility	of	living	 in	 Los	Angeles.
       She’d	 find	 a	 new	 place,	a	 smaller	one,	 maybe	a	 studio	in	 Koreatown	  or
Echo	Park,	or	she	could	rent	a	room	in	 a	shared	house	just	like	her	mother	when
she	first	 moved	to	 America.	 She’d	fly	 to	 Seattle	to	 pack	up	all	 her	 belongings
and	ship	  what	 she	 needed	down.	  But	 the	 thrill	  of	  starting	 life	  over	 again
animated	her.
       She	couldn’t	 quite	 see	herself	transplanting	her	same	behaviors	in	an	office
job	from	 one	city	 to	the	next.	 She	always	knew	 that	she	wasn’t	cut	 out	for	 it—
the	hours	indoors	in	front	 of	 a	screen,	the	data	entry,	the	filing,	 the	water	cooler
outside	her	 door—but	  what	 else	 could	 she	 do	 with	 so	 little	  experience,	 no
connections,	and	an	English	degree?	She’d	have	to	do	something	fresh,	reinvent
herself.	She	could	 work	 at	a	 coffee	shop	 or	a	 restaurant	or	in	 retail	 while	 she
went	back	to	school	for	art.
       Margot	 was	struck	by	the	memory	of	 holding	the	corner	of	the	net	out	to	the
sky,	up	against	the	shape	of	the	Ferris	wheel,	imagining	 all	the	tiny	 silver	 fish—
like	her	mother,	shimmering	and	liquefied—that	 would	 swim	through	 its	weave.
       But	 she	and	 her	mother	 were	now	 both	 free	yet	 forever	 woven	into	 each
other.	They	could	be	both—separate	and	inseparable.	They	were	not	a	rotten	net
but	something	more	 deliberate	like	 threads	of	 color,	variations	 of	 blue,	plaited,
one	after	the	other.	Her	mother’s	 death	was	not	a	knot	but	a	temporary	 undoing.
Her	mother	 had	been	carrying	the	 burden	of	 so	much	truth,	 truths	that	 she	had
protected	Margot	  from,	 and	 now	 Margot	  knew:	 she,	 like	 her	 mother,	 could
handle	anything—even	love,	even	family.

244
       ACCELERATING	ONTO	THE	10	IN	A	FRIDAY	NIGHT	SNARL	of	traffic	in	the	middle
of	January,	she	wondered	if	moving	 back	to	LA	 was,	in	 fact,	a	terrible	idea.	She
hated	driving.	She	gazed	at	the	sad	disco	of	taillights,	 with	her	mother’s	 ashes	in
the	passenger	seat,	thinking	about	Mrs.	 Baek,	wherever	 she	was,	driving	 off	 to
start	all	over	again.	What	 if	 she	hadn’t	made	it	 anywhere	far?	She	could	hide	in
this	city.	  It	 was	easy	to	 be	anonymous,	 to	 find	 some	nook	 within	  one	of	 the
suburbs,	or	even	in	downtown	 LA,	 to	 lie	low	 until	 the	trouble	 had	passed.	How
would	anyone	know?
       Margot	  thought	 about	how	 she	could	 one	 day	run	 into	 her,	 that	perhaps
driving	down	 the	street,	she	could	glance	at	a	car	stopped	beside	her	and	notice	a
woman	in	the	driver’s	 seat	and	wonder	if	that	was	Mrs.	Baek.
       After	 a	dinner	 of	kimchi	 fried	 rice	 two	weeks	ago	at	his	apartment	in	 Echo
Park,	David	 translated	some	of	the	documents	from	 her	mother’s	 safety-deposit
box.	With	 the	help	of	 the	investigator	 hired	by	 Margot’s	 father,	her	 mother	had
determined	the	 identity	 and	location	 of	 her	 parents	in	 Gunpo,	 a	city	 south	 of
Seoul.	Only	 Mina’s	 mother,	now	 ninety-two	 years	old,	 survived.	But	 what	 was
not	obvious	from	 the	documents	was	whether	or	 not	Mina	 had	ever	reached	out
to	her,	or	whether	knowing	her	mother	lived	 was	enough.
       “Would	  you	want	to	meet	her?”	David	 had	asked.
       “I	  don’t	 know.”	 Margot	 stared	at	 the	grain	 of	 his	wood	 dining	 table.	The
whorls	reminded	her	of	thumbprints.
       “We	 can	call	 this	investigator,	Mr.	 Cho.”	 He	studied	the	papers.	“Maybe,	 if
not	about	your	grandmother,	maybe	he	has	some	info	on	 this	other	family?”	 His
eyes	were	glossy.	“The	little	girl	 with	 the	pigtails,	if	 she’s	still	alive.”
       “Oh,	 God,	I	don’t	 know.	 I’d	have	to	sit	with	 this	for	 a	bit	first.”
       Afterward,	  she	drove	home	and	cried	 for	 her	mother	and	 father.	She	cried
for	her	grandmother.	Why	 did	this	 world	 break	so	many	people	apart?	Why	was
it	so	hard	to	be	together?	Would	 her	grandmother	be	relieved	 to	know	 what	had
happened	to	her	daughter,	or	would	she	be	struck	by	the	kind	 of	 grief	that	could
kill	 her,	too?	How	did	we	decide	how	to	live	 without	 breaking	each	other?
       She	 wept	 for	 days	 and	could	 hardly	 eat	 at	 all.	 The	 following	  weekend,
Miguel	 delivered	 groceries	 and	made	 a	dinner	 of	  enchiladas	for	 them	 at	 the
apartment	with	a	red	mole	 sauce	that	he	had	purchased	from	the	restaurant	they
never	made	it	to	 on	Christmas	 Eve.	They	 sat	in	silence	mostly,	 which	 was	just
what	she	needed.	All	 the	things	 she	felt	were	terrible	 and	heavy.	 All	 the	things
she	felt	were	different	variations	of	 pain.
       She	had	then	finally	 mustered	the	courage	to	call	Mrs.	Kim,	 who	had	at	first
not	answered,	but	returned	her	call	two	days	later.
       Sitting	  on	her	 mother’s	 couch	in	 the	living	  room	 which	 was	now	 mostly

245
bare	except	for	 the	most	 necessary	of	 furniture,	 Margot	 asked,	“Do	 you	 think
that	maybe	.	.	 .	Do	you	 know	 anything	about	what	 happened	to	my	 father	after
he	left	my	mom?	This	would’ve	 been	in	the	late	eighties.”
       “We	  met	in	Chicago	 in	1990	 or	1991,”	 Mrs.	 Kim	 said,	voice	 scratchy	and
weak.	“He	 was	at	that	time	 working	 at	his	cousin’s	 import	 and	export	business,
and	he	had	bought	a	small	supermarket	there	eventually.	 He	never	 really	talked
about	what	his	life	 had	been	like	in	LA.	 I	figured	 it	was	because	back	in	the	day,
when	he	was	in	his	twenties,	he	had	a	wife	who	died.”
       “Another	 wife?”
       “Yes,	 that	must	have	been	in	the	early	eighties	 so—before	you,	before	your
mom.”	 She	coughed	away	from	 the	receiver.	 “He	didn’t	  have	his	papers.	After
we	married,	he	got	his	green	card.	But	 he	had	never	told	me	about	your	 mom	or
what	had	 happened	between	 the	two	  of	 them.”	 She	 paused.	“I’m	  sorry.	 I’m
afraid	I’m	 not	much	help.”
       “How	  did	you	both	end	up	back	in	LA?”	 Margot	 asked.
       “My	  family	 is	in	Orange	County.”
       “I	  see.”	 Margot	 sighed.	“Maybe	  you	might	  be	able	 to	.	 .	 .	tell	 me	 more
about	him?	At	least	how	you	met?	What	he	was	like?	I	just	 want	to	know.”
       “Sure	 .	 .	.	okay.”	  Mrs.	Kim	  paused.	“Do	 you	want	 to	meet	 somewhere	in
Koreatown?	I	haven’t	 been	there	in	years.	I’m	trying	 to	learn	how	to	drive	 again,
so	maybe	after	I	take	my	lessons.	Or	I	can	hire	a	car.”
       “What	  happened	to	your	 driver?”	 The	 push	at	the	 doorstep.	The	 smell	of
fresh-cut	grass	with	 that	 undercurrent	of	 something	 foul—manure	 or	 compost.
The	taste	of	metal	in	her	mouth.
       “I	 had	to	get	rid	of	 him.”
       “Really?”
       “Yes,	 it’s	 all	 very	 unfortunate.”	 She	breathed	into	the	phone.	“He	 was	.	 .	.
stealing	from	 me.	You	can	never	 trust	a	man	who	 looks	like	 that,	I	 guess.”	She
coughed	again.	“He	 was	trying	 to	get	all	 these	ideas	into	my	 head.	I	found	 him
snooping	around	 my	 computer,	 looking	 through	 bank	 accounts	and	stuff.	  It’s
been	.	.	.	 I’ve	 had	a	 really	 hard	time	 lately.”	 Her	 voice	 broke.	“I	 guess	we	 all
have,	right?	Nothing	seems	right	these	days.	It’s	hard	to	even	get	out	of	bed.”
       “Yes.	 Yes,	I	understand,”	Margot	 said.
       “Maybe	  you	could	 call	 the	investigator?”	 Mrs.	 Kim	  asked.	“I	 don’t	 know
what	you’ve	 found	 at	 your	 mother’s	 house.	But	 I	 bet	he	could	 share	what	 he
already	knows.	Maybe	 that	could	 help	you	fill	  in	some	of	 what	you’re	 missing.
Have	you	tried	asking	him?	 Your	father	 gave	him	a	lot	of	 business.	He	was	very
good	at	his	work.”
       The	  next	 day,	 Margot	 called	 David	  and	 asked	if	  he	 could	 contact	 the

246
investigator,	who	 most	likely	 only	 spoke	Korean.	The	investigator	 revealed	that
her	mother	had	been	married	in	 her	twenties	 and	had	a	daughter	in	Korea,	 who
was	killed	 with	her	father	 by	a	car	speeding	in	the	road.	They	 had	been	walking
to	the	grocery	store.	Her	mother	had	been	at	home.
       Her	 half	 sister	 had	only	 been	eight	 years	old.	 Her	 mother	had	 only	 been
four	when	she	had	lost	her	parents.	These	children	had	been	lost	to	their	 parents
through	recklessness	and	war.
       Perhaps,	 despite	 the	  distances	between	  them,	 the	 differences	  in	  their
experiences	as	a	mother	and	a	 daughter,	as	individuals,	 as	women	 of	a	 certain
time	and	place,	 what	had	made	them	 a	family	 was	 not	simply	 blood	 but	never
fully	 giving	 up	 on	each	other.	 Forgiveness	was	always	 a	possibility.	  One	day,
you	could	 dive	into	 the	dark	 water	and	float	 because	of	a	lightness	in	 your	 life
now	that	you	 had	taken	off	 your	 clothes,	abandoned	all	those	stones.	You	were
free	from	every	net.	You	relaxed	like	 you	had	never	been	able	to	before.
       She	had	so	much	information	 now.	 She	had	so	much	to	create.	What	would
her	grandmother	want	to	know?	She	would	be	the	only	audience	who	mattered	at
this	point.
       And	 now	Margot	 inched	the	car	down	the	pier,	nervous	about	hitting	 one	of
the	pedestrians	in	 the	crowd	 that	 funneled	down	 to	 the	end.	The	 Ferris	 wheel
flashed	hot—red	and	white.	 She	cracked	open	her	windows	to	the	cacophony	 of
voices,	of	different	 languages	and	laughter.	The	wind	seemed	to	attack	her	as	she
climbed	out	of	the	car,	shivering,	zipping	 her	jacket	closed.
       Through	 the	smell	 of	 carnival	 foods—cheeseburgers,	nachos,	funnel	cake,
hot	  chocolate—and	  the	  bodies,	  jostling,	   walking,	   and	  lingering,	   hands
outstretched	for	selfies,	 she	walked	on	 the	wooden	boards	of	 the	pier,	 carrying
her	mother’s	ashes	and	a	plastic	grocery	bag	with	a	single	Honeycrisp	 apple	and
a	bottle	of	 soju	like	 an	old	 Korean	man—all	 sadness	and	yearning,	dark	humor
fermented	inside.
       At	 the	very	 end,	she	sat	on	a	bench	with	her	mother	beside	her.	Maybe	one
day	she	would	spread	her	ashes	here.	It	was	probably	illegal,	but	who	cared?	For
now,	she	inhaled	 the	salt	air,	 stared	into	the	 most	distant	water,	 with	 the	moon
waxing	ripe	and	bright,	and	bit	 into	the	apple.
       She	 picked	up	 her	phone,	and	 within	 one	ring,	 a	woman	 answered,	voice
gravelly	and	worn:	“?”
       Tears	 streamed	down	 Margot’s	 face	as	 she	wondered:	How	 much	 weight
can	I	 bear?	 She	was	 not	her	 mother.	 She	was	weak,	 spoiled,	 American.	 The
whistle	of	 a	bomb	dropping,	 an	explosion	blasted	in	 her	head.	She	clung	to	that
rope—now	inside	 of	 her,	too—the	 braid	they	 had	made	was	the	apple	 that	she
squeezed	in	her	hand.

247
       “”	 the	woman	repeated.
       Margot	could	hear	the	woman’s	breath	on	the	other	end,	its	warmth	like	the
sun	on	her	face,	a	bed	full	of	seeds.
       “I’m	  Mina’s	 daughter.	.	,”	  Margot	said,	 but	the	 shaking	of	 her	 voice
implored,	Please,	please	understand.

248
                                       Acknowledgments





       MY	EDITOR,	NATALIE	HALLAK,	SUPPORTED	THIS	NOVEL	with	her	keen	intellect,
imagination,	and	warmth.	 She	has	been	an	exceptional	partner	and	it	has	been	a
dream	to	work	 with	 Park	Row	 Books.	My	 agent,	Amy	 Elizabeth	 Bishop,	is	 not
only	incisive	  but	hilarious	 and	kind	 in	 every	 way.	She	 has	been	a	tremendous
advocate,	and	by	believing	in	my	words,	she	changed	my	life.
       Teachers	 and	 mentors	 David	 Wong	  Louie,	 who	  passed	away	 in	 2018,
Russell	Leong,	King-Kok	 Cheung,	Maya	Sonenberg,	Colleen	J.	McElroy,	 Shawn
Wong,	Alexander	Chee,	and	Randa	Jarrar	created	pathways	for	my	work	through
their	 generosity	 and	 dedication	 to	  storytelling	  and	 craft.	 The	 UCLA	   Asian
American	 Studies	 Center	 provided	  me	 with	  a	 sense	 of	 place	 and	 history;
Amerasia	Journal	published	the	first	 short	story	I	wrote.
       Editors	  and	 literary	  journals	  sustained	me	 by	  sharing	 my	  words:	 Los
Angeles	Review	of	Books,	Guernica,	 Asian	American	 Writers’	 Workshop’s	 The
Margins,	Apogee	Journal,	The	Rumpus,	Electric	Literature	 and	The	Offing.
       Family	 and	friends	 nourished	me	through	the	years	of	 writing	 this	book:	 in
particular,	 Eva	Larrauri	 de	 Leon,	Talia	 Shalev,	 the	Lee	 and	Kim	 families,	  the
Goodman	and	Robin	families,	 Corinne	 Manning,	Ever	 Jones,	Keiko	and	Naomi
Namekata,	Gabrielle	Bellot,	 Anca	Szilágyi,	 and	Paula	Shields.	My	writing	 group
shared	wisdom	 and	 magic:	  Ingrid	 Rojas	 Contreras,	 Yalitza	  Ferreras,	Meron
Hadero,	Amber	Butts,	Angie	 Chau,	Tanya	Rey,	and	Melissa	Valentine.
       I	 am	 indebted	 to	my	 mother	 as	a	 model	for	  how	infinitely	   complex	 and
wondrous	a	single	 life	 can	be.	She	 taught	me	to	 define	success	through	 how	I
feel	about	 myself	 and	the	 world.	 I	 would	 have	 been	lost	without	  her	and	 her
courage,	her	story	telling,	and	the	exceptional	meals	that	she	makes.
       My	 husband,	Paul,	stood	by	 me	through	every	 draft	and	lived	 with	 me	and
my	characters,	which	required	endless	faith,	resilience,	and	a	sense	of	humor,	for
years	under	one	 roof.	 Each	time	 I	 experienced	a	 setback,	he	reminded	 me	 of
where	I	was	and	how	 far	 I’d	 gone.	This	novel	 wouldn’t	 have	been	without	 him
(and	our	dogs).
       Thank	 you	all	for	 making	this	possible.

249
                           When	one	book	ends,	another	begins	.	.	.
Bookends	is	a	vibrant	reading	community	to	help	you	ensure	you’re	never
       without	 a	good	book.	It	brings	together	the	best	reads	from	three
publishers:	Hodder	&	 Stoughton,	Headline	Publishing	Group	and	Quercus
                                                     Books.

                           	Click	here	to	sign	up	to	the	Bookends	newsletter

                                                 	@TeamBookends


                                              	/WelcomeToBookends

250
                               Table	        of	  Contents

Copyright	Page
About	the	Book
About	the	Author
Contents
Dedication
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Summer	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Summer	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Summer	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Summer	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Fall	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Fall	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Fall	1987
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Winter	1987—1988
Margot:	Fall	2014
Mina:	Winter	1988
Margot:	Winter	2014
Mina:	Spring	2014
Margot:	Winter	2014
Mina:	Summer	2014
Margot:	Winter	2014
Mina:	Fall	2014
Margot:	Winter	2014—2015
Acknowledgments

