2
ALSO	BY	YAA	 GYASI


      Homegoing

4
                              THIS	IS	A	 BORZOI	BOOK	 PUBLISHED	BY	 ALFRED	 A.	KNOPF


                                                     Copyright	©	 2020	by	YNG	Books,	Inc.


All	rights	reserved.	Published	in	the	United	States	by	Alfred	A.	Knopf,	a	division	of	Penguin	Random	House
                                                                      LLC,	 New	York.


                                                                     www.aaknopf.com


       Knopf,	Borzoi	Books,	and	the	colophon	are	registered	trademarks	of	Penguin	Random	House	LLC.


                                           Library	 of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
                                                              Names:	Gyasi,	Yaa,	author.
                                                   Title:	 Transcendent	kingdom	/	Yaa	Gyasi.
 Identifiers:	 LCCN	2019039844	(print)	|	LCCN	2019039845	(ebook)	|	ISBN	9780525658184	(hardcover)	|
                             ISBN	9780525658191	(ebook)	|	ISBN	9781524711771	(open	market)
      Classification:	LCC	PS3607.Y37	T73	2020	(print)	|	LCC	PS3607.Y37	(ebook)	|	DDC	813/.6—dc23
                                         LC	record	available	at	https://lccn.loc.gov/2019039844
                                    LC	ebook	record	available	at	https://lccn.loc.gov/2019039845


                                                           Ebook	ISBN 9780525658191


    This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	 Names,	characters,	places,	and	incidents	either	are	the	product	of	the	author’s
 imagination	or	are	used	fictitiously.	Any	resemblance	to	actual	persons,	living	or	dead,	events,	or	locales	is
                                                                   entirely	coincidental.


                         Cover	illustration	based	on	a	photograph	by	Jose	Luis	Pelaez	/	Getty	Images
                                                              Cover	design	by	Kelly	Blair

                                                                    ep_prh_5.5.0_c0_r0

5
                                                        Contents


Cover
Also	by	Yaa	Gyasi
Title	Page
Copyright
Dedication
Epigraph


    Chapter	 1

    Chapter	 2

    Chapter	 3

    Chapter	 4

    Chapter	 5

    Chapter	 6

    Chapter	 7

    Chapter	 8

    Chapter	 9

    Chapter	 10

    Chapter	 11

    Chapter	 12

    Chapter	 13

    Chapter	 14

    Chapter	 15

    Chapter	 16

    Chapter	 17

    Chapter	 18

    Chapter	 19

    Chapter	 20

6
Chapter	21
Chapter	22
Chapter	23
Chapter	24
Chapter	25
Chapter	26
Chapter	27
Chapter	28
Chapter	29
Chapter	30
Chapter	31
Chapter	32
Chapter	33
Chapter	34
Chapter	35
Chapter	36
Chapter	37
Chapter	38
Chapter	39
Chapter	40
Chapter	41
Chapter	42
Chapter	43
Chapter	44
Chapter	45
Chapter	46
Chapter	47
Chapter	48
Chapter	49
Chapter	50
Chapter	51

7
    Chapter	 52

    Chapter	 53

    Chapter	 54

    [From	 our	 house…]


Acknowledgments
A	Note	About	the	Author

8
For	Tina

9
The	world	is	charged	with	the	grandeur	of	God.
It	will	 flame	out,	like	 shining	from	shook	foil.

                  GERARD	MANLEY	HOPKINS,
                        “God’s	Grandeur”




      Nothing	comes	into	the	universe
      and	nothing	leaves	it.

                            SHARON	OLDS,
                           “The	Borders”

10
                                                          1





Whenever	I	think	of	my	mother,	I	picture	a	queen-sized	bed	with	her	lying	in	it,	a
practiced	stillness	filling	the	room.	For	months	on	end,	she	colonized	that	bed
like	a	 virus,	the	first	 time	 when	I	was	a	child	 and	then	again	when	I	 was	a
graduate	student.	The	first	time,	I	was	sent	to	Ghana	to	wait	her	out.	While	there,
I	was	walking	through	Kejetia	Market	with	my	aunt	when	she	grabbed	my	arm
and	pointed.	“Look,	a	crazy	person,”	she	said	in	Twi.	 “Do	 you	see?	A	crazy
person.”
        I	was	mortified.	My	aunt	was	speaking	so	loudly,	and	the	man,	tall	with	dust
caked	into	his	dreadlocks,	was	within	earshot.	“I	see.	I	see,”	I	answered	in	a	low
hiss.	The	man	continued	past	us,	mumbling	to	himself	as	he	waved	his	hands
about	in	gestures	that	only	he	could	understand.	My	aunt	nodded,	satisfied,	and
we	kept	walking	past	the	hordes	of	people	gathered	in	that	agoraphobia-inducing
market	until	we	reached	the	stall	where	we	would	spend	the	rest	of	the	morning
attempting	to	sell	knockoff	handbags.	In	my	three	months	there,	we	sold	only
four	bags.
        Even	now,	I	don’t	completely	understand	why	my	aunt	singled	the	man	out
to	me.	Maybe	she	thought	there	were	no	crazy	people	in	America,	that	I	had
never	seen	one	before.	Or	maybe	she	was	thinking	about	my	mother,	about	the
real	reason	I	was	stuck	in	Ghana	that	summer,	sweating	in	a	stall	with	an	aunt	I
hardly	knew	while	my	mother	healed	at	home	in	Alabama.	I	was	eleven,	and	I
could	see	that	my	mother	wasn’t	sick,	not	in	the	ways	that	I	was	used	to.	I	didn’t
understand	what	my	mother	needed	healing	from.	I	didn’t	understand,	but	I	did.
And	my	embarrassment	at	my	aunt’s	loud	gesture	had	as	much	to	do	with	my
understanding	as	it	did	with	the	man	who	had	passed	us	by.	My	aunt	was	saying,
“That.	That	is	what	crazy	looks	like.”	But	instead	what	I	heard	was	my	mother’s
name.	What	I	saw	was	my	mother’s	face,	still	as	lake	water,	the	pastor’s	hand
resting	gently	on	her	forehead,	his	prayer	a	light	hum	that	made	the	room	buzz.
I’m	not	sure	I	know	what	crazy	looks	like,	but	even	today	when	I	hear	the	word	I

11
picture	a	 split	screen,	the	 dreadlocked	man	in	 Kejetia	 on	 one	side,	my	 mother
lying	in	 bed	on	the	other.	I	 think	 about	how	no	 one	at	all	reacted	to	that	 man	in
the	market,	not	in	fear	or	 disgust,	nothing,	save	my	aunt,	who	wanted	me	to	look.
He	was,	it	seemed	to	me,	at	perfect	peace,	even	as	he	gesticulated	wildly,	even	as
he	mumbled.
        But	my	 mother,	in	her	bed,	infinitely	 still,	 was	wild	inside.

12
                                                          2





The	second	time	it	happened,	I	got	a	phone	call	while	I	was	working	in	my	lab	at
Stanford.	I’d	had	to	separate	two	of	my	mice	because	they	were	ripping	each
other	to	bits	in	that	shoebox	of	a	home	we	kept	them	in.	I	found	a	piece	of	flesh
in	one	corner	of	the	box,	but	I	couldn’t	tell	which	mouse	it	came	from	at	first.
Both	were	bleeding	and	frenzied,	scurrying	away	from	me	when	I	tried	to	grab
them	even	though	there	was	nowhere	to	run.
        “Look,	Gifty,	she	hasn’t	been	to	church	in	nearly	a	month.	I’ve	been	calling
the	house	but	she	won’t	pick	up.	I	go	by	sometimes	and	make	sure	she’s	got	food
and	everything,	but	I	think…I	think	it’s	happening	again.”
        I	didn’t	say	anything.	The	mice	had	calmed	down	considerably,	but	I	was
still	shaken	by	the	sight	of	them	and	worried	about	my	research.	Worried	about
everything.
        “Gifty?”	Pastor	John	said.
        “She	should	come	stay	with	me.”
        I’m	not	sure	how	the	pastor	got	my	mother	on	the	plane.	When	I	picked	her
up	at	SFO	she	looked	completely	vacant,	her	body	limp.	I	imagined	Pastor	John
folding	her	up	the	way	you	would	a	jumpsuit,	arms	crossed	about	the	chest	in	an
X,	legs	pulled	up	to	meet	them,	then	tucking	her	safely	into	a	suitcase	complete
with	a	HANDLE	WITH	CARE	sticker	before	passing	her	off	to	the	flight	attendant.
        I	gave	her	a	stiff	hug	and	she	shrank	from	my	touch.	I	took	a	deep	breath.
“Did	you	check	a	bag?”	I	asked.
        “Daabi,”	she	said.
        “Okay,	no	 bags.	Great,	we	can	go	straight	to	 the	car.”	 The	saccharine
cheeriness	of	my	voice	annoyed	me	so	much	I	bit	my	tongue	in	an	attempt	to	bite
it	back.	I	felt	a	prick	of	blood	and	sucked	it	away.
        She	followed	me	to	my	Prius.	Under	better	circumstances	she	would	have
made	fun	of	my	car,	an	oddity	to	her	after	years	of	Alabama	pickup	trucks	and

13
SUVs.	“Gifty,	 my	 bleeding	heart,”	she	sometimes	called	me.	I	don’t	 know	where
she’d	picked	up	 the	phrase,	but	 I	 figured	 it	 was	probably	 used	derogatorily	 by
Pastor	John	and	the	various	TV	preachers	she	liked	to	watch	while	she	cooked	to
describe	people	who,	 like	 me,	 had	defected	 from	 Alabama	 to	 live	 among	the
sinners	of	 the	world,	 presumably	 because	the	excessive	bleeding	of	 our	 hearts
made	us	too	weak	to	 tough	it	 out	among	the	 hardy,	the	chosen	of	 Christ	 in	the
Bible	Belt.	 She	loved	Billy	 Graham,	who	said	things	like	 “A	 real	Christian	 is	the
one	who	can	give	his	pet	parrot	to	the	town	gossip.”
        Cruel,	I	 thought	when	I	was	a	child,	to	give	away	your	pet	parrot.
        The	funny	 thing	about	the	phrases	that	my	mom	picked	up	is	that	she	always
got	them	a	little	wrong.	 I	was	her	bleeding	heart,	not	a	bleeding	heart.	It’s	a	crime
shame,	not	 a	 crying	 shame.	She	 had	a	 little	  southern	 accent	that	 tinted	  her
Ghanaian	one.	It	 made	 me	think	  of	 my	 friend	 Anne,	 whose	 hair	 was	brown,
except	on	some	days,	when	the	sunlight	 touched	her	just	 so	and,	suddenly,	you
saw	red.
        In	 the	car,	my	 mother	 stared	out	of	 the	passenger-side	window,	quiet	as	a
church	mouse.	I	 tried	 to	 imagine	 the	scenery	 the	way	 she	might	 be	seeing	it.
When	I’d	 first	 arrived	 in	 California,	 everything	 had	looked	 so	beautiful	 to	 me.
Even	the	 grass,	yellowed,	  scorched	from	  the	 sun	and	 the	 seemingly	 endless
drought,	had	 looked	 otherworldly.	 This	 must	be	Mars,	 I	 thought,	because	how
could	this	be	 America	too?	 I	pictured	 the	drab	green	pastures	of	 my	childhood,
the	small	 hills	  we	 called	 mountains.	 The	 vastness	of	 this	 western	 landscape
overwhelmed	me.	I’d	come	to	 California	 because	I	wanted	to	get	lost,	to	find.	 In
college,	 I’d	 read	 Walden	 because	a	 boy	  I	 found	  beautiful	  found	 the	 book
beautiful.	I	 understood	nothing	but	highlighted	 everything,	including	 this:	Not	till
we	are	lost,	in	 other	words,	 not	till	 we	have	 lost	the	world,	 do	we	 begin	to	find
ourselves,	and	realize	where	we	are	and	the	infinite	extent	of	our	relations.
        If	 my	 mother	was	moved	by	the	 landscape,	too,	I	couldn’t	tell.	 We	lurched
forward	 in	traffic	  and	I	 caught	the	 eye	of	 the	man	 in	the	 car	next	 to	ours.	 He
quickly	 looked	away,	then	looked	 back,	then	away	again.	I	wanted	to	 make	him
uncomfortable,	or	 maybe	just	 to	 transfer	 my	own	 discomfort	 to	 him,	 and	so	 I
kept	staring.	I	could	see	in	the	way	that	he	gripped	the	steering	wheel	that	he	was
trying	not	 to	look	 at	me	again.	His	 knuckles	were	pale,	veiny,	rimmed	 with	 red.
He	gave	up,	shot	me	 an	exasperated	look,	mouthed,	“What?”	 I’ve	 always	found
that	traffic	 on	a	bridge	 brings	everyone	closer	to	their	own	 personal	edge.	Inside
each	car,	a	snapshot	of	a	breaking	point,	drivers	looking	out	toward	the	water	and

14
wondering	What	if?	 Could	there	be	another	way	out?	We	scooted	forward	 again.
In	the	scrum	of	 cars,	the	man	seemed	almost	close	enough	to	touch.	What	would
he	do	if	he	could	touch	me?	If	 he	didn’t	have	to	contain	all	 of	that	rage	inside	his
Honda	Accord,	where	would	it	go?
        “Are	 you	hungry?”	I	asked	my	mother,	finally	 turning	away.
        She	shrugged,	still	 staring	out	of	 the	 window.	The	 last	time	 this	happened
she’d	lost	seventy	pounds	in	two	months.	When	I	came	back	from	my	 summer	in
Ghana,	I	had	 hardly	recognized	her,	 this	woman	 who	had	 always	found	skinny
people	offensive,	as	though	a	 kind	of	 laziness	or	failure	 of	 character	kept	 them
from	appreciating	 the	pure	joy	 that	is	a	good	meal.	 Then	she	joined	their	 ranks.
Her	cheeks	sank;	her	stomach	deflated.	She	hollowed,	disappeared.
        I	  was	determined	 not	 to	  let	 that	 happen	again.	 I’d	 bought	 a	 Ghanaian
cookbook	online	to	make	up	for	 the	years	I’d	spent	avoiding	my	mother’s	kitchen,
and	I’d	practiced	a	few	of	the	dishes	in	the	days	leading	up	to	my	mother’s	arrival,
hoping	to	perfect	them	before	I	 saw	her.	I’d	bought	a	deep	fryer,	even	though	my
grad	student	stipend	left	little	room	 in	my	budget	for	 extravagances	like	bofrot	or
plantains.	Fried	food	was	my	mother’s	favorite.	 Her	mother	 had	made	fried	food
from	 a	cart	 on	 the	side	 of	 the	road	 in	 Kumasi.	My	  grandmother	was	a	 Fante
woman	from	 Abandze,	a	sea	town,	and	she	was	notorious	for	despising	Asantes,
so	much	so	that	she	refused	to	speak	Twi,	even	after	twenty	years	of	living	in	 the
Asante	capital.	If	you	bought	her	food,	you	had	to	listen	to	her	language.
        “We’re	 here,”	 I	 said,	 rushing	to	 help	 my	 mother	get	 out	 of	 the	car.	 She
walked	a	 little	  ahead	of	 me,	 even	though	 she’d	never	been	 to	 this	 apartment
before.	She’d	visited	me	in	California	only	 a	couple	of	times.
        “Sorry	 for	the	mess,”	I	said,	but	there	was	no	mess.	None	that	my	eyes	could
see	anyway,	but	my	eyes	were	not	hers.	Every	time	she	visited	me	over	the	years
she’d	sweep	her	finger	along	things	it	never	occurred	to	me	to	clean,	the	backs	of
the	blinds,	the	hinges	of	doors,	then	present	the	dusty,	blackened	finger	 to	me	in
accusation,	and	I	could	do	nothing	but	shrug.
        “Cleanliness	is	godliness,”	she	used	to	say.
        “Cleanliness	is	 next	to	godliness,”	I	 would	correct,	 and	she	would	 scowl	at
me.	What	was	the	difference?
        I	 pointed	her	 toward	the	 bedroom,	and,	silently,	 she	crawled	into	 bed	and
drifted	off	 to	sleep.

15
                                                          3





As	soon	as	I	heard	the	sound	of	soft	snoring,	I	sneaked	out	of	the	apartment	and
went	to	check	on	my	mice.	Though	I	had	separated	them,	the	one	with	the	largest
wounds	was	hunched	over	from	pain	in	the	corner	of	the	box.	Watching	him,	I
wasn’t	sure	he	would	live	much	longer.	It	filled	me	with	an	inexplicable	sorrow,
and	when	my	lab	mate,	Han,	found	me	twenty	minutes	later,	crying	in	the	corner
of	the	room,	I	 knew	I	 would	be	too	 mortified	to	 admit	that	the	thought	of	 a
mouse’s	death	was	the	cause	of	my	tears.
        “Bad	date,”	I	told	Han.	A	look	of	horror	passed	over	his	face	as	he	mustered
up	a	few	pitiful	words	of	comfort,	and	I	could	imagine	what	he	was	thinking:	I
went	into	the	hard	sciences	so	that	I	wouldn’t	have	to	be	around	emotional	women.
My	crying	turned	to	laughter,	loud	and	phlegmy,	and	the	look	of	horror	on	his
face	deepened	until	his	ears	flushed	as	red	as	a	stop	sign.	I	stopped	laughing	and
rushed	out	of	the	lab	and	into	the	restroom,	where	I	stared	at	myself	in	the	mirror.
My	eyes	were	puffy	and	red;	my	nose	looked	bruised,	the	skin	around	the	nostrils
dry	and	scaly	from	the	tissues.
        “Get	ahold	of	yourself,”	I	said	to	the	woman	in	the	mirror,	but	doing	so	felt
cliché,	like	I	was	reenacting	a	scene	from	a	movie,	and	so	I	started	to	feel	like	I
didn’t	have	a	self	to	get	ahold	of,	or	rather	that	I	had	a	million	selves,	too	many	to
gather.	One	was	in	the	bathroom,	playing	a	role;	another,	in	the	lab	staring	at	my
wounded	mouse,	an	animal	about	whom	I	felt	nothing	at	all,	yet	whose	pain	had
reduced	me	somehow.	Or	multiplied	me.	Another	self	was	still	thinking	about	my
mother.
        The	mouse	fight	had	rattled	me	into	 checking	on	my	mice	more	than	I
needed	to,	trying	to	keep	ahead	of	the	feeling.	When	I	got	to	the	lab	the	day	of
my	mother’s	arrival,	Han	was	already	there,	performing	surgery	on	his	mice.	As
was	usually	the	case	whenever	Han	arrived	at	the	lab	first,	the	thermostat	was
turned	down	low.	I	shivered,	and	he	looked	up	from	his	work.
        “Hey,”	he	said.

16
        “Hey.”
        Though	 we’d	been	sharing	this	space	for	 months	now,	we	hardly	 ever	said
more	than	this	to	each	other,	except	for	the	day	he’d	found	me	crying.	Han	smiled
at	me	 more	 now,	 but	 his	 ears	still	  burned	 bright	 red	 if	  I	 tried	  to	 push	our
conversation	past	that	initial	greeting.
        I	checked	in	on	my	mice	 and	my	experiments.	No	fights,	no	surprises.
        I	  drove	 back	 to	  my	 apartment.	 In	  the	 bedroom,	  my	 mother	  still	 lay
underneath	a	cloud	of	 covers.	A	sound	like	 a	purr	 floated	 out	from	 her	lips.	 I’d
been	living	alone	for	 so	long	 that	even	that	soft	 noise,	hardly	more	 than	a	hum,
unnerved	me.	I’d	forgotten	 what	 it	was	like	 to	 live	 with	 my	mother,	 to	care	for
her.	For	a	long	time,	most	of	my	life,	 in	 fact,	it	had	been	just	me	and	her,	but	this
pairing	was	unnatural.	She	knew	it	and	I	knew	it,	and	we	both	tried	to	ignore	what
we	knew	 to	 be	true—there	 used	to	 be	four	  of	 us,	then	 three,	two.	 When	 my
mother	goes,	whether	by	choice	or	not,	there	will	be	only	one.

17
                                                      4




Dear	God,
I’ve	been	wondering	where	you	are.	I	mean,	I	know	you’re	here,	with
me,	but	where	are	you	exactly?	In	space?


Dear	God,
The	Black	Mamba	makes	a	lot	of	noise	most	of	the	time,	but	when	she’s
mad	she	moves	really	slowly	and	quietly	and	then,	all	of	a	sudden,	there
she	is.	Buzz	says	it’s	because	she’s	an	African	warrior	and	so	she’s	got	to
be	stealthy.
        Buzz’s	impression	is	really	funny.	He	sneaks	around	and	then,	all
of	a	sudden,	he	makes	his	body	really	big,	and	picks	something	up	off
the	floor	and	says,	“What	is	this?”	He	doesn’t	do	impressions	of	the	Chin
Chin	Man	anymore.


Dear	God,
If	you’re	in	space,	how	can	you	see	me,	and	what	do	I	look	like	to	you?
And	what	do	you	look	like,	if	you	look	like	anything	at	all?	Buzz	says
he’d	never	want	to	be	an	astronaut	and	I	don’t	think	I	want	to	either,	but
I	would	go	to	space	if	you	were	there.

18
                                                              5





When	there	were	four	of	 us,	I	was	too	young	to	appreciate	it.	My	 mother	used	to
tell	stories	about	my	 father.	At	 six	feet	 four	 inches,	he	was	the	tallest	man	she’d
ever	seen;	she	thought	he	was	maybe	even	the	tallest	man	in	 all	 of	Kumasi.	 He
used	to	hang	around	her	mother’s	food	stand,	joking	with	 my	grandmother	about
her	stubborn	Fante,	coaxing	her	into	 giving	him	 a	free	baggie	of	 achomo,	which
he	called	chin	 chin	like	 the	 Nigerians	in	 town	did.	 My	 mother	 was	thirty	 when
they	 met,	 thirty-one	  when	 they	 married.	  She	 was	 already	 an	 old	 maid	  by
Ghanaian	standards,	but	she	said	God	had	told	her	to	wait,	and	when	she	met	my
father,	she	knew	what	she’d	been	waiting	for.
        She	called	him	the	Chin	 Chin	Man,	like	 her	mother	called	him.	 And	when	I
was	very	little	  and	wanted	to	 hear	stories	about	 him,	 I’d	tap	 my	 chin	until	 my
mother	complied.	 “Tell	 me	about	Chin	 Chin,”	 I’d	say.	I	 almost	never	thought	of
him	as	my	father.
        The	Chin	 Chin	 Man	was	six	years	older	than	she	was.	Coddled	by	 his	own
mother,	he’d	felt	  no	need	to	 marry.	He	 had	been	raised	Catholic,	 but	 once	my
mother	 got	 ahold	of	  him,	 she	 dragged	him	 to	 the	 Christ	  of	 her	 Pentecostal
church.	The	same	church	where	the	two	 of	them	 were	married	in	 the	sweltering
heat,	with	so	many	guests	they’d	stopped	counting	after	two	hundred.
        They	 prayed	for	 a	baby,	 but	month	 after	 month,	year	 after	year,	 no	baby
came.	It	was	the	 first	 time	 my	mother	 ever	doubted	God.	 After	 I	am	 worn	out,
and	my	lord	is	old,	shall	I	have	pleasure?
        “You	 can	have	a	child	 with	 someone	else,”	she	offered,	taking	initiative	  in
God’s	silence,	but	the	Chin	Chin	 Man	laughed	her	away.	My	 mother	 spent	three
days	fasting	and	praying	in	the	living	room	 of	my	 grandmother’s	house.	She	must
have	looked	as	frightful	as	a	witch,	smelled	as	horrid	as	a	stray	dog,	but	when	she
left	her	 prayer	room,	she	said	to	my	 father,	“Now,”	 and	he	went	 to	her	and	they
lay	together.	Nine	months	to	the	 day	later,	my	brother,	 Nana,	my	mother’s	Isaac,
was	born.

19
        My	 mother	used	to	say,	“You	should	have	seen	the	way	the	Chin	Chin	Man
smiled	at	Nana.”	His	entire	 face	was	in	on	it.	His	 eyes	brightened,	his	lips	spread
back	until	 they	were	 touching	his	 ears,	his	ears	lifted.	 Nana’s	face	returned	 the
compliment,	 smiling	 in	 kind.	 My	 father’s	heart	 was	a	lightbulb,	  dimming	 with
age.	Nana	was	pure	light.
        Nana	could	 walk	at	 seven	months.	That’s	how	they	knew	 he	would	be	tall.
He	was	the	darling	of	 their	compound.	Neighbors	 used	to	request	him	at	parties.
“Would	 you	bring	 Nana	by?”	they’d	say,	wanting	 to	fill	  their	apartment	with	 his
smile,	his	bowlegged	baby	dancing.
        Every	 street	vendor	had	a	gift	 for	 Nana.	A	 bag	of	 koko,	 an	ear	of	 corn,	a
tiny	drum.	 “What	 couldn’t	 he	have?”	my	 mother	wondered.	Why	 not	the	 whole
world?	She	knew	 the	 Chin	 Chin	 Man	would	 agree.	Nana,	 beloved	and	loving,
deserved	the	best.	But	what	 was	the	best	the	world	 had	 to	offer?	 For	 the	Chin
Chin	Man,	 it	was	my	 grandmother’s	achomo,	the	bustle	of	Kejetia,	 the	red	 clay,
his	mother’s	fufu	  pounded	just	 so.	It	 was	Kumasi,	Ghana.	My	 mother	 was	less
certain	of	this.	 She	had	a	cousin	in	America	who	sent	money	and	clothes	back	to
the	family	 somewhat	regularly,	which	surely	 meant	there	was	money	and	clothes
in	abundance	across	the	Atlantic.	With	Nana’s	birth,	Ghana	had	started	to	feel	too
cramped.	My	mother	wanted	room	for	him	 to	grow.
        They	 argued	and	argued	and	 argued,	but	 the	Chin	 Chin	 Man’s	easygoing
nature	meant	he	let	my	mother	go	easy,	and	so	within	a	week	she	had	applied	for
the	green	card	lottery.	It	was	a	time	when	not	 many	Ghanaians	were	immigrating
to	America,	which	 is	to	say	you	could	enter	the	lottery	and	win.	My	mother	found
out	that	she	had	been	randomly	 selected	for	 permanent	residency	in	 America	a
few	months	later.	She	packed	what	little	 she	owned,	bundled	up	baby	Nana,	and
moved	to	Alabama,	a	state	she	had	never	heard	of,	but	where	she	planned	to	stay
with	 her	 cousin,	who	 was	 finishing	 up	 her	 PhD.	 The	 Chin	 Chin	 Man	 would
follow	 later,	after	they	had	saved	up	enough	money	for	a	second	plane	ticket	and
a	home	of	their	own.

20
                                                          6





My	mother	slept	all	day	and	all	night,	every	day,	every	night.	She	was	immovable.
Whenever	I	could,	I	would	try	 to	 convince	her	to	eat	something.	I’d	taken	to
making	koko,	my	favorite	childhood	meal.	I’d	had	to	go	to	three	different	stores
to	find	the	right	kind	of	millet,	the	right	kind	of	corn	husks,	the	right	peanuts	to
sprinkle	on	top.	I	hoped	the	porridge	would	go	down	thoughtlessly.	I’d	leave	a
bowl	of	 it	by	 her	bedside	in	the	morning	before	I	went	to	 work,	and	when	I
returned	the	top	 layer	would	 be	covered	in	 film;	 the	 layer	underneath	that
hardened	so	that	when	I	scraped	it	into	the	sink	I	felt	the	effort	of	it.
        My	mother’s	back	was	always	turned	to	me.	It	was	like	she	had	an	internal
sensor	for	when	I’d	be	entering	the	room	to	deliver	the	koko.	I	could	picture	the
movie	montage	of	us,	the	days	spelled	out	at	the	bottom	of	the	screen,	my	outfits
changing,	our	actions	the	same.
        After	about	five	days	of	this,	I	entered	the	room	and	my	mother	was	awake
and	facing	me.
        “Gifty,”	she	said	as	I	set	the	bowl	of	koko	down.	“Do	you	still	pray?”
        It	would	have	been	kinder	to	lie,	but	I	wasn’t	kind	anymore.	Maybe	I	never
had	been.	I	  vaguely	remembered	a	childhood	 kindness,	but	maybe	 I	 was
conflating	innocence	and	kindness.	I	felt	so	little	continuity	between	who	I	was	as
a	young	child	and	who	 I	 was	now	that	it	 seemed	pointless	to	even	consider
showing	my	mother	something	like	mercy.	Would	I	have	been	merciful	when	I
was	a	child?
        “No,”	I	answered.
        When	I	was	a	child	I	prayed.	I	studied	my	Bible	and	kept	a	journal	with
letters	to	God.	I	was	a	paranoid	journal	keeper,	so	I	made	code	names	for	all	the
people	in	my	life	whom	I	wanted	God	to	punish.
        Reading	the	journal	makes	it	clear	that	I	was	a	real	“Sinners	in	the	Hands	of
an	Angry	God”	kind	 of	 Christian,	and	I	believed	in	the	redemptive	power	of
punishment.	For	it	is	said,	that	when	that	due	Time,	or	appointed	Time	comes,	their

21
Foot	shall	slide.	Then	 they	shall	be	left	 to	fall	  as	they	are	 inclined	by	their	 own
Weight.
        The	code	name	I	gave	my	mother	 was	the	Black	Mamba,	because	we’d	just
learned	about	the	snakes	in	 school.	The	 movie	 the	teacher	showed	us	that	 day
featured	a	seven-foot-long	snake	that	looked	like	 a	slender	woman	in	a	skintight
leather	dress,	slithering	across	the	Sahara	in	pursuit	of	a	bush	squirrel.
        In	my	 journal,	the	night	we	learned	about	the	snakes,	I	wrote:


        Dear	God,
        The	Black	Mamba	has	been	really	mean	to	me	lately.	Yesterday	she	told
        me	that	if	I	 didn’t	clean	my	room	no	one	would	want	to	marry	me.


        My	 brother,	 Nana,	was	code-named	Buzz.	I	 don’t	 remember	why	 now.	In
the	first	few	years	of	my	 journal	keeping,	Buzz	was	my	hero:


        Dear	God,
        Buzz	ran	after	the	ice	cream	truck	today.	He	bought	a	firecracker
        popsicle	for	himself	and	a	Flintstones	pushpop	for	me.


        Or:


        Dear	God,
        At	the	rec	center	today,	none	of	the	other	kids	wanted	to	be	my	partner
        for	 the	three-legged	race	because	they	said	I	was	too	little,	but	then	Buzz
        came	over	and	he	said	that	he	would	do	it!	And	guess	what?	We	won
        and	I	got	a	trophy.


        Sometimes	he	 annoyed	me,	 but	 back	then,	 his	 offenses	were	 innocuous,
trivial.


        Dear	God,
        Buzz	keeps	coming	into	my	room	without	knocking!	I	can’t	stand	him!


        But	 after	 a	few	 years	my	 pleas	for	 God’s	intervention	 became	something
else	entirely.

22
        Dear	God,
        When	Buzz	came	home	last	night	he	started	yelling	at	TBM	and	I	could
        hear	her	crying,	so	I	went	downstairs	to	look	even	though	I	was
        supposed	to	be	in	bed.	(I’m	sorry.)	She	told	him	to	keep	quiet	or	he	would
        wake	me,	but	then	he	picked	up	the	TV	and	smashed	it	on	the	floor	and
        punched	a	hole	in	the	wall	and	his	hand	was	bleeding	and	TBM	started
        crying	and	she	looked	up	and	saw	me	and	I	ran	back	to	my	room	while
        Buzz	screamed	get	the	fuck	out	of	here	you	nosy	cunt.	(What	is	a	cunt?)


        I	 was	ten	when	I	wrote	that	entry.	I	was	smart	enough	to	use	the	code	names
and	make	note	of	new	vocabulary	words	but	not	smart	enough	to	see	that	anyone
who	could	read	could	easily	crack	my	 code.	I	hid	 the	journal	under	 my	mattress,
but	because	my	mother	is	a	person	who	thinks	to	clean	underneath	a	mattress,	I’m
sure	she	must	have	found	 it	 at	some	point.	 If	 she	did,	 she	never	mentioned	 it.
After	 the	broken-television	 incident,	my	 mother	had	run	 up	to	my	 bedroom	and
locked	the	door	 while	 Nana	raved	downstairs.	She	grabbed	me	close	and	pulled
the	both	of	us	down	onto	our	knees	behind	the	bed	while	she	prayed	in	Twi.
        Awurade,	bɔ	me	ba	barima	ho	ban.	Awurade,	bɔ	me	ba	barima	ho	ban.	Lord,
protect	my	son.	Lord,	protect	my	son.
        “You	 should	pray,”	 my	mother	 said	then,	reaching	for	 the	koko.	 I	watched
her	eat	two	spoonfuls	before	setting	it	back	down	on	the	nightstand.
        “Is	 it	okay?”	I	asked.
        She	shrugged,	turned	her	back	to	me	once	more.


                                                              —

I	went	to	 the	lab.	Han	wasn’t	there,	 so	the	room	was	a	livable	 temperature.	I	set
my	jacket	on	 the	back	of	a	chair,	 got	myself	ready,	then	grabbed	a	couple	of	my
mice	to	prep	them	for	 surgery.	I	shaved	the	fur	from	 the	tops	of	 their	heads	until
I	saw	their	 scalps.	I	 carefully	 drilled	 into	 those,	wiping	 the	 blood	away,	until	  I
found	 the	 bright	  red	 of	 their	  brains,	 the	 chests	of	 the	 anesthetized	 rodents
expanding	and	deflating	mechanically	as	they	breathed	their	unconscious	breaths.
        Though	I	 had	done	this	millions	of	 times,	it	 still	awed	me	to	see	a	brain.	To
know	that	if	 I	 could	 only	understand	this	little	 organ	inside	this	 one	tiny	 mouse,
that	understanding	still	  wouldn’t	 speak	to	 the	full	  intricacy	 of	 the	 comparable
organ	inside	my	own	head.	And	yet	I	had	to	try	to	understand,	to	extrapolate	from

23
that	limited	 understanding	in	 order	to	 apply	 it	to	 those	of	 us	who	 made	up	the
species	Homo	sapiens,	the	most	complex	animal,	the	only	animal	who	believed	he
had	transcended	his	Kingdom,	as	one	of	my	high	school	biology	 teachers	used	to
say.	That	belief,	 that	 transcendence,	was	held	within	 this	 organ	itself.	  Infinite,
unknowable,	soulful,	 perhaps	even	magical.	I	 had	 traded	the	Pentecostalism	of
my	childhood	 for	 this	new	 religion,	this	 new	quest,	knowing	 that	I	 would	 never
fully	know.
        I	 was	a	sixth-year	PhD	candidate	in	neuroscience	at	the	Stanford	University
School	of	 Medicine.	 My	 research	was	on	the	 neural	circuits	 of	 reward-seeking
behavior.	Once,	on	a	date	during	my	first	 year	of	 grad	school,	I	 had	bored	a	guy
stiff	 by	trying	 to	explain	to	him	 what	I	 did	all	day.	He’d	taken	me	to	 Tofu	House
in	Palo	 Alto,	 and	as	I	 watched	him	 struggle	with	 his	 chopsticks,	losing	 several
pieces	of	 bulgogi	 to	 the	 napkin	 in	 his	 lap,	 I’d	 told	 him	 all	 about	 the	medial
prefrontal	cortex,	nucleus	accumbens,	2-photon	Ca2+	imaging.
        “We	  know	  that	  the	 medial	  prefrontal	  cortex	 plays	  a	 critical	  role	  in
suppressing	reward-seeking	behavior,	it’s	just	that	the	neural	circuitry	 that	allows
it	to	do	so	is	poorly	understood.”
        I’d	 met	him	 on	OkCupid.	 He	 had	straw-blond	hair,	 skin	 perpetually	at	the
end	phase	of	 a	sunburn.	 He	looked	 like	 a	 SoCal	surfer.	 The	 entire	time	 we’d
messaged	back	and	forth	I’d	wondered	if	I	was	the	first	black	 girl	he’d	ever	asked
out,	if	 he	was	checking	 some	kind	 of	 box	off	  his	list	 of	 new	and	exotic	 things
he’d	like	to	try,	like	 the	Korean	food	in	front	 of	us,	which	he	had	already	given	up
on.
        “Huh,”	 he	said.	“Sounds	interesting.”
        Maybe	 he’d	expected	something	different.	 There	were	only	 five	 women	in
my	lab	of	twenty-eight,	 and	I	was	one	of	three	black	PhD	candidates	in	the	entire
med	school.	I	had	told	SoCal	Surfer	 that	I	 was	getting	my	doctorate,	but	I	 hadn’t
told	 him	 what	 I	 was	 getting	 it	 in	  because	I	 didn’t	 want	 to	 scare	him	  away.
Neuroscience	may	 have	screamed	“smart,”	  but	it	  didn’t	 really	 scream	“sexy.”
Adding	to	 that	my	blackness,	maybe	I	was	too	much	 of	an	anomaly	for	 him.	 He
never	called	me	back.
        From	 then	on,	I	 told	dates	that	my	 job	was	to	 get	mice	hooked	on	 cocaine
before	taking	it	away	from	 them.
        Two	 in	three	asked	the	same	question.	“So	do	 you	just,	like,	 have	a	ton	 of
cocaine?”	I	 never	admitted	 that	 we’d	switched	 from	 cocaine	to	 Ensure.	It	 was
easier	to	get	and	sufficiently	addictive	 for	the	mice.	 I	relished	the	thrill	 of	 having

24
something	interesting	and	illicit	 to	say	to	these	men,	most	of	whom	I	would	 sleep
with	once	and	then	never	see	again.	It	made	me	feel	powerful	 to	see	their	names
flash	across	my	phone	screen	hours,	days,	weeks	after	they’d	seen	me	naked,	after
they’d	dug	 their	 fingernails	 into	 my	 back,	 sometimes	drawing	 blood.	 Reading
their	texts,	I	 liked	 to	feel	 the	marks	they’d	 left.	 I	felt	 like	 I	 could	suspend	them
there,	just	 names	on	my	 phone	screen,	but	 after	a	 while,	 they	stopped	calling,
moved	on,	and	 then	I	 would	 feel	powerful	  in	their	 silence.	At	  least	for	 a	little
while.	I	 wasn’t	accustomed	to	 power	in	 relationships,	power	 in	 sexuality.	I	 had
never	been	asked	on	a	date	in	high	school.	Not	once.	I	wasn’t	cool	enough,	white
enough,	enough.	In	college,	I	had	been	shy	and	awkward,	still	molting	the	skin	of
a	Christianity	that	insisted	I	 save	myself	for	marriage,	that	left	 me	fearful	of	 men
and	of	 my	 body.	Every	 other	sin	 a	person	commits	is	 outside	the	body,	but	the
sexually	immoral	person	sins	against	his	own	body.
        “I’m	 pretty,	 right?”	 I	once	asked	my	 mother.	We	 were	standing	in	front	 of
the	mirror	 while	 she	put	her	 makeup	on	for	 work.	 I	 don’t	 remember	how	old	 I
was,	only	that	I	 wasn’t	allowed	 to	wear	makeup	 yet.	I	 had	to	sneak	it	 when	my
mother	wasn’t	around,	but	that	 wasn’t	too	hard	to	do.	 My	mother	 worked	all	 the
time.	She	was	never	around.
        “What	 kind	of	 question	is	that?”	she	asked.	She	grabbed	my	arm	and	jerked
me	toward	the	 mirror.	 “Look,”	  she	said,	and	at	first	 I	 thought	she	was	angry	at
me.	I	tried	 to	look	 away,	but	every	time	my	 eyes	fell,	my	 mother	would	jerk	 me
to	attention	once	 more.	She	jerked	 me	so	many	 times	I	 thought	my	 arm	would
come	loose	from	the	socket.
        “Look	 at	what	God	made.	Look	at	what	I	made,”	she	said	in	Twi.
        We	 stared	at	ourselves	in	 the	mirror	  for	 a	long	 time.	We	 stared	until	 my
mother’s	work	alarm	went	off,	 the	one	that	told	her	it	was	time	to	leave	one	job	in
order	to	get	to	the	other.	She	finished	putting	her	lipstick	 on,	kissed	her	reflection
in	the	mirror,	  and	rushed	off.	 I	 kept	staring	at	 myself	after	 she	left,	 kissing	my
own	reflection	back.


                                                              —

I	watched	my	 mice	 groggily	spring	 back	to	life,	  recovering	from	 the	 anesthesia
and	woozy	 from	  the	 painkillers	 I’d	 given	 them.	 I’d	 injected	  a	virus	 into	  the
nucleus	accumbens	and	implanted	a	lens	in	their	 brains	so	that	I	 could	see	their
neurons	firing	as	I	ran	my	experiments.	I	sometimes	wondered	if	they	noticed	 the

25
added	weight	they	 carried	on	 their	heads,	but	 I	tried	 not	 to	think	  thoughts	like
that,	tried	 not	to	humanize	them,	 because	I	worried	it	 would	 make	it	 harder	for
me	to	do	 my	work.	 I	 cleaned	up	my	 station	and	went	to	 my	 office	 to	try	 to	 do
some	writing.	I	 was	supposed	to	be	working	toward	a	paper,	presumably	my	 last
before	graduating.	 The	 hardest	part,	 putting	 the	figures	 together,	 usually	 only
took	me	a	few	weeks	or	so,	but	I	 had	been	twiddling	my	 thumbs,	dragging	things
out.	Running	my	 experiments	over	and	over	again,	until	 the	idea	of	 stopping,	of
writing,	 of	 graduating,	 seemed	impossible.	I’d	 put	 a	little	  warning	on	 the	 wall
above	my	desk	to	whip	myself	 into	shape.	TWENTY	MINUTES	OF	WRITING	A	DAY	OR
ELSE.	Or	else	what?	I	wondered.	Anyone	could	see	it	was	an	empty	threat.	After
twenty	minutes	of	 doodling,	 I	pulled	 out	the	journal	 entry	 from	 years	ago	that	I
kept	hidden	in	the	bowels	of	my	 desk	to	read	on	those	days	when	I	was	frustrated
with	my	 work,	 when	I	 was	feeling	 low	and	 lonely	and	useless	and	hopeless.	Or
when	I	 wished	I	 had	a	job	 that	paid	 me	more	 than	a	seventeen-thousand-dollar
stipend	to	stretch	through	a	quarter	in	this	expensive	college	town.


        Dear	God,
        Buzz	is	going	to	prom	and	he	has	a	suit	on!	It’s	navy	blue	with	a	pink	tie
        and	a	pink	pocket	square.	TBM	had	to	order	the	suit	special	cuz	Buzz’s
        so	tall	that	they	didn’t	have	anything	for	him	in	the	store.	We	spent	all
        afternoon	taking	pictures	of	him,	and	we	were	all	laughing	and	hugging
        and	TBM	was	crying	and	saying,	“You’re	so	beautiful,”	over	and	over.
        And	the	limo	came	to	pick	Buzz	up	so	he	could	pick	his	date	up	and	he
        stuck	his	head	out	of	the	sunroof	and	waved	at	us.	He	looked	normal.
        Please,	God,	let	him	stay	like	this	forever.


        My	 brother	died	of	a	heroin	overdose	three	months	later.

26
                                                          7





By	the	time	I	wanted	to	hear	the	complete	story	of	why	my	parents	immigrated	to
America,	it	was	no	longer	a	story	my	mother	wanted	to	tell.	The	version	I	got—
that	my	mother	had	wanted	to	give	Nana	the	world,	that	the	Chin	Chin	Man	had
reluctantly	agreed—never	felt	sufficient	to	me.	Like	many	Americans,	I	knew
very	little	about	the	rest	of	the	world.	I	had	spent	years	spinning	elaborate	lies	to
classmates	about	how	my	grandfather	was	a	warrior,	a	lion	tamer,	a	high	chief.
        “I’m	 actually	a	 princess,”	I	 said	 to	Geoffrey,	 a	 fellow	 student	in	 my
kindergarten	class	whose	nose	was	always	running.	Geoffrey	and	I	sat	at	a	table
by	ourselves	in	the	very	 back	of	 the	classroom.	I	always	suspected	that	my
teacher	had	put	me	there	as	some	kind	of	punishment,	like	she	had	seated	me
there	so	that	I	would	have	to	look	at	the	slug	of	snot	on	Geoffrey’s	philtrum	and
feel	even	more	acutely	that	I	didn’t	belong.	I	resented	all	of	this,	and	I	did	my	best
to	torture	Geoffrey.
        “No,	you’re	not,”	Geoffrey	said.	“Black	people	can’t	be	princesses.”
        I	went	home	and	asked	my	mother	if	this	was	true,	and	she	told	me	to	keep
quiet	and	stop	bothering	her	with	questions.	It’s	what	she	said	anytime	I	asked	her
for	stories,	and,	back	then,	all	I	ever	did	was	ask	her	for	stories.	I	wanted	her
stories	about	her	life	in	Ghana	with	my	father	to	be	filled	with	all	the	kings	and
queens	and	curses	that	might	explain	why	my	father	wasn’t	around	in	terms	far
grander	and	more	elegant	than	the	simple	story	I	knew.	And	if	our	story	couldn’t
be	a	fairy	tale,	then	I	was	willing	to	accept	a	tale	like	the	kind	I	saw	on	television,
back	when	the	only	images	I	ever	saw	of	Africa	were	those	of	people	stricken	by
warfare	and	famine.	But	there	was	no	war	in	my	mother’s	stories,	and	if	there	was
hunger,	it	was	of	a	different	kind,	the	simple	hunger	of	those	who	had	been	fed
one	thing	but	wanted	another.	A	simple	hunger,	impossible	to	satisfy.	I	had	a
hunger,	too,	and	the	stories	my	mother	filled	me	with	were	never	exotic	enough,
never	desperate	enough,	never	enough	to	provide	me	with	the	ammunition	I	felt	I
needed	in	order	to	battle	Geoffrey,	his	slug	of	snot,	my	kindergarten	teacher,	and

27
that	seat	in	the	very	back.
        My	  mother	 told	  me	 that	 the	 Chin	 Chin	 Man	  joined	 her	 and	 Nana	 in
America	a	few	 months	after	 they	moved	to	Alabama.	 It	was	his	first	 time	 on	an
airplane.	He’d	taken	a	tro-tro	to	Accra,	 carrying	only	one	suitcase	and	a	baggie	of
my	grandmother’s	achomo.	As	 he	felt	  the	bodies	of	 the	 hundreds	of	 other	bus
passengers	press	up	against	him,	his	legs	tired	and	achy	from	standing	for	nearly
three	hours,	he	was	thankful	for	 his	height,	for	 the	deep	breaths	of	fresh	 air	that
floated	above	everyone	else’s	heads.
        At	 Kotoka,	 the	gate	agents	had	cheered	him	on	and	wished	him	 well	when
they	saw	where	 he	was	headed.	“Send	for	 me	 next,	chale,”	 they	said.	 At	 JFK,
Customs	and	Immigration	took	his	baggie	of	chin	chin	away.
        At	 the	time,	my	 mother	was	making	ten	thousand	dollars	a	year,	working	as
a	home	health	aide	for	a	man	called	Mr.	Thomas.
        “I	 can’t	believe	 my	shithead	kids	 stuck	me	 with	 a	nigger,”	 he	would	often
say.	Mr.	Thomas	was	an	octogenarian	with	early-stage	Parkinson’s	disease	whose
tremors	had	 not	deterred	 his	 foul	 mouth.	 My	 mother	 wiped	 his	 ass,	fed	him,
watched	Jeopardy!	with	him,	 smirking	 as	he	got	nearly	every	answer	wrong.	Mr.
Thomas’s	shithead	kids	had	hired	five	other	home	health	aides	before	my	mother.
They’d	all	quit.
        “DO.	  YOU.	  SPEAK.	  ENGLISH?”	   Mr.	  Thomas	yelled	  every	 time	 my
mother	brought	him	 the	heart-healthy	 meals	his	children	paid	 for	 instead	of	 the
bacon	he’d	asked	for.	The	home	health	service	had	been	the	only	place	to	hire	my
mother.	She	left	Nana	with	her	cousin,	or	brought	him	to	 work	with	 her,	until	Mr.
Thomas	started	calling	him	 “the	little	 monkey.”	 After	  that,	more	often	 than	not,
she	left	 Nana	alone	while	 she	worked	her	 twelve-hour	 night	shift,	 praying	 he’d
sleep	until	morning.
        The	 Chin	 Chin	 Man	 had	 a	harder	 time	 finding	 a	 job.	 The	 home	 health
service	had	hired	him,	but	 too	many	people	complained	once	they	saw	him	 walk
in	the	door.
        “I	  think	 people	 were	afraid	  of	 him,”	  my	 mother	 once	told	 me,	 but	 she
wouldn’t	tell	me	why	 she’d	come	to	that	conclusion.	She	almost	never	admitted	to
racism.	Even	Mr.	 Thomas,	who	had	never	called	my	 mother	anything	other	than
“that	nigger,”	 was,	to	her,	just	 a	confused	old	man.	But	 walking	around	with	 my
father,	she’d	seen	how	America	changed	around	big	black	men.	She	saw	him	try
to	shrink	 to	 size,	his	 long,	proud	 back	hunched	 as	he	walked	 with	 my	 mother
through	 the	Walmart,	  where	 he	was	 accused	of	 stealing	 three	 times	 in	 four

28
months.	Each	time,	they	took	 him	to	 a	little	 room	off	 the	exit	 of	 the	store.	They
leaned	him	against	the	wall	and	patted	him	down,	their	hands	drifting	up	one	pant
leg	and	down	the	other.	Homesick,	humiliated,	he	stopped	leaving	the	house.
        This	 is	 when	my	 mother	 found	 the	 First	 Assemblies	of	  God	Church	 on
Bridge	Avenue.	 Since	her	arrival	 in	 America,	she	had	stopped	going	 to	church,
opting	instead	to	 work	 every	Sunday	because	Sunday	was	the	day	of	 the	 week
most	Alabamians	wanted	off	for	the	two	 holy	acts—going	to	church	and	watching
football.	American	 football	 meant	nothing	to	my	mother,	but	she	missed	having	a
place	to	worship.	My	father	 reminded	her	of	all	that	she	owed	God,	reminded	her
of	the	power	held	in	 her	prayer.	She	wanted	to	summon	him	out	of	 his	funk,	 and
to	do	so,	she	knew	she	needed	to	swim	out	of	her	own.
        The	 First	Assemblies	of	 God	Church	 was	a	little	 brick	 building,	 no	bigger
than	a	 three-bedroom	house.	 It	 had	a	 large	 marquee	out	 front	 that	 displayed
cutesy	messages	meant	to	lure	people	in.	Sometimes	the	messages	were	questions.
Have	you	met	Him	yet?	or	 Got	God?	or	Do	 you	feel	lost?	Sometimes,	they	were
answers.	Jesus	is	the	reason	for	the	season!	I	don’t	know	if	the	marquee	messages
were	what	drew	my	mother	in,	 but	I	 do	know	that	the	church	became	her	second
home,	her	most	intimate	place	of	worship.
        The	day	she	walked	in,	music	played	over	the	loudspeakers	in	the	sanctuary.
As	the	singer’s	voice	beckoned,	my	 mother	 inched	toward	the	 altar.	My	 mother
obeyed.	She	knelt	 down	 before	 the	 Lord	 and	prayed	 and	prayed	 and	prayed.
When	she	lifted	her	head,	her	face	wet	with	 tears,	she	thought	she	might	get	used
to	living	in	 America.

29
                                                          8





When	I	was	a	 child	I	 thought	I	 would	be	a	 dancer	or	a	worship	leader	at	a
Pentecostal	church,	a	preacher’s	wife	or	a	glamorous	actress.	In	high	school	my
grades	were	so	good	that	the	world	seemed	to	whittle	this	decision	down	for	me:
doctor.	An	immigrant	cliché,	except	I	lacked	the	overbearing	parents.	My	mother
didn’t	care	what	I	did	and	wouldn’t	have	forced	me	into	anything.	I	suspect	she
would	be	prouder	today	if	I’d	ended	up	behind	the	pulpit	of	the	First	Assemblies
of	God,	meekly	singing	number	162	out	of	the	hymnal	while	the	congregation
stuttered	along.	Everyone	at	that	church	had	a	horrible	voice.	When	I	was	old
enough	to	go	to	“big	church,”	as	the	kids	in	 the	children’s	service	called	it,	I
dreaded	hearing	the	worship	leader’s	warbling	soprano	every	Sunday	morning.	It
scared	me	in	a	familiar	way.	Like	when	I	was	five	and	Nana	was	eleven,	and	we
found	a	baby	bird	that	had	fallen	out	of	 its	nest.	Nana	scooped	it	into	his	big
palms,	and	the	two	of	us	ran	home.	The	house	was	empty.	The	house	was	always
empty,	but	we	knew	we	needed	to	act	fast,	because	if	our	mother	came	home	to
find	the	bird,	she’d	kill	it	outright	or	take	it	away	and	drop	it	in	some	small	stretch
of	wilderness,	leaving	it	to	die.	She’d	tell	us	exactly	what	she’d	done	too.	She	was
never	the	kind	of	parent	who	lied	to	make	her	children	feel	better.	I’d	spent	my
whole	childhood	slipping	teeth	under	my	pillow	at	night	and	finding	teeth	there	in
the	morning.	Nana	left	the	bird	with	me	while	he	poured	a	bowl	of	milk	for	it.
When	I	held	it	in	my	hands,	I	felt	its	fear,	the	unending	shiver	of	its	little	round
body,	and	I	started	crying.	Nana	put	its	beak	to	the	bowl	and	tried	to	urge	it	to
drink,	but	it	 wouldn’t,	and	the	shiver	that	was	in	the	bird	moved	in	me.	That’s
what	the	worship	leader’s	voice	sounded	like	to	me—the	shaky	body	of	a	bird	in
distress,	a	child	who’d	grown	suddenly	afraid.	I	checked	that	career	off	my	list
right	away.
        Preacher’s	wife	was	next	on	my	list.	Pastor	John’s	wife	didn’t	do	much,	as
far	as	I	could	tell,	but	I	decided	to	practice	for	the	position	by	praying	for	all	of
my	friends’	pets.	There	was	Katie’s	goldfish,	for	whom	we	held	a	toilet-bowl
funeral.	I	said	my	prayer	while	we	watched	the	flash	of	orange	swirl	down	and

30
disappear.	There	was	Ashley’s	golden	retriever,	 Buddy,	a	frantic,	 energetic	dog.
Buddy	liked	 to	 knock	 over	the	 trash	bins	the	 neighbors	put	 out	every	 Tuesday
night.	Come	 Wednesday	morning	our	 street	would	be	 littered	 with	 apple	cores,
beer	bottles,	cereal	 boxes.	The	trash	 collectors	started	to	 complain,	 but	 Buddy
kept	living	 out	his	truth,	undeterred.	Once,	Mrs.	 Caldwell	found	 a	pair	of	 panties
near	her	 bin	 that	didn’t	  belong	to	 her,	 confirming	 a	 suspicion	 she’d	had.	She
moved	out	 the	next	 week.	 The	Tuesday	night	 after	 she	 left,	 Mr.	 Caldwell	 sat
outside	next	to	his	trash	bin	in	a	lawn	chair,	a	rifle	slung	across	his	lap.
        “Iffn	  that	dog	comes	near	my	trash	again,	you’ll	be	needin’	a	shovel.”
        Ashley,	 scared	for	 Buddy’s	 life,	 asked	if	  I	 would	 pray	for	 him,	  as	I	 had
already	made	something	of	a	name	for	myself	on	the	pet	funeral	circuit.
        She	brought	 the	 dog	by	 while	 my	 mother	 was	at	work	  and	Nana	was	 at
basketball	practice.	I’d	asked	her	to	come	over	when	no	one	was	home,	because	I
knew	that	 what	we	 were	doing	 was	in	a	 gray	area,	sacrament-wise.	I	 cleared	a
space	in	the	living	room,	 which	I	 referred	to	 as	the	sanctuary.	Buddy	figured	out
something	was	 up	as	 soon	as	we	 started	 to	 sing	“Holy,	  Holy,	 Holy,”	  and	 he
wouldn’t	stay	still.	 Ashley	 held	 him	down	 while	 I	 placed	my	hand	 on	his	head,
asking	God	to	make	him	 a	dog	of	peace	instead	of	one	of	 destruction.	I	 counted
that	prayer	 successful	every	time	 I	 saw	Buddy	 out	 and	about,	alive,	 but	 I	 still
wasn’t	sure	if	I	was	destined	for	the	ministry.
        It	 was	my	high	school	biology	 teacher	who	urged	me	toward	science.	I	 was
fifteen,	 the	 same	age	that	Nana	 was	when	 we	discovered	he	 had	a	 habit.	 My
mother	had	been	cleaning	Nana’s	room	when	 she	noticed.	She’d	gotten	a	ladder
from	 the	garage	so	she	could	sweep	out	his	 light	fixture,	  and	when	she	put	her
hand	in	the	 glass	bowl	of	 the	light,	 she	found	a	 few	scattered	pills.	 OxyContin.
Gathered	there,	they’d	looked	like	dead	bugs,	once	drawn	to	the	light.	Years	later,
after	all	 the	funeral	 attendants	had	finally	  gone,	leaving	jollof	  and	waakye	 and
peanut	butter	 soup	in	 their	  wake,	my	 mother	 would	 tell	  me	that	 she	blamed
herself	for	 not	 doing	 more	the	 day	she’d	cleaned	 the	light.	 I	 should	 have	said
something	kind	in	return.	I	should	have	comforted	her,	told	 her	it	wasn’t	her	fault,
but	somewhere,	just	below	the	surface	of	me,	I	 blamed	her.	I	blamed	myself	too.
Guilt	 and	doubt	 and	 fear	 had	already	settled	 into	 my	 young	body	 like	  ghosts
haunting	a	house.	I	 trembled,	 and	in	 the	one	second	it	 took	 for	 the	tremble	 to
move	through	my	 body,	I	 stopped	believing	in	 God.	It	 happened	that	quickly,	 a
tremble-length	reckoning.	 One	minute	there	was	a	God	 with	 the	whole	world	 in
his	hands;	the	 next	 minute	 the	world	  was	plummeting,	 ceaselessly,	toward	an

31
ever-shifting	bottom.
        Mrs.	 Pasternack,	my	biology	 teacher,	was	a	Christian.	Everyone	I	 knew	 in
Alabama	was,	but	 she	said	things	like	 “I	 think	 we’re	 made	out	of	 stardust,	and
God	made	the	stars.”	Ridiculous	 to	me	then,	weirdly	 comforting	 now.	 Then,	my
whole	body	felt	 raw,	 all	of	 the	time,	 like	 if	 you	touched	me	the	 open	wound	of
my	flesh	 would	 throb.	Now,	 I’m	 scabbed	over,	hardened.	Mrs.	 Pasternack	said
something	else	that	year	that	I	never	forgot.	She	said,	“The	truth	is	we	don’t	know
what	we	don’t	know.	We	don’t	even	know	the	questions	we	need	to	ask	in	order	to
find	 out,	but	when	we	 learn	one	tiny	 little	 thing,	a	dim	 light	 comes	on	in	a	dark
hallway,	and	 suddenly	 a	new	 question	appears.	We	 spend	 decades,	centuries,
millennia,	trying	 to	answer	that	one	question	so	that	another	dim	 light	 will	 come
on.	That’s	science,	but	that’s	also	everything	else,	isn’t	it?	Try.	Experiment.	Ask	a
ton	of	questions.”


                                                              —

The	first	experiment	I	 can	remember	performing	was	the	Naked	Egg	experiment.
It	was	for	 my	middle	 school’s	physical	science	class,	and	I	remember	it,	 in	part,
because	I’d	had	to	ask	my	mother	to	put	corn	syrup	on	the	grocery	 list,	and	she’d
grumbled	about	it	endlessly	all	week	long.	“Why	 doesn’t	your	teacher	buy	you	the
corn	syrup	if	she	wants	you	to	do	this	nonsense?”	she	said.	I	told	my	teacher	that	I
didn’t	think	  my	 mother	would	 buy	 the	corn	 syrup,	and,	 with	 a	little	  wink,	 my
teacher	gifted	 me	 a	bottle	 from	 the	 back	 of	 her	storage	closet.	 I	 thought	this
would	please	my	mother.	After	 all,	 it’s	what	she	had	been	asking	for,	but	instead
it	only	 mortified	  her.	“She’ll	 think	 we	can’t	afford	  corn	syrup,”	 she	said.	Those
were	 the	 hardest	years,	 the	 beginnings	 of	  the	 just-the-two-of-us	  years.	 We
couldn’t	afford	 corn	syrup.	My	teacher	went	to	our	church;	she	knew	about	Nana,
about	my	father.	 She	knew	my	mother	 worked	twelve-hour	 shifts	 every	day	but
Sunday.
        We	 started	 the	Naked	 Egg	 experiment	at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	week	 by
putting	our	 eggs	in	 vinegar.	The	 vinegar	dissolved	the	 shell,	slowly,	 so	that	 by
Wednesday’s	class	we	had	a	naked	egg,	urine-yellow	  and	larger	 than	a	regular
egg.	We	put	the	 naked	egg	into	a	new	 glass	and	poured	corn	syrup	over	it.	 The
egg	we	saw	the	 next	 day	was	shriveled,	 flattened.	 We	put	 the	 deflated	egg	 in
colored	 water	 and	watched	 the	 blue	 expand,	color	  pushing	through	 the	 egg,
making	it	larger	and	larger	and	larger.
        The	experiment	 was	a	way	to	teach	us	the	principles	 of	 osmosis,	but	I	was

32
too	distracted	to	 appreciate	the	science	behind	 it.	 As	I	 watched	the	 egg	absorb
that	blue	water,	all	I	 could	think	 about	was	my	mother	shaking	the	bottle	of	 corn
syrup	at	me,	her	face	almost	purple	with	rage.	“Take	 it	back,	take	it	 back,	TAKE
IT	BACK,”	  she	said,	before	flinging	herself	 onto	the	ground	and	kicking	her	 legs
up	and	down	in	a	tantrum.
        The	 two	 of	  us	 back	 then,	mother	  and	daughter,	 we	 were	 ourselves	an
experiment.	The	question	was,	and	has	remained:	Are	we	going	to	be	okay?


                                                              —

Some	days	when	I	got	home	from	the	lab	I	 would	go	into	 my	room,	 my	mother’s
room,	and	 tell	her	 all	 the	things	 I’d	 done	that	day,	 except	I	 wouldn’t	 say	them
aloud,	I’d	just	 think	them.	 Today,	I	watched	a	mouse	brain	flash	green,	I’d	think,
and	if	she	stirred	that	meant	she’d	heard	me.	It	made	me	feel	like	a	silly	child,	but
I	did	it	 all	the	same.
        Han	 invited	 me	to	a	 party	 at	 his	place,	I	 thought	 toward	 my	 mother	one
night.	Move	if	 you	think	 I	should	go.	When	her	hand	lifted	  to	scratch	her	nose,	I
grabbed	my	jacket	and	left.
        Han	lived	 in	 one	of	 those	apartment	complexes,	uniform	 and	labyrinthine,
that	feels	like	a	prison	or	a	military	 barracks	in	its	sameness.	I	found	myself	going
to	3H	 instead	of	 5H.	 Every	turn	 led	 to	another	 group	of	 Spanish	mission-style
apartments	with	  those	signature	 clay	 tile	 roofs	  that	 were	 everywhere	 in	 the
Southwest	and	California.
        When	 I	 finally	 got	 to	 5H,	 the	door	 was	ajar.	 Han	welcomed	 me	with	 an
uncharacteristic	hug.	“Giftyyyyy,”	 he	said,	lifting	 me	up	a	little.
        He	was	drunk,	another	rarity	for	 him,	and	though	I’d	never	noticed	it	before,
I	noticed	 it	then—the	 tips	of	 his	ears	were	red,	 just	like	 the	day	 he’d	found	me
crying	in	the	lab.
        “I	 don’t	think	I’ve	 ever	seen	you	in	shorts	before,	Han,”	I	said.
        “Check	 out	my	 bare	feet	 too,”	 he	said,	wiggling	 his	toes.	“Lab	 regulations
have	really	deprived	you	from	seeing	me	in	all	my	natural	beauty.”
        I	 laughed,	and	he	flushed	 even	deeper.	“Make	 yourself	at	 home,”	he	 said,
waving	me	in.
        I	moved	through	the	living	 room,	chatting	with	 my	cohort.	We	ranged	in	age
from	 twenty-two	 to	 forty-seven.	 Our	 backgrounds	 were	similarly	  all	 over	 the
place—robotics,	molecular	 biology,	music,	 psychology,	literature.	 All	 roads	had

33
led	to	the	brain.
        I	 was	bad	at	most	 parties	but	good	 at	these.	It’s	remarkable	 how	cool	 you
can	seem	when	you	are	the	only	black	person	in	a	room,	 even	when	you’ve	done
nothing	cool	 at	 all.	 I	 wasn’t	 close	to	 anyone	 at	the	 party,	 certainly	 not	 close
enough	to	tell	them	about	my	mother,	but	by	the	end	of	the	night,	 the	alcohol	had
loosened	my	lips	 and	I	 started	to	 get	comfortable,	 to	 talk	 around	the	subject	 I
most	wanted	to	talk	about.
        “Do	  you	 think	  you’ll	  ever	 go	 back	 to	  practicing	 psychiatry?”	  I	 asked
Katherine.	She	was	one	of	the	more	senior	members	of	 my	lab,	a	postdoc	who’d
done	her	undergraduate	studies	at	Oxford	and	a	medical	degree	at	UCSF	before
starting	her	PhD	 here.	We	 had	a	tentative	 friendship,	 predicated	mostly	 on	the
fact	that	we	had	both	been	raised	in	immigrant	 families	 and	that	we	were	two	 of
the	only	women	in	 the	department.	I	 always	got	the	sense	that	Katherine	wanted
to	get	to	know	 me	better.	 She	was	friendly	and	open,	too	 open	for	 my	comfort.
Once,	in	the	lounge,	Katherine	had	confided	 in	me	that	she	had	snooped	through
her	husband’s	things	and	 found	 little	 “o’s”	 written	  in	 his	calendar	on	 the	 days
when	she	was	ovulating,	and	she	thought	 that	maybe	he	 was	trying	to	 trick	 her
into	having	a	baby	 sooner	than	the	time	frame	 they’d	planned	on.	She’d	been	so
free	with	 that	 information,	  like	 she	was	telling	 me	about	 a	cough	she	couldn’t
kick,	but	 I	was	enraged,	self-righteous.	“Leave	him,”	I	 said,	but	she	didn’t,	and	as
I	talked	 to	her,	Steve,	her	 husband,	was	on	the	other	side	of	 Han’s	living	 room,
sipping	sangria,	his	head	tilted	 back	just	 slightly	 so	that	I	 could	 see	his	Adam’s
apple	bob	as	the	drink	moved	down.	Knowing	what	I	knew	about	Steve,	I	couldn’t
look	at	 him,	his	 Adam’s	apple,	and	not	 see	a	kind	of	 menace,	but	 there	he	was
talking,	drinking,	 ordinary.
        “I	 think	 about	going	back	to	my	practice	all	the	time,”	Katherine	 said.	“With
medicine,	I	 could	 see	that	 I	was	 helping	people.	 A	 patient	 would	come	 in,	 so
wracked	with	anxiety	 that	they	were	scratching	their	arms	raw,	and	months	later,
no	scratches.	That’s	gratifying.	But	with	research?	Who	knows.”
        My	 mother	 had	hated	therapy.	She	went	in	 arms	raw,	came	out	 arms	raw.
She	was	distrustful	of	psychiatrists	and	she	didn’t	believe	in	mental	illness.	That’s
how	she	put	it.	“I	 don’t	believe	 in	mental	illness.”	 She	claimed	that	it,	along	with
everything	else	she	disapproved	of,	was	an	invention	of	the	West.	I	told	her	about
Ama	Ata	 Aidoo’s	book	 Changes,	in	which	the	character	Esi	says,	“you	cannot	go
around	claiming	that	 an	idea	or	 an	item	was	imported	into	 a	given	society	unless
you	could	also	conclude	that	to	the	best	of	your	knowledge,	there	is	not,	and	never

34
was	any	word	or	 phrase	in	that	society’s	indigenous	language	which	describes	that
idea	or	item.”
        Abodamfo.	 Bodam	nii.	 That	was	the	word	 for	 “crazy	person,”	the	 word	I’d
heard	my	 aunt	 use	that	 day	in	 Kejetia	  to	 describe	the	 dreadlocked	man.	 My
mother	refused	this	logic.	 After	 my	brother	died,	 she	refused	to	name	her	illness
depression.	“Americans	get	depressed	on	TV	and	they	cry,”	she	said.	My	 mother
rarely	cried.	She	fought	 the	feeling	 for	 a	while,	but	 then	one	day,	not	long	 after
the	Naked	 Egg	 experiment,	 she	got	 into	  her	bed,	 got	 under	 the	 covers,	and
wouldn’t	get	back	up.	I	was	eleven.	I	was	shaking	her	arm	as	she	lay	there	in	bed,
I	was	bringing	her	food	before	walking	 to	school,	I	was	cleaning	the	house	so	that
when	she	finally	woke	up	she	wouldn’t	be	upset	with	me	for	 letting	the	place	turn
to	filth.	 I	 was	doing	okay,	I	thought,	so	when	I	 found	her,	sinking	 in	the	bathtub,
the	faucet	running,	the	floor	 flooded,	the	first	 thing	 I	felt	 was	betrayed.	We	were
doing	okay.
        I	 looked	 at	Katherine’s	 stomach.	Still	 flat,	 all	 of	 these	months	later.	 Was
Steve	still	 making	little	  “o’s”	 in	 his	calendar?	Had	 she	told	 him	 that	she	knew
about	his	betrayal	or	did	she	keep	it	 to	herself,	hold	 it	in	 the	clenched	fist	of	 her
heart	to	open	only	when	something	between	them	was	truly	broken?
        I	 had	 never	been	to	 therapy	myself,	  and	when	the	 time	 came	for	  me	to
choose	what	to	 study,	I	 didn’t	 choose	psychology.	I	 chose	molecular	biology.	 I
think	 when	people	 heard	about	my	 brother	 they	assumed	that	 I	 had	gone	into
neuroscience	out	of	a	sense	of	duty	 to	him,	 but	the	truth	 is	I’d	 started	this	work
not	because	I	wanted	to	help	people	but	because	it	seemed	like	the	hardest	thing
you	could	do,	 and	I	wanted	to	 do	the	hardest	thing.	I	 wanted	to	 flay	any	 mental
weakness	off	my	body	 like	fascia	from	 muscle.	Throughout	 high	school,	I	 never
touched	a	drop	of	alcohol	because	I	lived	in	fear	 that	addiction	was	like	 a	man	in
a	dark	trench	coat,	stalking	me,	waiting	for	me	to	get	off	 the	well-lit	 sidewalk	and
step	into	an	alley.	I	had	seen	the	alley.	I	had	watched	Nana	walk	into	the	alley	and
I	had	 watched	my	mother	 go	in	 after	 him,	 and	I	 was	so	angry	at	 them	for	 not
being	strong	enough	to	stay	in	the	light.	And	so	I	did	the	hard	thing.
        In	undergrad,	I	 used	to	poke	fun	at	psychology—a	soft	science.	It	was	about
the	brain	and	cognition,	 yes,	but	it	was	also	about	mood—feelings	 and	emotions
created	by	the	human	mind.	Those	feelings	and	emotions	seemed	useless	to	me	if
I	couldn’t	locate	them	in	data,	if	 I	couldn’t	see	how	the	nervous	system	worked	by
taking	it	apart.	I	wanted	to	understand	why	the	feelings	and	emotions	came	about,
what	part	of	 the	brain	caused	them,	and,	more	important,	 what	part	 of	the	brain

35
could	 stop	them.	 I	 was	 such	a	 self-righteous	 child.	 First,	  in	 the	 days	of	 my
Christianity,	when	I	 said	things	like	“I’ll	 pray	for	 you”	to	my	classmates	who	were
reading	books	 about	 witches	 and	 wizards.	Then,	 in	  those	first	  few	 years	 of
college,	when	 I	 become	dismissive	of	 anyone	 who	cried	 about	 breakups,	who
spent	money	frivolously,	  who	complained	 about	small	 things.	By	 that	 time	my
mother	had	already	“healed	through	prayer,”	as	Pastor	John	put	it.	Healed,	but	in
the	way	a	 broken	bone	that’s	 healed	still	 aches	at	the	first	 signs	of	 rain.	 There
were	always	first	 signs	of	 rain,	atmospheric,	 quiet.	She	was	always	aching.	She
would	come	visit	me	when	I	 was	in	undergrad	at	Harvard,	bundled	up	against	the
winter,	even	if	 it	 was	spring.	 I’d	look	 at	her	 coat,	her	head	scarf	wrapped	tight,
and	wonder	when	I	had	stopped	thinking	of	her	as	a	strong	woman.	Surely,	there’s
strength	in	being	dressed	for	a	storm,	even	when	there’s	no	storm	in	sight?
        The	 party	was	winding	 down.	Han’s	ears	looked	 like	they	 would	 be	hot	to
the	touch.
        “You	 shouldn’t	play	poker,”	 I	said	to	him.	 Almost	everyone	had	gone	at	this
point.	I	 didn’t	 want	to	 go	home.	I	 hadn’t	been	drunk	 in	such	a	 long	time,	 and	I
wanted	to	linger	in	the	warmth	of	it.
        “Huh?”	 Han	said.
        “Your	  ears	are	a	tell.	 They	 turn	 red	 when	you’re	 drunk	 and	when	you’re
embarrassed.”
        “So	 maybe	I	 should	only	 play	poker	 when	I’m	 drunk	 or	 embarrassed,”	he
said,	laughing.
        When	 I	finally	 got	 back	to	the	apartment,	there	 were	signs	that	my	mother
had	gotten	up	from	the	bed.	A	cabinet	door	in	the	kitchen	was	open,	a	glass	in	the
sink.	We	were	doing	okay.

36
                                                              9





The	Chin	Chin	Man	 got	a	job	as	a	janitor	at	a	day	care	center.	He	was	paid	under
the	table,	seven	dollars	an	hour,	an	hour	a	day,	five	 days	a	week.	After	 buying	a
monthly	bus	pass,	he	hardly	broke	even,	but	 it	was	something	to	 do.	“It	 got	him
off	the	couch,”	 my	mother	said.
        The	 children	 liked	 him.	 They	 would	climb	  up	his	 tall	 body	as	though	 he
were	a	tree,	all	limb-branches	and	torso-trunk.	His	accent	delighted	them.	He	told
them	stories,	pretending	he	was	one	of	two	living-man	 trees	from	Kakum	 Forest.
That	he	had	started	out	as	a	small	seed	that	rolled	into	the	 forest	from	 bushland,
that	every	day	butterflies	 the	size	of	 dinner	plates	would	flutter	 their	 wings	over
the	earth	where	he	was	planted,	trying	 to	take	root.	 The	wind	 from	 the	flapping
wings	would	stir	the	 ground,	coaxing	him	to	 grow,	grow,	grow,	and	he	did.	 Look
how	big	 he	was.	Look	 how	strong.	 He’d	toss	one	of	 the	children	 in	 the	air	 and
catch	them,	tickling	fiercely.	 The	children	couldn’t	get	enough.	Half	of	 them	were
butterflies	for	 Halloween	that	first	year,	though	their	parents	didn’t	know	why.
        By	 that	time	 Nana	had	started	 kindergarten,	and	every	 day	after	 the	Chin
Chin	Man	 had	finished	 cleaning	the	 day	care,	he	would	 take	the	 bus	to	Nana’s
school	and	the	two	of	them	would	 walk	home	while	 Nana	told	him	 of	every	tiny,
boring,	magical	thing	 they	had	done	in	 school	that	day,	and	the	 Chin	Chin	 Man
would	greet	these	things	with	an	interest	beyond	my	mother’s	comprehension.
        When	 she	got	 home	from	  work,	 feet	 swollen,	arms	 aching,	ears	stinging
with	 Mr.	 Thomas’s	abuse,	Nana	would	already	 be	in	 bed.	The	 Chin	Chin	 Man
would	say	things	 like,	 “You	 see?	They	 put	the	 string	 through	the	 holes	of	 the
macaroni	to	 form	  a	necklace.	 Can	 you	imagine	 this	 happening	 in	 Ghana?	A
necklace	made	out	of	 food.	 Why	don’t	 they	eat	the	 macaroni	instead	and	make
necklaces	out	of	something	useful?”
        My	 mother	 was	jealous	of	 how	close	Nana	 and	the	Chin	 Chin	 Man	were.
She	never	admitted	this	to	me,	but	I	could	tell	just	 by	the	way	she	delivered	those
stories	to	me	over	the	years.	She	never	kept	a	single	thing	that	Nana	or	I	made	in

37
school.	Nana	 stopped	 giving	 her	  things,	 and	he	 had	 never	 told	  her	 stories,
preferring	to	 save	them	for	the	Chin	 Chin	Man	 instead.	After	 Nana	died,	I	think
my	 mother	  wished	 she’d	 had	 something	 of	  his,	 something	 more	  than	 her
memories,	more	than	his	basketball	jersey,	kept	stinking	in	his	closet,	a	story	that
was	just	hers	to	delight	in.
        When	 the	Chin	 Chin	Man	 put	Nana	to	 bed	those	nights,	he	would	 tell	 my
brother	the	 same	story	 he	told	 the	 day	care	 children,	 that	he	 was	one	of	  two
living-man	trees	from	Kakum	 Forest.	Nana’s	the	one	who	told	the	story	to	me.
        “I	 believed	 it,	Gifty,”	  he	said.	I	 don’t	 remember	how	old	 I	 was,	just	that	 I
was	young	and	in	 a	phase	where	I	never	ate	 but	was	always	hungry.	“I	  actually
believed	the	man	was	a	tree.”
        “Who	 was	the	other	living-man	tree?”	I	asked.
        “Huh?”
        “He	 said	he	was	one	of	two	living-man	 trees.	Who	 was	the	other	one?	Was
it	Ma?”
        The	look	 that	 came	over	Nana’s	face—darkly	 contemplative,	deeply	proud
—surprised	me.	“Nah,	 couldn’t	have	been	Ma.	If	 Pop	was	a	tree,	then	Ma	 was	a
rock.”


                                                              —

Han	had	left	the	thermostat	turned	low.	I	exhaled	and	thought	I	could	see	the	wisp
of	my	 breath	lingering	in	 the	air.	I	 had	a	jacket	I	 kept	at	the	lab,	and	I	 slipped	it
on	and	sat	down	to	work.	My	mice	 staggered	around	in	their	boxes	like	drunks	in
the	tank.	The	analogy	was	apt,	but	it	still	made	me	sad	to	imagine	them	that	way.
I	thought,	for	 the	millionth	  time,	about	the	baby	bird	 Nana	and	I	had	found.	 We
never	could	get	it	 to	drink,	 and	after	about	fifteen	 minutes	 of	failure,	 we	took	 it
outside	and	tried	 to	coax	 it	to	 fly.	 It	 wouldn’t	 do	that	 either.	Our	 mother	 came
home	to	find	  us,	shooing	it	 away	with	 our	hands	while	 it	 looked	at	 us	dumbly,
stumbled,	fell.
        “It	  won’t	ever	 fly	 now,”	 she	said.	“Its	 mother	 won’t	 recognize	it	 anymore
because	you	touched	it	and	it	smells	like	you.	It	 doesn’t	matter	what	you	do	now.
It	will	 die.”
        Nana	cried.	He	loved	 animals.	Even	in	his	last	months	I	could	still	 hear	him
begging	our	mother	 for	 a	dog.	What	 would	he	 have	thought	of	 me,	this	 work	 I
do?

38
        I	 took	one	of	the	mice	out.	Its	head	was	drooping	slightly	from	 the	bar	that	I
had	attached	to	it.	 I	put	 it	 under	the	microscope	so	I	 could	better	 see	my	work.
The	virus	I	injected	 into	 its	brain	had	allowed	me	to	introduce	 foreign	 DNA	 into
its	neurons.	This	DNA	  contained	opsins,	proteins	that	made	the	neurons	change
their	 behaviors	in	 response	to	light.	 When	 I	 pulsed	light	 in	 the	 right	 area,	the
neurons	spurred	into	action.
        “It’s	  kind	 of	  like	 an	 LED	  show	 for	 mice	  brains,”	 I	 once	 explained	 to
Raymond.
        “Why	 do	you	do	that?”	he	asked.
        “Do	 what?”
        “Diminish	 your	 work	like	 that.”
        It	 was	my	first	 year	of	grad	school	and	our	third	 date.	Raymond	was	a	PhD
candidate	in	Modern	Thought	and	Literature	 who	studied	protest	movements.	He
was	also	gorgeous,	dark	like	 dusk	with	 a	 voice	that	 made	me	tremble.	 I	forgot
myself	when	I	was	around	him	and	none	of	my	usual	tactics	of	seduction—that	is,
diminishing	my	work—seemed	to	have	any	effect	on	him.
        “It’s	 just	easier	to	explain	it	that	way.”
        Raymond	 said,	 “Well,	  maybe	you	 don’t	 have	 to	 do	easy	 with	 me.	 You
picked	a	hard	career.	You’re	 good	at	it	 too,	right?	Or	 else	you	wouldn’t	be	 here.
Be	proud	of	your	career.	Explain	things	the	hard	way.”
        He	 smiled	at	me,	and	I	 wanted	to	slap	the	 smile	off	 his	face,	 but	I	 wanted
other	things	more.
        When	 I	first	 told	 my	 mother	I	 was	going	to	 make	a	career	out	of	 science,
she	simply	  shrugged.	“Okay,	  fine.”	  It	  was	 a	 Saturday.	I	  was	 visiting	 from
Cambridge	and	had	 promised	her	I	 would	 go	 to	church	 with	 her	the	 next	day.
Maybe	it	 was	the	promise,	words	I	regretted	as	soon	as	they	left	 my	mouth,	that
had	made	me	announce	my	 career	intentions	 to	her	 the	way	 I	 did—like	  I	 was
hurling	 a	 ball	 after	  shouting	 “Think	  fast!”	  I	 thought	 she	 would	 object,	  say
something	like,	God	is	the	only	science	we	need.	I’d	been	finding	creative	ways	to
avoid	church	 since	Nana’s	funeral	 despite	my	 mother’s	occasional	pleading.	At
first,	 I’d	simply	 made	up	excuses	to	get	out	of	 it—I’d	 gotten	 my	period,	 I	had	a
school	project	to	complete,	I	needed	to	pray	on	my	own.	Finally,	she	took	the	hint
and	resorted	to	sending	me	long,	disapproving	glances	before	heading	off	 in	 her
Sunday	best.	But	then,	something	about	my	 going	away	to	 college	changed	her,
softened	her.	I	was	already	my	mother’s	daughter	by	then,	 callous,	too	callous	to
understand	that	she	was	reckoning	with	the	complex	shades	of	loss—her	son,	an

39
unexpected,	physical	loss;	 her	daughter,	something	 slower,	 more	natural.	 Four
weeks	into	my	freshman	year,	she	ended	a	phone	call	with	“I	love	you,”	spoken	in
the	reluctant	mumble	she	reserved	for	English.	I	laughed	so	hard	I	started	crying.
An	 “I	  love	 you”	 from	  the	 woman	 who	 had	 once	called	 the	 phrase	 aburofo
nkwaseasԑm,	white	people	foolishness.	At	first	she	chastised	me	for	laughing,	but
before	long	 she	 was	laughing	 too,	 a	big-bellied	  sound	that	 flooded	 my	 dorm
room.	Later,	when	I	 told	my	 roommate,	Samantha,	why	I	was	laughing,	she	said,
“It’s,	like,	 not	funny?	To	 love	your	family?”	 Samantha,	rich,	white,	 a	local	whose
boyfriend	 would	 occasionally	 make	 the	 drive	 over	 from	  UMass,	 leaving	 me
displaced	 in	  the	 common	  room,	 was	  herself	 the	  embodiment	 of	  aburofo
nkwaseasԑm.	I	laughed	all	over	again.
        The	first	  thing	I	 noticed	when	I	 went	back	 to	the	First	 Assemblies	of	 God
with	 my	 mother	 that	 day	was	how	 much	 it	 had	 grown	 since	the	 time	 of	 my
childhood.	The	church	 had	taken	over	two	stores	in	a	strip	 mall	 and	was	waiting
—impatiently,	 it	seemed,	given	the	number	of	prayers	people	made	about	it—for
the	mom-and-pop	stationery	 store	next	door	 to	give	 up	and	sell.	 I	 recognized	a
few	people,	but	 most	of	 the	faces	were	 new	to	me.	 My	 mother	and	I	 stood	out
even	more	among	all	 these	new	members—a	church	packed	 full	 of	 white,	 red-
blooded	southerners	 in	 their	 pastel	 polos	and	 khakis,	 my	 mother	  brilliant	  in
ankara.
        The	room	 hushed	as	Pastor	John	walked	to	the	pulpit.	He	had	grayed	at	the
temples	since	the	last	 time	 I	 saw	him.	 He	folded	 his	 hands,	which	 had	always
looked	to	me	 to	be	two	sizes	too	big,	 as	though	God	had	switched	Pastor	John’s
hands	with	another	man’s	and,	upon	realizing	his	mistake,	looked	 at	himself	 in	a
mirror	 and	 shrugged.	“I	 am	that	 I	 am.”	 I	 liked	 imagining	 another,	 larger	man
walking	around	with	 Pastor	John’s	small	hands.	I	liked	to	think	 that	that	man	had
also	become	a	preacher	with	a	congregation	that	could	fit	in	his	palm.
        “Father	God,	 we	thank	you	for	this	day.	We	thank	 you	for	bringing	 our	sons
and	daughters	back	to	church	after	some	time	away,	for	leading	them	safely	back
to	your	feet	after	their	 stints	away	in	college.	God,	we	ask	that	you	fill	their	 heads
with	your	 Word,	that	you	 don’t	allow	them	to	 fall	prey	 to	the	ways	of	the	secular
world,	that	you—”
        I	 scowled	at	my	mother	as	Pastor	John	continued	to	make	vague	references
to	me,	but	she	looked	straight	ahead,	unfazed.	After	the	sermon,	as	he	greeted	us
congregants	on	our	way	out,	Pastor	John	squeezed	my	hand,	a	little	 harder	than
was	welcome,	and	said,	“Don’t	 you	 worry	 none.	Your	 mom’s	doing	good.	 She’s

40
doing	real	good.	God	is	faithful.”


                                                              —

“You’re	 doing	real	 good,”	 I	 said	to	 the	mouse	 as	I	 put	him	 down.	 Though	 I’d
repeated	this	 process	dozens	of	 times	 without	  fail,	 I	 still	  always	said	 a	little
prayer,	a	small	plea	that	 it	 would	work.	 The	question	I	 was	trying	 to	answer,	to
use	Mrs.	 Pasternack’s	terms,	was:	 Could	 optogenetics	be	used	 to	 identify	 the
neural	mechanisms	involved	in	 psychiatric	 illnesses	where	there	are	issues	with
reward	seeking,	like	 in	depression,	where	there	is	 too	much	 restraint	in	 seeking
pleasure,	or	drug	addiction,	where	there	is	not	enough?
        In	 other	words,	many,	 many	years	down	the	line,	 once	we’ve	figured	 out	a
way	to	 identify	  and	 isolate	 the	 parts	of	  the	brain	 that	 are	 involved	 in	  these
illnesses,	once	we’ve	jumped	 all	 the	necessary	hurdles	to	 making	 this	research
useful	to	 animals	other	 than	mice,	 could	 this	science	work	 on	 the	people	 who
need	it	the	most?
        Could	 it	 get	a	brother	 to	set	down	 a	needle?	Could	it	 get	a	mother	 out	of
bed?

41
                                                            10





My	 mother	was	 surprised	to	 find	 herself	 pregnant	with	 me.	 She	and	the	 Chin
Chin	Man	had	stopped	trying	long	 before.	America	 was	so	expensive,	barrenness
was	its	own	kind	of	 blessing.	But	then	there	was	the	morning	sickness,	the	tender
breasts,	the	ballooning	of	her	bladder.	She	knew.	She	was	forty	years	old,	and	she
wasn’t	entirely	 happy	with	  what	everyone	 around	her	 kept	 referring	 to	 as	her
“miracle.”
        “You	 weren’t	 a	very	good	baby,”	 she	told	me	all	 my	 life.	 “In	 my	stomach,
you	were	 very	 unpleasant,	but	coming	 out	 you	 were	 a	nightmare.	 Thirty-four
hours	of	misery.	I	thought,	Lord,	 what	have	I	done	to	deserve	this	torment?”
        Nana	was	the	first	miracle,	 the	true	miracle,	and	the	glory	of	 his	birth	 cast	a
long	shadow.	I	was	born	into	 the	darkness	that	shadow	left	behind.	 I	understood
that,	even	as	a	child.	My	mother	made	certain	of	it.	She	was	a	matter-of-fact	kind
of	woman,	not	a	cruel	woman,	exactly,	but	something	quite	close	to	cruel.	When	I
was	young,	I	 prided	myself	 on	 being	able	to	 tell	 the	difference.	 Nana	 was	still
around,	and	so	I	 could	 stand	being	told	 I	 was	a	horrible	 baby.	 I	 could	stand	it
because	I	understood	the	context;	 Nana	was	 the	context.	 When	he	 died,	every
matter-of-fact	 thing	became	cruel.
        When	I	 was	very	little,	my	mother	took	 to	calling	me	asaa,	the	miracle	berry
that,	when	eaten	first,	turns	sour	things	sweet.	Asaa	in	context	is	a	miracle	berry.
Without	context,	it	 is	nothing,	does	nothing.	The	sour	fruit	remains.
        In	 those	early	years	of	our	family	  of	four,	 sour	fruit	 was	everywhere,	but	 I
was	asaa	and	Nana	was	 context,	 and	so	we	 had	 sweetness	in	abundance.	My
mother	still	 worked	for	 Mr.	 Thomas	then.	Some	of	 my	earliest	memories	are	of
his	endlessly	trembling	hands	reaching	for	 mine	on	the	 days	my	mother	brought
me	to	see	him.
        “Where’s	 my	little	 nugget?”	he	would	 stammer,	the	words	 fighting	 to	push
through	the	 shaking	 door	of	  his	lips.	 Mr.	  Thomas	loved	 my	 mother	 by	 then,
perhaps	more	than	he	loved	his	own	children,	 but	his	sharp	tongue	never	dulled,

42
and	I	never	heard	him	say	a	kind	word	to	her.
        The	 Chin	Chin	 Man	had	 a	steady	job	as	the	janitor	  for	 two	of	 the	middle
schools.	He	was	still	beloved	by	the	children,	and	he	was	a	good,	hard	worker.	My
memories	of	him,	 though	few,	 are	mostly	pleasant,	but	memories	of	 people	you
hardly	know	are	often	permitted	 a	kind	of	pleasantness	in	their	absence.	It’s	those
who	stay	who	 are	judged	 the	harshest,	simply	 by	 virtue	of	 being	 around	to	 be
judged.
        I’m	 told	that	as	a	baby	I	was	loud	and	chatty,	the	exact	opposite	of	the	quiet,
shy	person	I	 turned	out	 to	be.	 Verbal	 fluency	 in	young	 children	 has	long	been
used	as	a	signifier	of	future	intelligence,	 and	while	that	holds	true	for	 me,	it’s	the
temperament	change	that	 I’m	 interested	 in.	 The	fact	  that	when	 I	 hear	 or	 see
myself	on	 tape	from	 those	 early	years	of	 my	 life,	 I	 often	 feel	 as	though	I	 am
witnessing	an	entirely	  different	 person.	 What	happened	to	 me?	 What	 kind	 of
woman	might	 I	 have	become	if	 all	 of	 that	 chattiness	hadn’t	changed	direction,
moved	inward?
        There	 are	recordings	of	 me	 from	 back	then,	 audiotape	after	 audiotape	of
my	fast	talking,	 perfect	Twi	 or,	 first,	 my	nonsense	babbling.	In	one	of	the	tapes,
Nana	is	trying	to	tell	the	Chin	Chin	 Man	a	story.
        “The	 crocodile	tilts	his	head	back	and	opens	his	large	mouth	and—”
        A	 shriek	from	 me.
        “A	 fly	 lands	on	the	crocodile’s	eye.	He	tries	to—”
        “Dada,	dada,	dada!”	I	shout.
        If	 you	 listen	to	 the	tape	closely,	you	can	almost	 hear	the	Chin	 Chin	Man’s
patience	 in	  the	 face	  of	  Nana’s	 growing	  frustration	  and	  my	  unreasonable
interruptions.	He’s	trying	 to	pay	attention	to	us	both,	but,	 of	course,	neither	of	 us
gets	what	  we	  really	 want:	  complete	 and	  utter	 attention,	  attention	 without
compromise.	I	wasn’t	speaking	real	words	yet,	but	still,	 there	is	an	urgency	to	my
nonsense	babbling.	I	  have	something	 important	  to	 say.	A	  disaster	is	 on	 the
horizon,	and	if	 no	one	listens	to	me	the	disaster	will	 come	to	pass	and	my	father
and	Nana	will	 have	no	one	to	blame	but	themselves.	The	urgency	in	my	 voice	is
quite	 real.	 It’s	 distressing	to	 listen	 to,	  even	all	 of	  these	years	 later.	 I’m	 not
pretending	there	is	an	impending	disaster;	I	truly	believe	that	there	is	one.	At	 one
point,	I	 make	a	 low,	guttural,	 animal	 sound,	a	sound	so	clearly	biological	 in	 its
design	to	 elicit	 attention	 and	 sympathy	from	  my	 fellow	  animals,	and	 yet	 my
fellow	 animals—my	father,	 my	brother—do	 nothing	but	talk	 over	me.	They	 talk
over	me	because	we	are	safe,	in	a	small,	rented	house	in	Alabama,	not	stranded	in

43
a	dark	and	dangerous	rain	forest,	 not	on	 a	raft	 in	the	 middle	 of	the	 sea.	So	the
sound	is	a	nonsense	sound,	a	misplaced	sound,	a	lion’s	roar	in	the	tundra.	When	I
listen	to	the	tape	now,	it	 seems	to	me	that	this	itself	was	the	disaster	I	foresaw,	a
common	enough	disaster	for	most	infants	these	days:	that	I	was	a	baby,	born	cute,
loud,	needy,	wild,	but	the	conditions	of	the	wilderness	have	changed.
        On	 the	tape,	Nana	goes	back	to	telling	 his	story,	 but	it’s	 of	 no	use.	I	grow
increasingly	desperate,	not	letting	 him	get	 a	word	in	 edgewise.	Finally,	 you	can
hear	a	little	smack,	Nana	shouting	“Shut	up	shut	up	SHUT	UP.”
        “No	 hitting,”	 the	Chin	 Chin	Man	 says,	and	then	he	begins	to	speak	to	Nana
in	 low	 tones,	too	 low	 to	 hear	 on	 the	tape,	 but	 you	 can	still	  sense	the	anger
underneath	those	hushed	sounds.	The	anger	has	notes	of	understanding	in	it.	He’s
saying,	Yes,	she’s	insufferable,	but	she’s	ours	and	so	we	must	suffer	her.


                                                              —

My	mother	 was	eating	again,	though	not	 in	front	 of	 me.	I	 came	home	from	 the
lab	a	couple	of	times	to	find	 empty	cans	of	 Amy’s	Chunky	Tomato	 Bisque	in	the
trash,	and	so	I	started	buying	loads	of	them	at	the	Safeway	near	campus.
        I	 wasn’t	eating	much	myself	in	 those	days,	the	lean,	unhealthy	grad	student
days.	My	  dinners	 all	 came	in	  boxes	or	 cans,	 announcing	themselves	 by	 the
microwave’s	ding.	At	 first,	  I	was	embarrassed	about	my	diet.	 It	 didn’t	help	 that
the	cashier	I	always	seemed	to	get	at	my	local	Safeway	was	improbably	beautiful.
Dark	olive	skin	 with	an	undercut	that	I	caught	a	glimpse	of	every	time	 she	tucked
her	hair	behind	 her	ear.	Sabiha,	her	name	tag,	always	crooked	and	fastened	just
above	her	 left	 breast,	 announced.	I	 couldn’t	 bear	it.	  I	 started	to	 imagine	 her
internal	responses	to	the	 contents	of	 my	 shopping	cart.	That	 “Sesame	Chicken
Lean	Cuisine	for	 dinner	again,	huh?”	look	 I	was	certain	she’d	once	flashed	me.	I
decided	to	 spread	my	shopping	 around	to	 different	  grocery	stores	in	 the	 area.
Now	that	my	 mother	was	staying	with	me,	I	 felt	 less	embarrassed	about	the	soup
cans	overflowing	in	 my	cart.	 If	 anyone	asked,	I	was	armed	with	an	excuse.	“My
mother,	she’s	ill,”	I	imagined	myself	saying	to	that	beautiful	 cashier.
        “Would	 you	 mind	if	  I	eat	dinner	 with	 you?”	I	 asked	my	mother.	I	 brought
two	bowls	of	 soup	into	her	room,	 my	room,	and	sat	in	a	dining	 chair	I’d	 dragged
in.	The	room	 was	so	sparsely	decorated	that	even	the	word	“decorated”	 was	too
strong	to	describe	it.	There	was	a	bed,	a	nightstand,	now	the	chair.	There	was	also
a	smell,	that	funk	of	depression,	sturdy,	reliable	like	a	piece	of	furniture.

44
        As	was	typically	 the	case,	my	mother	had	her	back	to	me,	but	I	had	decided
to	try	to	talk	 to	her	anyway.	I	set	her	bowl	on	the	nightstand	and	waited	for	her	to
turn.	I	 ate	my	soup	loudly,	 slurping	 because	I	knew	how	much	 she	hated	eating
noises	and	I	wanted	to	get	a	rise	out	of	her.	Even	anger	would	be	better	than	this.
She’d	been	living	with	me	for	a	week	and	had	spoken	maybe	five	sentences.
        I	 hadn’t	spoken	much	either.	I	didn’t	 know	what	to	 talk	about.	What	do	you
say	to	a	woman’s	back,	your	mother’s	back?	The	curve	of	it,	 the	sloping,	sagging
flesh	of	 it,	was	more	recognizable	to	 me	now	than	her	face,	which	 was	once	the
one	thing	in	 this	world	 that	I	 sought	out	the	most.	Her	 face,	which	 my	face	 had
come	to	look	 like,	 was	the	thing	I’d	 studied	on	those	evenings	we’d	spent	in	her
bathroom,	talking	about	our	lives	 while	she	applied	makeup,	readying	herself	for
work.	In	those	just-the-two-of-us	 years	after	my	return	from	 Ghana,	I	had	studied
her	face	for	 any	sign	of	 collapse,	trying	to	 make	myself	an	expert	 on	the	shades
of	sadness	I	recognized	in	 her	 eyes.	Was	it	 lurking	 there	again,	the	 dark,	deep
sadness,	or	was	it	just	the	everyday	kind,	the	kind	we	all	have	from	 time	 to	time,
the	kind	 that	 comes	and,	more	important,	 goes?	It	 had	been	almost	 three	days
since	I’d	seen	my	mother’s	face,	but	I	had	studied	her	enough	to	know	which	kind
of	sadness	I	would	find	there.


                                                              —

In	Edward	Tronick’s	 popular	“Still	 Face	Experiment”	 from	the	1970s,	babies	and
mothers	sit	facing	 each	other.	At	 first,	 they	 engage	with	each	other	readily	 and
joyfully.	  The	 baby	points	 and	 the	mother’s	 eyes	follow	  her	 finger.	 The	 baby
smiles	and	the	 mother	smiles	 back.	They	 laugh;	they	 touch.	Then,	 after	 a	few
minutes	of	this,	 the	mother’s	face	turns	completely	still.	 The	baby	tries	 all	of	 the
same	moves	that	had	elicited	a	response	only	moments	before,	 but	to	no	 effect.
The	mother	won’t	acknowledge	her.
        I	 first	  watched	this	 experiment	 in	 my	developmental	 psychology	class	in
college,	and	it	 reminded	 me	of	 the	 audiotapes	from	 my	 childhood,	 except	the
videos	of	this	 experiment	were	far	 more	distressing.	Unlike	 in	 my	tape,	there	is
no	attempt	at	soothing	the	child’s	 suffering,	 and	the	child	is	 so	clearly	suffering.
The	 look	 on	 her	 face	 is	 one	 of	 such	 pure	 betrayal,	 elementary,	 really,	 this
betrayal.	More	 treacherous	still,	perhaps,	is	the	 fact	 that	it	 is	the	 mother,	of	 all
people,	who	is	 ignoring	the	 baby,	not	a	 sibling	or	 a	father.	 It	 is	the	 one	person
who	biologically,	 emotionally,	unequivocally	 matters	most	at	that	stage	of	life.	In
class	that	day,	watching	the	baby’s	wariness	play	 out	on	the	 projector	 while	my

45
classmates	and	I	took	notes,	we	heard	a	sudden	whimper.	It	wasn’t	the	baby	in	the
video.	It	was	a	fellow	student,	a	girl	whom	 I’d	never	really	noticed,	though	she	sat
only	a	few	 chairs	away	from	 me.	She	left	 the	room	 abruptly,	knocking	 over	my
notebook	as	she	did	so,	and	I	knew	she	knew	what	the	baby	knew.	She’d	been	in
the	same	wilderness.
        My	 mother	 and	I	 reenacted	the	Still	 Face	Experiment,	 now	repurposed	as
the	Turned	Back	Experiment,	 except	I	was	twenty-eight	 and	she	was	only	weeks
away	from	 sixty-nine.	 The	harm	 done	by	her	 turned	back	 would	be	 minimal;	 I
had	already	become	the	person	I	was	going	to	become,	a	scientist	who	understood
that	what	ailed	my	mother	 was	in	fact	a	disease,	even	if	she	refused	to	recognize
it	as	such.	Even	if	she	refused	doctors,	medicine,	her	own	daughter.	She	accepted
prayer	and	only	prayer.
        “I	 still	  pray	sometimes,”	I	 told	 my	 mother’s	back.	 It	 wasn’t	a	lie,	 exactly,
though	it	 certainly	 wasn’t	the	 truth.	 The	 last	time	 she’d	spoken,	she	asked	me
about	prayer,	and	so	I	was	willing	 to	forgo	 the	whole	truth	 if	 it	 meant	she	might
speak	again.	Maybe	religion	was	the	only	well	that	would	draw	water.


                                                              —

Rejoice	always,	pray	without	ceasing.	I	used	to	 worry	over	 that	scripture	 when	I
was	a	child.	“Is	it	possible?”	I	asked	my	mother.	“To	pray	without	 ceasing?”
        “Why	 don’t	you	give	it	a	try?”
        So,	I	 did.	My	 first	 attempts	involved	 getting	down	on	my	 knees	at	the	foot
of	 the	bed.	 I	 started	by	 listing	 everything	 I	 was	thankful	  for.	 My	 family,	  my
friends,	my	 blue	bicycle,	ice	 cream	sandwiches,	Buddy	the	dog.	I	looked	 up	and
not	even	a	minute	had	passed.	I	kept	listing,	people	I	thought	God	should	work	on
a	little	more,	animals	that	I	 thought	God	had	gotten	right	and	a	few	that	I	 thought
he’d	gotten	wrong.	Before	long,	I	got	distracted	and	my	mind	wandered	so	far	off
that	I	found	 that	instead	of	 praying,	I	 was	thinking	 about	what	had	happened	on
my	favorite	television	show	the	night	before.
        “I	 don’t	think	it’s	 possible,”	I	reported	back	to	my	mother.
        She	was	in	 the	kitchen,	 straining	used	oil	 into	 an	empty	 bottle.	She	had	a
habit	 of	 sticking	 her	 tongue	 out	when	 she	 poured	things.	 Years	 later,	 in	 the
bathroom	pouring	soap	into	 a	dispenser,	I’d	caught	myself	 in	the	mirror	  making
that	same	face	and	it	had	startled	me.	 The	thing	I	 feared,	becoming	my	 mother,
was	happening,	physically,	in	spite	of	myself.

46
        “With	 man	this	is	impossible,	but	with	God	all	things	are	possible,”	she	said.
        “Matthew	 19:26.”
        My	  whole	  life,	   my	 mother	  had	 been	  quizzing	 me	  on	 Bible	  verses.
Sometimes	the	verses	were	obscure,	so	obscure	that	I’m	sure	she	looked	them	up
moments	before	asking	me,	but	I	prided	myself	on	getting	them	right.	 Now,	from
time	to	time,	a	verse	will	 come	to	me	at	the	oddest	moments.	I’ll	be	at	a	gas	pump
or	walking	 through	the	halls	of	 a	department	store	and	a	voice	will	 say,	Oh,	taste
and	see	that	the	Lord	is	good!	Blessed	is	the	one	who	takes	refuge	in	Him!	And	I’ll
reply,	Psalms	34:8.
        “What	 is	prayer?”	my	mother	asked.
        This	question	stumped	me	then,	stumps	me	still.	I	 stood	there,	staring	at	my
mother,	waiting	for	 her	to	give	me	the	answers.	Back	then,	I	approached	my	piety
the	same	way	I	approached	my	studies:	fastidiously.	I	spent	the	summer	after	my
eighth	birthday	 reading	 my	 Bible	 cover	 to	cover,	 a	feat	 that	 even	my	 mother
admitted	she	had	never	done.	I	wanted,	above	all	else,	to	be	good.	And	 I	wanted
the	path	to	that	goodness	to	be	clear.	I	suspect	that	this	is	why	I	excelled	at	math
and	science,	where	the	rules	are	laid	out	step	by	step,	where	if	you	did	something
exactly	the	way	it	 was	supposed	to	be	done,	the	result	would	be	exactly	as	it	was
expected	to	be.
        “If	  you	are	living	a	godly	 life,	a	moral	 life,	 then	everything	you	do	can	be	a
prayer,”	 my	 mother	 said.	“Instead	 of	 trying	 to	 pray	 all	 day,	 live	 your	 life	  as
prayer.”
        I	 was	disappointed	by	her	answer;	she	could	see	it	in	my	face.	She	said,	“If
you	 find	  it	  difficult	   to	  pray,	 why	  don’t	  you	 try	  writing	  to	  God	 instead?
Remember,	everything	we	do	is	prayer.	God	will	read	what	you	write,	 and	he	will
answer	your	writing	like	prayers.	From	your	pen	to	God’s	ear.”
        Later	 that	 night,	I	 would	 write	 my	 first	 journal	 entry,	 and	get	hooked	 on
how	clearheaded	I	felt,	how	even	just	the	act	of	writing	 to	God	made	me	feel	like
he	was	there,	 reading,	 listening.	 He	was	 there	in	  everything,	so	 why	 couldn’t
prayer	be	a	life	lived?	I	 watched	my	mother	continue	to	pour	used	oil	through	the
sieve.	I	watched	the	sieve	catch	the	hardened,	charred	bits	of	food	left	over	 from
the	day’s	cooking.	I	watched	my	mother’s	tongue	peek	out	from	the	corner	of	 her
lip,	a	snail	slipping	out	of	its	shell.	Was	this	pouring	prayer?
        I	 slurped	 the	 last	 sip	of	  soup.	My	  mother	 didn’t	 stir;	 she	 didn’t	 turn.	 I
watched	the	slope	of	her	back	rise	and	fall,	rise	and	fall.	Was	this	prayer?

47
                                                11




Dear	God,
Buzz	and	I	raced	to	the	car	after	church	today.	He	won,	but	he	said	I’m
getting	faster.	He	better	watch	out.	Next	time	I’ll	beat	him.

Dear	God,
Please	bless	Buzz	and	TBM	and	please	let	Buzz	get	a	dog.	Amen.

48
                                                            12





In	deep	brain	stimulation,	 or	 DBS,	the	areas	of	the	brain	 that	control	 movement
are	stimulated	 with	 electrical	 signals.	The	 surgery	is	 sometimes	performed	 on
people	with	Parkinson’s	disease,	and	the	goal	is	to	improve	their	motor	functions.
I	sat	in	on	one	of	these	surgeries	during	my	first	 year	of	graduate	school,	because
I	was	curious	 about	how	 the	procedure	worked	 and	whether	 or	not	 it	 could	be
useful	in	my	own	research.
        The	  patient	 that	  day	 was	 a	  sixty-seven-year-old	 man	  who	 had	  been
diagnosed	with	 Parkinson’s	six	 years	earlier.	He’d	 had	a	 moderate	response	to
medication,	and	the	 neurosurgeon,	a	colleague	who’d	spent	a	sabbatical	year	 in
my	 lab	 doing	 research,	kept	 the	 patient	 awake	while	  he	 carefully	 placed	 an
electrode	in	the	subthalamic	nucleus	and	turned	on	the	impulse	generator	battery.
I	watched	as	the	patient’s	tremor,	most	pronounced	in	his	left	hand,	stilled.	It	 was
amazing	to	see,	as	if	the	keys	to	a	car	had	been	lost	while	the	engine	was	still	 on
and	 thrumming,	   thrumming.	  And	  then,	  keys	  found,	  ignition	   turned	  off,
thrumming	stilled.
        “How	 you	doing,	Mike?”	 the	doctor	asked.
        “Pretty	 good,”	 Mike	  said,	and	then,	 again	incredulously,	 “Hey,	 I’m	 doing
pretty	good.”
        Seconds	later,	Mike	 was	crying.	 Desperate,	inconsolable	crying,	 as	though
Pretty	Good	Mike	 had	 been	nothing	more	than	a	figment	 of	 our	imaginations.	 I
got	to	see	firsthand	one	of	the	problems	 with	DBS	 and	other	methods	like	it,	 the
fact	that	 magnets	and	electrical	 signals	cannot	differentiate	  between	individual
neurons.	The	  surgeon	moved	 the	  electrode	 in	 Mike’s	  brain	 one-tenth	  of	 a
centimeter	over	to	 try	 to	correct	 the	wave	of	 sadness	that	had	suddenly	gripped
him.	It	 worked,	but	 what	if	 it	 hadn’t?	One-tenth	of	 a	centimeter	is	all	 that	stood
between	pretty	good	and	unimaginable	 sorrow.	One-tenth	 of	 a	centimeter	in	 an
organ	about	 which	 we	 know	  so	very	  little,	  despite	our	 constant	 attempts	 at
understanding.

49
        One	of	 the	 exciting	 things	about	optogenetics	is	that	 it	 allows	us	to	 target
particular	neurons,	allowing	for	 a	greater	amount	of	specificity	 than	DBS.	Part	of
what	 interested	 me	  about	 Parkinson’s	 disease	studies	 was	 my	  research	 in
optogenetics,	but	it	was	also	my	memories	of	Mr.	Thomas.	When	I	 was	three,	the
old	man	died.	I	 wouldn’t	find	 out	what	Parkinson’s	was	until	 many	years	later,	in
high	school,	when	reading	about	the	disease	in	my	textbook	conjured	up	an	image
of	the	man	my	mother	used	to	work	for.
        There’s	a	 picture	 of	 my	 family	  at	his	 funeral.	 We	 are	standing	 near	the
casket.	Nana	looks	like	he	is	 both	bored	and	angry,	the	first	  signs	of	a	look	 that
my	family	 will	  come	to	 know	well	 in	 his	teenage	years.	The	Chin	Chin	 Man	 is
holding	me,	taking	 care	not	to	 ruffle	 my	 black	dress.	My	 mother	 stands	next	to
him.	She	doesn’t	look	sad,	exactly,	but	there’s	something	there.
        This	 is	one	 of	 the	only	 pictures	 of	 the	four	 of	 us	together.	 I	 think	 that	I
remember	that	day,	but	I	don’t	know	 if	 I’ve	just	turned	my	 mother’s	stories	about
it	into	 memories	or	if	 I’ve	 stared	at	that	picture	long	enough	that	my	 own	stories
started	to	emerge.
        What	 I	think	 I	 remember:	The	Chin	 Chin	 Man	and	my	 mother	fought	 that
morning.	He	didn’t	 want	to	 go	to	the	funeral,	 but	she	insisted.	However	horrible
Mr.	 Thomas	had	been,	he	was	still	 an	elder	and	therefore	 deserving	of	 respect.
We’d	all	piled	into	 our	red	minivan.	 My	mother	drove,	which	 was	rare	when	both
of	my	 parents	were	in	the	car	together,	and	her	hands	gripped	the	steering	wheel
so	hard	I	could	see	her	veins	pulsing.
        Mr.	 Thomas’s	shithead	kids	were	there,	all	three	of	them.	The	two	sons,	who
were	around	the	same	age	as	my	father,	were	crying,	but	 his	daughter	is	the	one
who	stood	out	the	 most.	She	was	stone-faced,	staring	at	her	father	 in	his	 casket
with	an	unmistakable	look	of	contempt.	She	came	up	to	my	family	 as	we	took	our
turn	viewing	the	body,	and	said	to	my	mother,	“He	 was	a	god-awful	man,	and	I’m
not	sorry	he’s	dead,	but	I	 am	sorry	you	had	 to	put	up	 with	him	 all	 these	years,	I
guess.”
        She	was	the	one	who	 took	 our	picture,	 though	why	 anyone	would	want	 to
commemorate	that	moment,	I	don’t	know.	On	 the	way	home,	my	parents	couldn’t
stop	talking	about	what	 she’d	said.	It	was	a	sin	to	speak	ill	 of	 the	dead	like	 that;
worse	than	a	sin,	it	was	a	curse.	As	my	parents	discussed	it,	my	mother	got	more
and	more	agitated.
        “Pull	 over,”	she	said,	for	my	father	was	driving	 this	time.	“Pull	 over.”
        The	Chin	 Chin	Man	got	onto	 the	shoulder	of	the	highway;	he	turned	toward

50
my	mother,	waiting.
        “We	 have	to	pray.”
        “Can’t	this	 wait?”	he	said.
        “Wait	 for	 what?	For	 that	man	to	 jump	out	 of	 his	grave	and	come	and	find
us?	No,	we	must	pray	now.”
        Nana	and	I	already	knew	the	drill.	We	 bowed	our	heads,	and	after	a	moment
or	so,	the	Chin	Chin	Man	did	too.
        “Father	 God,	we	pray	for	 that	woman	who	spoke	ill	 of	 her	father.	 We	pray
that	you	do	not	 punish	her	for	 saying	those	things	and	that	you	do	not	punish	 us
for	 hearing	them.	 Lord,	 we	ask	that	 you	 allow	Mr.	  Thomas	to	 be	at	peace.	In
Jesus’s	name,	amen.”


                                                              —

“In	 Jesus’s	name,	amen,”	the	most	common	ending	to	 a	prayer.	So	common,	 in
fact,	that	 when	I	 was	a	child,	 I	 felt	 that	 no	prayer	 was	complete	without	 those
words.	I	 would	 go	to	 dinner	at	 friends’	 houses,	waiting	for	 their	 fathers	 to	say
grace.	If	those	four	 words	 were	not	spoken,	I	 wouldn’t	lift	  my	fork.	  I’d	whisper
them	myself	before	eating.
        We	used	those	four	words	to	 end	prayers	at	Nana’s	soccer	games.	In	Jesus’s
name,	we	would	ask	that	God	allow	our	boys	to	defeat	their	opponents.	Nana	was
five	when	 he	started	playing	the	sport,	 and	by	the	time	 I	 was	born,	he’d	already
made	a	name	for	himself	on	the	field.	He	was	fast,	tall,	agile,	and	he	led	his	team,
the	Rockets,	to	state	finals	three	years	in	a	row.
        The	Chin	 Chin	Man	 loved	soccer.	“Football,”	 he	said,	“is	the	most	graceful
sport	there	is.	 It	 is	performed	 with	 elegance	and	precision,	like	 a	 dance.”	He’d
pick	me	 up,	as	he	said	this,	 and	dance	me	around	the	 bleachers	behind	the	old
high	school	where	most	of	Nana’s	games	were	held.	We	went	to	every	single	one,
me	and	the	Chin	Chin	 Man.	My	 mother,	usually	working,	 would	 come	when	she
could,	the	requisite	cooler	of	grapes	and	Capri	Suns	in	hand.
        One	of	 Nana’s	games	stood	out	to	me.	He	was	about	ten	years	old	then,	and
he	had	already	come	into	 his	 growth	like	 a	 weed	in	spring.	 Most	 of	the	 boys	I
knew	growing	 up	were	shorter	than	 us	girls	until	 about	fifteen	  or	sixteen,	when
they	rounded	some	invisible	corner	in	the	summertime	and	returned	to	school	the
next	year	twice	 our	 size,	with	 voices	that	 crackled	like	 car	 radios	being	 tuned,
searching	for	the	right,	 the	clearest,	sound.	But	not	Nana.	Nana	was	always	taller

51
than	everyone	else.	To	get	him	 onto	the	 soccer	team	that	first	 year,	 my	mother
had	had	to	produce	his	birth	 certificate	 to	 prove	he	wasn’t	older	than	the	rest	of
the	kids.
        The	 day	 of	 this	 particular	 game	had	 been	hot	 and	muggy,	 one	of	  those
quintessential	Alabama	summer	days	when	the	heat	feels	like	a	physical	presence,
a	weight.	Five	minutes	into	the	game	and	you	could	already	see	droplets	of	sweat
flinging	 from	 the	boys’	hair	 every	time	 they	shook	their	 heads.	Southerners	are,
of	course,	accustomed	to	this	kind	of	 heat,	but	still	 it	works	 on	you,	to	carry	that
weight	around.	Sometimes,	if	you’re	not	careful,	it	sinks	you.
        One	of	 the	boys	on	the	other	team	slid	in	a	careless	effort	to	score	a	goal.	It
didn’t	work.	He	lay	there	on	the	ground	for	a	second	or	so,	as	if	stunned.
        “Get	 up	 off	  the	 damn	ground,”	 a	 man	 shouted.	There	 were	only	 a	 few
bleachers	at	the	 soccer	 field,	 because	no	 one	 in	 Alabama	 really	 cared	about
soccer.	It	was	a	child’s	sport,	something	to	put	your	 kids	in	until	 they	were	ready
to	play	football.	 The	man	was	on	the	other	side	of	the	bleachers,	but	that	was	still
quite	close.
        The	game	continued	on.	 Nana	was	a	forward,	and	a	good	one.	By	 halftime
he	had	already	scored	two	goals.	The	other	team	had	one.
        When	 the	whistle	 blew,	 the	boys	 came	to	 join	 their	 coach	on	 the	bench,
which	 was	only	 a	row	 in	 front	  of	 us.	Nana	 grabbed	a	 handful	 of	 grapes	and
carefully,	 methodically,	 started	plucking	 them	 off	  the	stem	 and	popping	 them
into	his	mouth	while	the	coach	talked.
        On	the	other	side,	the	man	who’d	shouted	grabbed	his	son	by	the	root	of	his
sweat-soaked	hair.	“Don’t	you	let	them	 niggers	win.	Don’t	let	 them	score	another
goal	on	you,	you	hear	me?”
        Everyone	 heard	 him.	 We’d	 only	 spent	 a	little	  over	 half	 an	 hour	 in	 the
company	of	this	man,	and	yet	it	was	already	clear	that	he	liked	to	be	heard.
        I	 was	too	 young	to	 understand	the	word	 the	man	had	used,	but	 I	 was	old
enough	to	understand	the	change	in	atmosphere.	Nana	didn’t	 move,	nor	 did	 the
Chin	Chin	 Man,	but	 still	 everyone	was	staring	at	the	three	of	 us,	the	only	 black
people	on	the	field	 that	day.	Was	“them	 niggers”	simply	 a	grammatical	error,	 or
was	the	plural	supposed	to	include	my	father	and	me?	What	would	we	win?	What
was	that	man	in	danger	of	losing?
        Nana’s	coach	cleared	his	 throat	 and	muttered	some	half-hearted	 words	of
encouragement	in	an	attempt	to	distract	everyone.	The	whistle	blew	and	the	boys
from	both	 teams	rushed	back	onto	the	field,	 but	not	Nana.	He	 looked	up	toward

52
the	bleachers	at	the	Chin	 Chin	 Man,	who	 was	sitting	 there	with	 me	on	 his	lap.
Nana’s	look	was	a	question,	and	I	couldn’t	see	my	father’s	face,	 but	I	 soon	knew
how	he	answered.
        Nana	ran	onto	the	field,	and	for	 the	rest	of	that	half	he	was	little	more	than	a
blur,	moving	 not	 with	 the	 elegance	my	father	 associated	with	 soccer,	but	with
pure	fury.	 A	 fury	 that	would	 come	to	define	 and	consume	him.	 He	scored	goal
after	goal,	 even	stealing	the	ball	 from	 his	own	 teammates	at	certain	points.	 No
one	checked	him.	 The	 angry	parent’s	rage	was	written	 in	 the	 bright	 red	of	 his
face,	but	even	he	didn’t	say	anything	else,	though	I’m	 sure	his	son	paid	the	price
for	that	rage	in	the	car	on	the	way	home.
        By	the	end	of	 the	game,	Nana	was	spent.	His	shirt	was	so	drenched	in	sweat
that	it	clung	to	his	body,	so	tight	you	could	 see	the	outline	of	his	ribs	as	he	panted
and	panted.
        The	 Chin	 Chin	Man	 stood	up	 as	the	referee	 blew	the	 closing	whistle.	 He
brought	his	hands	to	his	mouth	and	let	out	a	loud,	long	cheer.	“Mmo,	Mmo,	Mmo.
Nana,	wayɛ	 ade.”	He	 picked	 me	up	 and	danced	me	 around	the	bleachers,	our
dance	not	elegant	or	 precise	but	messy,	exuberant,	loud.	 He	 kept	cheering	 this
cheer—Good	job,	  Good	 job,	 Good	 job—until	  Nana,	 embarrassed,	cracked	 a
smile.	The	fury	fled.	 Though	the	occasion	for	this	moment	was	a	somber	one,	the
moment	itself	was	joyful.	  Getting	in	 the	car	that	day,	Nana	and	I	were	so	happy,
glowing	   in	   the	  warmth	    of	   our	   father’s	  pride,	    delighted	  by	   Nana’s
accomplishments.	Looking	 at	 us	then,	two	 laughing,	 playful	 children	 and	their
warm,	doting	father,	 it	 would	be	easy	to	assume	that	we’d	all	but	forgotten	 what
that	man	had	yelled.	That	we’d	forgotten	we	had	any	cares	at	all.	But	the	memory
lingered,	the	lesson	I	 have	never	quite	 been	able	to	 shake:	that	I	 would	 always
have	something	to	prove	and	that	nothing	but	blazing	brilliance	 would	be	enough
to	prove	it.

53
                                                            13





When	Nana	started	playing	soccer,	my	parents	started	fighting	about	food.	There
was,	as	was	typical	of	team	sports,	a	rotating	snack	schedule.	Every	third	week,	it
was	my	family’s	 turn	to	 provide	the	 oranges,	grapes,	and	Capri	Suns	that	all	the
moms	called	“Rocket	 Fuel”	for	 the	sixteen	other	 boys	on	the	team.	At	 halftime,
the	Rockets	would	 suck	the	juice	 from	  the	orange	wedges,	leaving	the	flesh	 of
the	fruit	 behind.	“Such	waste,”	my	 mother	said	whenever	she	came	to	a	game	to
find	 the	 sidelines	 littered	 with	 wedges,	 little	 land	 mines	 of	 uneaten	fruit,	  of
privilege.	My	 family	 was	always	attuned	to	such	waste:	chicken	left	 on	the	bone
by	diners	 too	 polite	 to	 eat	with	 their	  hands,	crusts	cut	 off	  of	 sandwiches	for
children	who	took	 only	a	single	bite	and	left	 the	rest.	I	was	at	an	age	where	I	was
trying	picky	 eating	on	for	 size,	pushing	all	the	tomatoes	to	the	edges	of	my	plate
in	silent	refusal.	My	 mother	let	this	go	on	for	two	 days.	On	the	third	day	she	put	a
switch	on	 the	table	 and	stared	me	down.	 She	didn’t	 have	to	 say	a	word.	 I	 had
gotten	the	switch	only	 once	before,	the	day	I’d	 whispered	“damn”	 into	 the	silent
sanctuary	of	the	First	 Assemblies.	The	word	 had	echoed	through	that	 holiest	of
holies;	the	echo	found	 my	mother;	 my	mother	 found	the	switch.	 Afterward,	 her
hands	had	trembled	so	violently,	I	 thought	she	would	 never	do	it	 again,	so	when
the	switch	appeared	on	the	table	that	 night,	I	 suspected	she	was	bluffing.	I	 eyed
her,	eyed	the	switch,	 eyed	the	clock.	 By	midnight,	 six	 hours	after	I’d	 begun	my
dinner,	with	tears	in	my	eyes	and	terror	in	my	heart,	I	ate	the	last	of	the	tomatoes.
        Nana	had	never	been	a	picky	eater.	To	feed	his	height,	he	ate	everything	he
could.	Nothing	was	safe.	My	mother	knew,	 down	to	the	cent,	what	every	scrap	of
food	in	 our	house	cost.	After	 every	trip	 to	the	grocery	store,	she	would	sit	at	 the
kitchen	table	and	pore	over	the	receipts,	highlighting	numbers	and	making	lists.	If
the	Chin	 Chin	 Man	 was	 there,	she	 would	 shout	some	figure	  at	him	  and	say,
“These	children	are	going	to	eat	us	out	of	home	and	house.”
        She	and	the	Chin	 Chin	 Man	 started	watering	down	the	 orange	juice.	 Like
chemists	performing	a	punishing	experiment,	they	would	collect	 the	empty	gallon

54
jugs,	fill	  them	a	 quarter	of	 the	 way	with	 orange	juice,	 and	 flood	 the	rest	with
water,	until	 the	color	of	 the	liquid	 inside	 could	no	longer	 be	called	orange,	until
the	drink	 could	 no	longer	 be	called	 juice.	 Nana	and	 I	stopped	 drinking	 it,	 but
Nana	didn’t	stop	eating.	Cereal,	granola	bars,	fruit,	the	leftover	 rice	and	stew.	He
ate	and	ate	and	ate,	and	seemed	to	grow	taller	with	every	bite.
        My	 parents	started	hiding	 whatever	food	 could	 be	hidden.	Open	 a	drawer
and	look	 in	  the	very	  back	and	 you	 might	 find	  an	 Ovaltine	 cracker.	 Nestled
between	stacks	of	clothing	in	their	closet	were	the	bananas.
        “Here’s	 what	we	 do,”	Nana	 said	when	the	Cheerios	 went	missing	one	day
when	both	of	 our	 parents	were	at	work	 and	the	two	 of	 us	were	left	 to	 our	own
devices,	to	our	hunger.	“We’ll	  split	up.	 You	 check	the	low	 places	and	I’ll	 check
the	high	places.”
        We	 opened	every	drawer,	looked	atop	every	shelf,	 and	collected	our	 booty
in	the	middle	 of	 the	living	 room.	 There	were	all	 the	things	we’d	 expected	to	be
hidden,	and	many	more	 things	we	didn’t	 even	know	we	 had.	At	 age	four,	I	 was
already	a	fiend	for	Malta.	I	 liked	to	suck	down	the	bitter	 foam	from	 the	top	of	the
bottle	and	drink	in	large	gulps.	I	would	 have	had	one	every	day,	for	every	meal,	if
I	could	 have,	but	I’d	 been	told	 it	was	a	party	 drink	 only,	 unavailable	on	regular
days.	But	now	there	it	was,	along	with	all	the	other	forbidden	fruits.
        Nana	and	I	 tore	 into	the	 food	 and	drinks,	giggling.	 We	 had	only	 about	an
hour	before	 the	Chin	 Chin	 Man	returned	 home,	and	we	knew	 that	all	 the	food
would	 need	to	 go	back	 exactly	 where	 we’d	found	 it.	  Nana	ate	 chocolate	and
Cheerios,	I	sipped	a	Malta	 slowly,	savoring	 the	sweet	barley	taste,	and	at	dinner
that	night,	  seated	across	the	table	 from	  each	other	 while	  our	 parents	passed
around	bowls	of	 light	 soup,	we	would	 catch	each	other’s	eyes	and	grin,	 sharing
our	tasty	secret.


                                                              —

“Who	did	 this?”	my	 mother	said,	pulling	 an	empty	granola	bar	wrapper	from	 the
trash.	The	 jig	  was	up.	 Nana	 and	I	  had	been	 careful,	 but	 clearly	 not	 careful
enough.	Even	the	trash	wasn’t	safe	from	our	mother’s	exacting	eye.
        “Who	 did	this?	Where	did	you	find	 it?”
        I	 burst	into	tears,	giving	us	away.	I	was	ready	to	confess	to	all	of	our	crimes,
but	the	Chin	 Chin	Man	 chimed	in.	 “Leave	the	 kids	alone.	Do	 you	want	them	 to
starve?	Is	that	what	you	want?”

55
        My	 mother	pulled	 something	out	of	 her	purse.	A	 bill?	A	 receipt?	“We	 will
all	starve	if	 we	don’t	start	 making	more	money.	 We	can’t	afford	 to	 live	like	 this
any	longer.”
        “You	 were	the	one	who	wanted	to	come	here,	remember?”
        And	 so	it	 went.	Gently,	 gently,	Nana	took	 my	 hand	and	led	me	out	 of	 the
room.	We	went	to	his	bedroom	and	he	closed	the	door.	He	pulled	a	coloring	book
from	 his	bookshelf	 and	grabbed	me	 the	crayons.	Before	 long	I	 wasn’t	listening
anymore.
        “Good	 job,	  Gifty,”	  he	said	 as	I	 showed	him	 my	 work.	 “Good	 job,”	  and
outside	the	sound	of	chaos	swirled	on.

56
                                                        14





Toward	the	middle	of	my	first	year	of	graduate	school,	Raymond	and	I	started
seeing	each	other	more	seriously.	I	couldn’t	get	enough	of	him.	He	smelled	like
vetiver	and	musk	and	the	jojoba	oil	he	put	in	his	hair.	Hours	after	I’d	left	him,	I
would	find	traces	of	those	scents	on	my	fingers,	my	neck,	my	breasts,	all	those
places	where	we	had	brushed	up	against	each	other,	touched.	After	our	first	night
in	bed	together,	I’d	learned	that	Raymond’s	father	was	a	preacher	at	an	African
Methodist	Episcopal	church	in	Philadelphia,	and	I’d	laughed.	“So	that’s	why	I	like
you,”	I	said.	“You’re	the	son	of	a	preacher	man.”
        “You	like	me,	huh?”	he	said	with	that	deep	voice,	that	sly	grin,	as	he	moved
toward	me	so	that	we	could	begin	again.
        It	was	my	first	real	relationship,	and	I	was	so	smitten	that	I	felt	like	I	was	a
living	lily	of	the	valley,	a	rose	of	Sharon.	Like	an	apple	tree	among	the	trees	of	the
forest	is	my	beloved	among	the	young	men.	I	delight	to	sit	in	his	shade,	and	his	fruit
is	sweet	to	my	taste.	My	friend	Bethany	and	I	used	to	read	passages	from	Song	of
Solomon	to	each	other,	crouched	beneath	the	pale	blue	pews	in	 the	 empty
sanctuary	of	the	First	Assemblies	of	God.	It	felt	illicit	to	read	about	all	of	that
flesh—breasts	like	fawns,	necks	like	ivory	towers—in	the	pages	of	this	 holy
book.	It	was	an	incongruous	thrill,	to	feel	that	flush	of	desire	well	up	between	my
legs	as	Bethany	and	I	giggled	through	those	verses.	Where	is	all	of	this	pleasure
coming	from?	I’d	think,	my	voice	getting	huskier	and	huskier	with	each	chapter.
Raymond	was	the	closest	I’d	come	to	recapturing	that	feeling,	the	pleasure	as	well
as	the	sense	of	forbiddenness.	The	fact	that	he	wanted	to	be	with	me	at	all	made
me	feel	like	I	was	getting	away	with	some	con.
        He	lived	on	campus,	in	an	Escondido	Village	low-rise,	and	pretty	soon	I	was
spending	most	of	my	time	there.	He	liked	to	cook	these	sumptuous	meals,	five-
hour	braises	with	homemade	bread	and	salads	of	shaved	radishes	and	fennel.	He’d
invite	all	of	his	colleagues	from	Modern	Thought	and	Literature,	and	they	would
have	intense,	detailed	conversations	about	things	I	had	never	heard	of.	I’d	nod	and

57
smile	at	 the	 mentions	 of	 the	 use	of	 allegory	 in	 Ben	 Okri’s	 Stars	of	 the	 New
Curfew	or	generational	trauma	among	diasporic	communities.
        Afterward,	  I	would	 wash	the	dishes	the	way	my	mother	 taught	me,	turning
off	the	water	as	I	soaped	down	the	pots	and	pans,	trying	to	get	rid	of	the	elaborate
mess	Raymond’s	cooking	always	left	behind.
        “You’re	 so	quiet,”	 he	said,	coming	 up	behind	 me	to	wrap	 his	arms	around
my	waist,	to	kiss	my	neck.
        “I	 haven’t	read	any	of	the	books	y’all	were	talking	about.”
        He	 turned	me	around	to	 face	him,	 grinned.	I	 almost	never	let	a	“y’all”	  slip
from	 my	lips,	and	when	 I	did	 Raymond	seemed	to	savor	it	like	 a	drop	 of	honey
on	his	tongue.	That	 word	 used	sparingly,	thoughtlessly,	was	the	 only	remaining
evidence	of	my	 Alabama	years.	I’d	 spent	a	decade	carefully	 burying	 everything
else.
        “Talk	 about	 your	own	 work,	 then.	Let	 us	know	how	 the	mice	 are	doing.	I
just	want	 them	to	get	 to	know	 you	a	little	 better.	 I	want	 everyone	to	see	what	I
see,”	he	said.
        What	did	 he	see?	I	wondered.	I’d	usually	bat	him	away	so	that	I	could	finish
washing	the	dishes.
        That	year	was	the	beginning	of	my	final	 thesis	experiment.	I	put	the	mice	 in
a	behavioral	testing	 chamber,	a	clear-walled	 structure	with	 a	 lever	and	a	 metal
tube.	I	 trained	 the	mice	 to	 seek	reward.	 When	they	 pressed	the	lever,	 Ensure
would	flood	 into	 the	 tube.	Pretty	 soon	they	were	pressing	the	 lever	as	often	 as
possible,	drinking	up	 their	reward	with	 abandon.	Once	they’d	gotten	the	hang	of
this,	I	changed	the	conditions.	When	 the	mice	pressed	the	lever,	sometimes	they
got	Ensure,	but	sometimes	they	got	a	mild	foot-shock	instead.
        The	foot-shock	 was	randomized,	so	there	was	no	pattern	for	them	to	 figure
out.	The	mice	just	 had	to	decide	if	 they	 wanted	to	keep	pressing	the	lever,	keep
risking	that	 shock	in	the	pursuit	 of	 pleasure.	Some	of	the	mice	stopped	pressing
the	lever	 right	 away.	After	  a	 shock	or	 two,	 they	did	 the	 mouse	equivalent	 of
throwing	up	 their	hands	and	never	went	 near	the	lever	again.	Some	of	 the	mice
stopped,	but	it	took	time.	 They	liked	the	Ensure	enough	to	keep	holding	out	hope
that	 the	 shocks	would	  stop.	 When	 they	 realized	 they	 wouldn’t,	  those	mice,
reluctantly,	gave	up.	Then	there	was	the	final	 group	of	mice,	 the	ones	who	never
stopped.	Day	after	day,	shock	after	shock,	they	pressed	the	lever.


                                                              —

58
My	parents	started	fighting	 every	day.	They	fought	 about	money,	how	there	 was
never	enough.	They	 fought	 about	 time,	 about	displays	 of	 affection,	 about	 the
minivan,	 about	the	height	 of	 the	 grass	in	the	 lawn,	about	 Scripture.	But	 at	the
beginning	of	creation	God	made	them	male	and	female.	For	this	reason	a	man	will
leave	his	father	and	mother	and	be	united	to	his	wife,	and	the	two	will	become	one
flesh.	So	they	are	 no	longer	two,	 but	one	flesh.	 Therefore	what	 God	has	joined
together,	let	no	one	separate.
        The	Chin	 Chin	 Man	hadn’t	just	 left	 his	father	 and	his	mother;	he’d	left	 his
country	as	well,	and	he	wouldn’t	let	my	mother	forget	it.
        “In	 my	country,	neighbors	will	 greet	you	instead	of	turning	their	 heads	away
like	they	don’t	know	you.”
        “In	 my	 country,	you	can	eat	food	 fresh	from	 the	 ground.	Corn,	hard	on	 its
cob,	not	soft	like	the	spirits	of	 these	people.”
        “In	 my	country,	 there	is	no	word	for	 half-sibling,	 stepsibling,	aunt,	or	uncle.
There	is	only	sister,	brother,	mother,	father.	We	are	not	divided.”
        “In	 my	 country,	 people	may	 not	have	 money,	but	 they	have	happiness	in
abundance.	In	abundance.	No	one	in	America	is	enjoying.”
        These	 mini-lectures	 on	  Ghana	were	 delivered	  to	 the	 three	 of	  us	with
increasing	frequency.	My	mother	 would	gently	remind	 my	father	that	 Ghana	was
her	country	too,	our	country.	She	nodded	and	agreed.	America	is	a	difficult	place,
but	look	at	what	we’ve	been	able	to	build	here.	Sometimes	Nana	would	come	into
my	room	and	pretend	to	be	him.	 “In	my	 country,	we	do	not	 eat	the	red	M&M’s,”
he’d	say,	throwing	the	red	M&M’s	at	me.
        It	 was	hard	for	Nana	and	me	to	see	America	the	way	our	father	saw	it.	Nana
couldn’t	remember	Ghana,	and	I	 had	never	been.	Southeast	Huntsville,	northern
Alabama,	was	all	 we	knew,	 the	physical	 location	 of	 our	entire	 conscious	lives.
Were	there	places	in	the	world	where	neighbors	would	have	greeted	us	instead	of
turning	away?	Places	where	my	classmates	wouldn’t	have	made	fun	of	my	 name
—called	me	charcoal,	called	me	monkey,	called	me	 worse?	I	couldn’t	imagine	it.
I	couldn’t	let	 myself	imagine	 it,	because	if	I	 did,	if	 I	 saw	it—that	other	 world—I
would	have	wanted	to	go.
        It	 should	have	been	obvious	to	us.	We	 should	have	seen	it	coming,	 but	we
didn’t	see	what	we	didn’t	want	to	see.
        “I’m	 going	home	to	 visit	my	 brother,”	the	Chin	 Chin	Man	 said,	and	then	he
never	came	back.

59
        In	 those	first	few	 weeks,	he	called	every	once	in	a	while.	“I	 wish	 you	could
see	how	brilliant	the	sun	is	here,	Nana.	Do	you	remember?	Do	you	remember	it?”
Nana	ran	home	from	school	every	Tuesday	in	order	to	make	their	 3:30	telephone
calls.
        “When	 are	you	coming	back?”	Nana	asked.
        “Soon,	soon,	soon.”
        If	  my	 mother	 knew	that	 soon,	soon,	 soon	was	a	 lie,	 she	didn’t	 let	 on.	 I
suppose	if	it	 was	a	lie,	 it	was	one	she	wanted	to	 believe.	She	spent	most	of	 her
mornings	on	the	phone	with	him,	 speaking	in	hushed	tones	as	I	prattled	on	to	my
favorite	doll.	 I	was	four,	oblivious	 to	the	lurch	 my	father	had	left	 us	in	and	to	the
deep	pain	my	mother	must	have	been	feeling.
        If	 I’ve	 thought	of	 my	 mother	as	callous,	and	many	 times	I	 have,	then	it	 is
important	to	remind	 myself	what	a	callus	is:	the	hardened	tissue	that	forms	over	a
wound.	And	what	a	wound	 my	father	leaving	 was.	On	those	phone	calls	with	the
Chin	Chin	 Man,	my	 mother	was	always	so	tender,	drawing	from	 a	wellspring	 of
patience	that	I	  never	would	 have	had	 if	 I	 were	 in	 her	shoes.	To	 think	 of	 the
situation	now	 still	 makes	me	 furious.	 That	 this	 man,	my	 father,	 went	 back	to
Ghana	in	 such	 a	 cowardly	 way,	 leaving	 his	 two	 children	  and	wife	  alone	 to
navigate	a	difficult	 country,	 a	punishing	state.	That	he	let	us,	let	her,	believe	that
he	might	return.
        My	 mother	 never	spoke	an	ill	 word	about	him.	 Not	 once.	Even	after	soon,
soon,	soon	turned	into	maybe,	turned	into	never.
        “I	 hate	him,”	 Nana	said	years	later,	after	 the	Chin	 Chin	 Man	had	canceled
yet	another	visit.
        “You	 don’t,”	 my	mother	said.	“He	 hasn’t	come	back	because	he	is	ashamed,
but	it	doesn’t	mean	he	doesn’t	care	about	you.	And	how	could	you	hate	him	when
he	cares	so	much?	He	cares	about	you,	 he	cares	about	me	and	Gifty.	  He	 cares
about	Ghana.	How	could	you	hate	a	man	like	that?”


                                                              —

The	mice	who	 can’t	stop	pushing	the	 lever,	even	after	 being	shocked	dozens	of
times,	are,	neurologically,	 the	ones	who	are	most	interesting	to	 me.	By	 the	time
my	mother	came	to	stay	with	me	in	California,	 my	team	and	I	were	in	the	process
of	identifying	 which	 neurons	were	firing	or	not	firing	  whenever	the	mice	decided
to	press	the	lever	despite	knowing	 the	risks.	We	 were	trying	 to	use	blue	light	 to

60
get	the	mice	to	stop	pressing	the	lever,	to	“turn	 on,”	so	to	speak,	the	neurons	that
weren’t	functioning	properly	 in	warning	those	mice	away	from	risk.
        I	 talked	about	the	 lever	experiment	 at	the	next	dinner	 party	that	 Raymond
threw.	He’d	made	cassoulet,	rich	with	pork	and	duck	and	lamb,	glistening	with	oil
and	so	delicious	and	sinful	 that	everyone	in	 the	room	 let	out	 audible	sighs	after
their	first	 bites.
        “So	 it’s	 a	question	 of	 restraint,”	 one	colleague,	Tanya,	 said.	“Like	  how	 I
can’t	restrain	myself	from	 eating	more	 of	this	 cassoulet,	even	though	I	know	my
waistline	isn’t	going	to	be	happy	about	it.”
        Everyone	laughed	as	Tanya	rubbed	her	stomach	like	Winnie-the-Pooh	upon
finding	a	pot	of	 honey.
        “Well,	 yes,”	I	 said.	“But	it’s	 a	bit	more	complicated	than	that.	Like	 even	the
idea	of	  a	 ‘you’	 that	 can	restrain	 ‘yourself’	  doesn’t	quite	 get	 at	 it.	 The	 brain
chemistry	of	  these	mice	 has	changed	to	 the	 point	 where	they	 aren’t	 really	 in
control	of	what	they	can	or	can’t	control.	They	aren’t	‘themselves.’ ”
        They	  all	  nodded	 vigorously,	  as	 though	 I’d	  said	 something	  extremely
profound,	and	then	one	of	them	mentioned	King	 Lear.	We	are	not	ourselves	when
nature,	being	oppressed,	commands	the	mind	to	suffer	with	the	body.	I	hadn’t	read
Shakespeare	since	high	school,	 but	 I	 nodded	along	with	  them,	 pretending	for
Raymond’s	sake	to	be	interested	in	the	conversation.	After	they	left	that	night,	 all
those	dishes	in	 their	  wake,	I	  could	 tell	 that	 he	was	 happy	to	 see	me	 finally
opening	up	to	 his	friends.	 I	 wanted	to	 be	happy	too,	 but	I	 felt	 like	 I	 was	lying
somehow.	Whenever	 I	 listened	 to	 his	 friends	  speak	about	 issues	like	 prison
reform,	climate	 change,	the	opioid	epidemic,	in	the	simultaneously	intelligent	 but
utterly	vacuous	way	of	people	who	think	it’s	important	simply	 to	weigh	in,	to	have
an	opinion,	I	would	 bristle.	I	 would	think,	 What	is	the	point	of	 all	this	talk?	What
problems	do	we	solve	by	identifying	problems,	circling	them?
        I	 said	my	goodbyes	and	then	I	rushed	home	and	threw	up	and	I	never	could
eat	that	dish	again.

61
                                                            15





When	I	was	still	in	elementary	school,	my	children’s	church	pastor	told	us	that	sin
was	defined	as	anything	you	think,	 say,	or	 do	that	goes	against	God.	She	pulled
out	these	two	puppets	that	looked	like	 little	 monsters	and	had	them	demonstrate
sin.	The	purple	 monster	would	hit	 the	green	monster,	and	our	 pastor	would	say,
“Hey,	hitting	 is	 a	sin.”	The	 green	monster	would	wait	 until	 the	purple	 monster’s
back	was	turned	and	then	steal	a	Hershey’s	Kiss	from	the	purple	monster’s	hand.
Everyone	thought	 this	 move	was	hilarious,	 so	 hilarious	 that	 our	pastor	 had	to
remind	us	that	it	was	sinful	to	steal.
        I	 was	a	good,	pious	child,	committed	 to	not	 sinning,	and	the	definition	 that
our	pastor	gave	confounded	me.	It	was	easy	enough	to	not	do	anything	wrong	or
say	anything	wrong.	But	to	not	think	sinfully?	 To	not	think	 about	lying	or	 stealing
or	hitting	 your	 brother	 when	he	comes	into	 your	 room	 intent	on	 torturing	 you,
was	that	even	possible?	Do	we	have	control	over	our	thoughts?
        When	 I	was	a	child	 this	 was	a	religious	 question,	a	question	of	 whether	it
was	possible	to	 live	  a	sinless	life,	  but	 it	 is	 also,	 of	 course,	a	 neuroscientific
question.	That	day,	when	the	children’s	church	pastor	used	her	puppets	to	teach	us
about	sin,	I	realized,	with	no	small	amount	of	 embarrassment,	that	my	secret	goal
of	 becoming	 as	blameless	as	Jesus	was	in	 fact	 impossible,	 and	 perhaps	even
blasphemous.	My	  pray-without-ceasing	  experiment	  had	 all	  but	  proven	 the
impossibility	 of	  controlling	 my	 thoughts.	 I	 could	 control	  one	layer,	 the	 most
readily	available	layer,	but	there	was	always	a	sublayer	lurking.	That	sublayer	was
truer,	more	 immediate,	 more	 essential,	than	anything	 else.	It	  spoke	softly	 but
constantly,	and	the	things	it	said	were	the	very	things	that	allowed	 me	to	live	and
to	be.	Now	 I	understand	that	we	have	a	subconscious	life,	vibrant	 and	vital,	 that
acts	in	spite	of	“ourselves,”	our	conscious	selves.
        In	 the	book	of	 Matthew,	Jesus	says,	“You	shall	love	the	Lord	your	God	with
all	your	heart	and	with	all	 your	soul	and	with	all	 your	mind.”	Here	is	a	separation.
Your	 heart,	the	part	 of	 you	that	 feels.	Your	  mind,	the	 part	of	 you	 that	 thinks.

62
Your	soul,	the	part	of	 you	that	is.	I	 almost	never	hear	neuroscientists	speak	about
the	soul.	Because	of	our	 work,	we	 are	often	given	 to	thinking	 about	 the	part	of
humans	that	is	the	vital,	inexplicable	essence	of	ourselves,	as	the	workings	of	our
brains—mysterious,	 elegant,	essential.	 Everything	 we	 don’t	  understand	about
what	makes	a	person	a	person	can	be	uncovered	once	we	understand	this	organ.
There	is	 no	separation.	Our	 brains	are	 our	hearts	that	 feel	 and	our	 minds	that
think	and	 our	souls	that	are.	But	 when	I	 was	a	child	 I	called	 this	essence	a	soul
and	I	believed	in	its	 supremacy	over	the	mind	and	the	heart,	its	immutability	 and
connection	to	Christ	himself.
        The	week	 before	Buddy	 the	dog	died,	his	golden	 hair	started	falling	 out	in
tufts.	You’d	 pet	him	 and	come	away	with	fistfuls	  of	that	 luster.	It	 was	clear	that
he	was	coming	to	his	 end,	but	before	 he	did,	I	 went	over	 to	Ashley’s	house	and
prayed	for	him.	 “Dear	God,	 bless	this	dog	and	let	his	soul	be	at	rest,”	I	 said,	and
Ashley	and	I	knelt	 down	next	to	 Buddy	and	cried	 into	his	soft	 body,	and	I	 had	a
vision	of	 Buddy	 in	 the	vet’s	office,	  his	soul	 rising	out	 of	 that	golden	 shell	and
floating	up	 toward	Heaven.	It	comforted	 me	then	to	 believe	in	a	soul,	a	separate
self,	to	picture	Buddy’s	soul	alive	and	well,	even	if	he	wasn’t.
        At	 times,	 my	life	  now	feels	so	 at	odds	with	 the	religious	 teachings	of	 my
childhood	that	I	 wonder	what	the	little	 girl	 I	once	was	would	think	 of	the	woman
I’ve	become—a	neuroscientist	who	has	at	times	given	herself	over	to	equating	the
essence	that	psychologists	call	the	 mind,	 that	Christians	 call	the	 soul,	with	  the
workings	 of	 the	 brain.	 I	 have	indeed	 given	 that	 organ	a	 kind	 of	  supremacy,
believing	and	hoping	that	all	of	 the	answers	to	all	of	the	questions	that	I	have	can
and	must	be	contained	 therein.	But	 the	 truth	 is	I	 haven’t	much	 changed.	I	still
have	so	 many	  of	 the	  same	questions,	 like	  “Do	  we	 have	 control	 over	  our
thoughts?,”	but	I	am	looking	for	 a	different	 way	to	answer	them.	I	am	looking	for
new	names	for	old	feelings.	My	soul	is	still	my	soul,	even	if	 I	rarely	call	it	 that.


                                                              —

I	have	only	a	few	memories	of	 the	Chin	Chin	 Man	from	 before	he	left,	 and	even
those	are	memories	that	might	have	been	created	from	my	mother’s	stories.	Nana
was	ten	 and	 he	 remembered	 everything	 about	 our	 father.	 I	  would	 ask	 him
question	after	question,	about	his	hair,	the	color	 of	his	eyes,	the	size	of	his	arms,
his	height,	his	smell.	 Everything.	In	 the	beginning	Nana	would	 answer	patiently,
always	ending	with	“You’ll	 see	for	yourself	soon.”
        In	that	 first	year,	when	we	all	thought	the	Chin	 Chin	Man	was	coming	back,

63
we	did	everything	we	could	to	keep	our	lives	the	same,	to	make	our	home	a	place
our	patriarch	would	recognize	when	he	returned.	My	mother,	 who	was	always	the
disciplinarian	 except	in	 extreme	 cases,	would	sometimes	 find	 herself	 in	 those
extreme	cases	shouting,	“Just	wait	until	your	father	gets	home!”	Those	words	still
sparked	fear	in	us,	were	still	enough	to	convince	us	to	behave.
        Nana	started	playing	even	more	soccer.	He	tried	out	for	the	advanced	league
and	made	the	team.	They	practiced	 every	day	and	had	games	that	took	 them	to
Atlanta,	Montgomery,	 Nashville.	It	 was	a	huge	strain	on	my	mother,	as	all	of	 the
parents	were	  expected	to	  pay	 for	  the	  equipment	 and	 uniforms	  and	 travel
expenses.	Worse	still,	they	were	expected	to	chaperone	at	least	one	of	 the	away
games.
        The	day	of	 the	Nashville	 game,	she	had	no	one	to	watch	me.	She’d	already
taken	the	day	off	work.	At	 that	point	she	was	a	home	health	aide	for	two	families,
the	Reynoldses	and	the	Palmers,	and	though	neither	family	was	as	abusive	as	Mr.
Thomas,	her	work	doubled	but	her	pay	didn’t	keep	pace.	My	father’s	job	had	kept
more	regular	hours,	and	so	he	was	the	one	who	acted	as	my	 caretaker	while	my
mother	went	from	 the	Reynoldses	to	the	Palmers	and	back	 again.	When	he	left,
my	mother	 resorted	to	 paying	 an	old	 Bajan	 woman	whose	daughter	 she	knew
from	the	home	health	company.	I	loved	this	old	 woman,	whose	name	I	have	since
forgotten.	She	smelled	like	 fresh	ginger	and	hibiscus,	and	for	 years	any	whiff	 of
those	things	would	 conjure	 up	 an	 image	of	 her.	 I	 loved	 to	 sit	in	 her	 lap	 and
snuggle	into	the	pillow	of	 her	fat	stomach	and	feel	it	expand	as	she	breathed.	She
kept	ginger	candies	on	her	at	all	times,	and	she	fell	asleep	so	often	that	it	was	easy
enough	for	me	to	rifle	 through	her	purse	and	steal	one.	If	she	woke	up	and	caught
me,	she’d	spank	me	or	she’d	shrug	and	laugh	and	I’d	 laugh	too.	 It	was	our	 little
game,	and	I	usually	won.	But	 the	day	of	 the	Nashville	 game,	she’d	gone	back	to
Barbados	to	attend	her	friend’s	funeral.
        I	 rode	 the	team	 bus	to	 Nashville	 on	my	 mother’s	 lap.	She	 had	packed	a
cooler	of	 oranges	and	grapes	and	Capri	Suns	and	mini	 water	bottles.	 The	night
before,	she’d	washed	Nana’s	jersey	by	hand	because	a	grass	stain	hadn’t	come	out
in	 the	 washing	machine.	 She	 didn’t	 trust	 washing	 machines.	She	didn’t	  trust
dishwashers	either.	“When	  you	want	 something	 done	right,	 do	 it,”	  she	would
often	say.
        Nana’s	team	was	called	the	Tornados.	There	was	one	other	black	kid	on	the
team	and	two	Koreans,	so	Nana	didn’t	 have	to	worry	 as	much	about	bearing	the
full	 brunt	 of	 taunts	from	 angry,	racist	 parents.	He	was	still	 the	 best	kid	 on	the

64
team,	still	the	reason	so	many	parents	got	red	cards,	but	it	was	a	comfort	to	him	to
not	feel	so	alone.
        On	 the	bus	ride	that	day,	I	 wouldn’t	 sit	still.	 This	was	the	summer	 before	I
started	kindergarten,	nearly	a	year	after	the	Chin	Chin	 Man	left,	 and	I	could	 feel
the	end	of	my	 freedom	encroaching.	I	 was	wilder	 than	usual.	On	more	than	one
occasion	I’d	been	brought	home	by	 a	neighbor	after	 getting	into	 some	mischief,
and	my	 mother	 had	long	 since	stopped	telling	 me	 to	 wait	 until	 my	 father	 got
home.	I	 ran	up	and	down	 the	aisle	of	 the	 bus.	I	tugged	the	 hair	of	 the	 child	 in
front	 of	 me	until	 he	yelped.	 I	 flailed	 like	 a	fish	 in	 my	mother’s	 arms	until	 she
released	me.	The	drive	from	 Huntsville	 to	Nashville	 only	takes	about	two	hours,
and	I	was	determined	to	make	every	passenger	feel	every	minute	of	it.
        My	 mother	kept	apologizing	 to	the	other	chaperones	and	sending	me	a	look
that	I	knew	well.	It	 was	her	I	cannot	beat	you	in	front	of	 all	these	white	people,	but
just	you	wait	look.	I	 didn’t	care.	If	 a	beating	was	inevitable,	why	stop?	I	spent	the
last	fifteen	minutes	of	 the	bus	ride	sing-shouting	“The	Wheels	on	the	Bus,”	while
the	soccer	team	plugged	their	ears	and	groaned.	Nana	ignored	me.	By	that	point
he	was	an	expert	at	that.
        Two	 referees	in	impractical	cowboy	 hats	waited	for	us	as	we	pulled	into	the
parking	lot	of	the	soccer	fields.
        The	boys	 and	their	parents	rushed	off	 the	bus,	no	 doubt	eager	to	get	away
from	me,	but	 I	had	already	stopped	my	singing	and	returned	to	my	 calmer,	more
peaceful	self.	 Nana	 was	seated	next	 to	 the	emergency	 exit	 window,	 his	 head
leaned	against	the	red	bar	in	a	way	that	looked	uncomfortable.
        “Come	 on,	Nana,”	 some	of	 the	kids	 said	as	they	 made	their	 way	out,	 but
Nana	didn’t	get	up	from	 the	seat.	He	lightly	 banged	his	head	against	that	red	bar,
over	and	over	and	over,	until	 everyone	left,	 and	it	 was,	finally,	 just	 the	three	of
us.	My	mother,	Nana,	and	me.
        My	 mother	 squeezed	into	the	seat	beside	Nana	and	pulled	me	up	 onto	her
lap.	She	took	 his	 chin	 in	 her	hand	and	 turned	him	 to	 face	 her.	“Nana,	 what’s
bothering	you?”	she	said	in	Twi.
        Nana	had	tears	in	the	corners	of	 his	eyes	that	were	threatening	to	spill,	 and
he	was	making	a	face	 that	I’ve	 only	ever	 seen	in	young	boys,	a	 face	that	is	 the
façade	of	a	man,	hiding	 a	boy	 who	has	had	to	grow	 up	far	 too	fast.	I	 have	seen
that	faux	 tough	look	 on	boys	as	they	 pushed	shopping	carts,	walked	siblings	 to
school,	bought	cigarettes	for	their	 parents	who	waited	in	 their	cars.	It	 breaks	my
heart	now,	to	 see	that	face,	 to	 recognize	the	lie	 of	 masculinity	 sitting	 atop	the

65
shoulders	of	a	young	child.
        Nana	blinked	 his	 tears	back.	He	sat	up	 a	little	 straighter,	 gently	lifted	  our
mother’s	hand	from	  his	face,	 and	returned	 it	 to	 her	lap.	 “I	 don’t	 want	to	 play
soccer	anymore,”	he	said.
        Just	then	 one	of	 the	 referees	came	onto	 the	bus.	He	 saw	the	 three	of	 us
squeezed	into	those	small	seats	and	gave	us	a	sheepish	grin,	lifting	 that	cowboy
hat	off	  his	 head	and	 placing	it	  onto	 his	heart,	 as	though	 my	 family	  was	the
national	anthem,	the	yellow	 school	bus	a	ballpark.	 “Ma’am,	we’re	 ’bout	ready	to
get	this	game	started	 and	there	are	a	 bunch	of	 boys	out	 there	saying	their	 star
player’s	still	on	this	bus.”
        My	 mother	didn’t	 even	turn	to	look	at	the	referee.	She	kept	her	eyes	trained
on	Nana.	We	all	 remained	perfectly	 quiet	and	still,	 and	finally	 the	man	took	 the
hint,	put	his	cowboy	hat	back	on,	and	got	off	the	bus.
        “You	 love	soccer,”	my	mother	said	once	we	heard	the	sound	of	the	referee’s
cleats	crunching	the	gravel	of	the	lot.
        “No,	 I	don’t.”
        “Nana,”	 she	said	sharply,	 and	then	she	stopped	and	 exhaled	for	 so	long	 I
wondered	where	she	had	been	keeping	all	of	 that	air.	 She	could	have	told	 Nana
that	she’d	lost	a	day’s	paycheck	to	chaperone	this	trip,	that	she	was	already	on	thin
ice	with	the	Reynoldses	for	missing	work	 two	weeks	before	when	I	wouldn’t	 stop
vomiting	 and	had	to	be	taken	 to	the	emergency	room.	 She	could	have	told	 him
how	that	emergency	room	 bill	 was	higher	 than	she’d	expected,	even	though	we
had	insurance,	that	 the	 night	 she’d	opened	that	 envelope	she	 sat	there	 at	our
dining	room	 table	crying	into	 her	scrubs	so	that	we	wouldn’t	be	able	to	 hear	her.
She	could	have	told	 him	 that	 she	had	already	had	to	 take	on	 some	extra	work
cleaning	houses	to	afford	the	fees	for	 the	advanced	soccer	league,	and	that	those
fees	were	nonrefundable	and	she	couldn’t	get	her	time	back	 either.	All	 that	 time
she’d	spent	working	to	afford	 a	trip	on	 a	bus	with	a	loud	daughter	and	son	who’d
somehow	realized	in	 the	 two-hour-long	 bus	ride	 that	 his	father	 wasn’t	 coming
back.
        “We’ll	  find	 another	way	home,”	 she	said.	“We	 don’t	have	to	 stay	here	for
one	more	second,	Nana,	okay?	You	don’t	have	to	play	if	you	don’t	want	to.”
        We	 walked	 to	 the	Greyhound	 station,	 our	mother	 holding	 our	 hands	the
entire	time.	We	took	 that	bus	home,	and	I	don’t	think	Nana	made	a	single	noise.	I
don’t	think	I	 did	either.	 I	could	feel	 that	something	had	changed	among	the	three
of	 us	and	I	 was	trying	 to	 learn	what	 my	 role	 in	this	 new	 configuration	 of	 my

66
family	 might	 be.	That	day	was	the	end	 of	my	 naughtiness,	the	beginning	of	 my
good	years.	If	our	 mother	was	angry	or	 upset	at	us,	me	for	 being	a	terror,	 Nana
for	 changing	his	mind,	 she	didn’t	let	 on.	She	wrapped	us	up	in	 her	arms	during
that	long	 ride	 home,	her	 face	 inscrutable.	When	 we	 got	 home,	she	put	 all	 of
Nana’s	soccer	gear	into	 a	 box,	sealed	the	 box,	 and	dumped	 it	 into	 the	nether
regions	of	our	garage,	never	to	be	seen	again.

67
                                                        16





I	asked	Katherine	to	lunch	at	the	little	 Thai	restaurant	in	the	basement	of	the
psychology	building.	I	ordered	from	the	brusque	woman,	who	could	sometimes
make	eating	there	feel	like	a	punishment	despite	how	good	the	food	was,	and
wandered	out	to	sit	in	the	courtyard	while	I	waited	for	Katherine	to	arrive.	It	was
a	sunny,	beautiful	day.	The	kind	of	day	I	often	took	for	granted	living	in	a	place
where	the	beauty	of	the	school,	of	nature,	seemed	to	come	so	effortlessly.	This
was	in	stark	contrast	to	my	time	on	the	East	Coast,	where	beauty	was	hard	won,
where	every	brilliant	day	had	to	be	savored,	the	memories	of	them	stored	like
acorns	buried	underground	by	industrious	squirrels,	just	to	get	you	through	those
punishing	winters.	That	first	winter	in	Massachusetts,	with	snow	piled	up	to	my
knees,	I’d	missed	Alabama	with	an	intensity	I	hadn’t	thought	possible.	I	craved
heat	and	light	 the	way	 other	people	craved	coffee	and	 cigarettes.	Sick	and
sluggish,	I	got	a	SAD	lamp	from	mental	health	services	and	sat	staring	at	it	for
hours,	hoping	it	would	fool	me	into	believing	I	 was	back	in	the	place	where	I
assume	my	ancestors	first	instilled	this	need	for	warmth—in	Ghana	on	a	beach
just	above	the	equator.
        Katherine	was	half	an	hour	late.	I	started	eating	and	watched	two	undergrads
argue	in	front	of	the	bike	stand	across	the	way.	It	was	clear	they	were	a	couple.
One	of	the	women	circled	her	U-lock	around	her	wrist	while	the	other	woman
shouted,	“I	have	a	PSET	due	at	three,	Tiffany.	You	know	that.”	Tiffany	didn’t
seem	to	know,	or	maybe	she	just	didn’t	care.	She	was	on	her	bike,	zooming	off
within	seconds,	and	the	other	woman	just	 stood	there,	stunned.	She	looked
around,	trying	to	see	if	the	fight	 had	had	any	witnesses.	I	should	have	looked
away,	given	her	some	privacy	in	her	embarrassment,	but	I	didn’t.	We	made	eye
contact,	and	her	face	grew	so	red	I	could	almost	feel	the	heat	coming	off	of	it.	I
smiled	at	her,	but	that	only	seemed	to	make	her	feel	worse.	I	remembered	what	it
was	like	to	be	that	age,	so	aware	of	yourself	and	the	theater	of	your	private	little
shames.	“I	have	my	shit	too,”	I	wanted	to	say.	“I	have	worse	shit	than	a	PSET	due
at	three,	worse	shit	than	Tiffany,	even.”	She	narrowed	her	eyes	at	me	as	though

68
she’d	heard	my	thoughts,	and	then	she	stormed	off.
        Katherine	 finally	  arrived.	 “Sorry,	  sorry,”	 she	said,	 slipping	 into	 the	 seat
across	from	me.	“The	Caltrain	just	decided	to	stop	running	for	 some	reason.”
        Even	in	that	 haggard,	breathless	state,	she	looked	beautiful.	Long	black	hair
piled	messily	on	the	top	of	her	head,	those	braces-straight	teeth—a	telltale	sign	of
someone	who’d	grown	up	with	money	and	attention.	They	gleamed	brilliant	every
time	she	smiled.	I	glanced	at	her	stomach.	Nothing.	“That’s	okay,”	I	said,	and	then
I	clammed	up.	I	had	invited	 Katherine	on	the	pretense	that	I	wanted	to	talk	 about
our	work.	There	were	so	few	 women	in	our	field,	 and	though	it	 was	important	to
have	role	models	and	 mentors,	I	 had	done	very	 little	 to	 connect	with	 the	other
women	in	my	 department.	I	was	the	typical	 graduate	student,	clambering	for	the
attentions	of	the	hotshot	male	scientists,	the	ones	who	had	discovered	this	 thing,
won	that	award.	I	wanted	my	name	spoken	in	the	same	breath	as	theirs,	my	work
written	about	 in	the	 same	journals.	Katherine,	brilliant	  though	she	was,	liked	 to
wear	a	sweatshirt	with	the	word	 STEMINIST	splashed	across	the	front.	Every	year,
she	manned	a	booth	at	 the	undergraduate	career	fair	  for	 women	considering	 a
career	in	science.	When	she’d	asked	me,	my	first	week	at	Stanford,	if	I	wanted	to
join	the	Women	 in	STEM	group	she	led,	I’d	said	no	without	 a	second	thought.	I’d
had	a	professor	in	 college	laugh	when	 I	asked	if	  he’d	be	my	 advisor	the	year	 I
declared	my	major.	True,	I	 had	never	taken	a	class	with	him,	and	true,	he	was	the
preeminent	microbiologist	 on	 campus,	but	still,	  in	that	 split	 second	of	 laughter
before	he	caught	 himself	 and	said,	“Why	 sure,	 dear,”	I’d	 wanted	nothing	 more
than	to	turn	into	dust,	to	sink	 into	the	ground	and	disappear	forever.	I	didn’t	 want
to	be	thought	of	as	a	woman	in	science,	a	black	woman	in	science.	I	wanted	to	be
thought	of	 as	a	 scientist,	full	  stop,	and	 it	 mystified	 me	 that	 Katherine,	 whose
work	was	published	in	the	best	journals,	was	content	to	draw	attention	to	 the	fact
of	her	womanhood.	Even	this	 question	of	a	baby,	of	 the	little	 ovulation	“o’s”	 her
husband	had	snuck	into	his	calendar	just	at	the	moment	when	 Katherine’s	career
was	set	to	take	off,	was	itself	a	reminder	of	the	millstone	 of	womanhood	we	wore
around	our	necks.
        I	 didn’t	  want	 to	 wear	mine,	  and	I	 wasn’t	 really	 interested	 in	 talking	 to
Katherine	about	the	research	that	she	was	doing.	What	I	wanted	to	talk	about	was
my	mother,	her	 sleepy	breath	hum	and	weight	 loss,	her	vacant	eyes,	her	sloping
back.	My	dinnertime	visits	 had	done	nothing	to	draw	her	out.	After	three	days,	I’d
given	up	 that	tack	 and	tried	 a	different	  one.	I	 called	Pastor	 John	and	held	 the
phone	to	my	mother’s	ear	while	he	prayed.

69
        “Father	 God,	we	ask	that	you	rouse	this	woman	from	her	slumber,”	 he	said.
“Jesus,	we	pray	that	you	lift	 her	spirits.	Remind	her	that	all	 of	her	crosses	belong
to	you.”
        He	 kept	going	 like	 this	for	 some	time,	 and	my	 hand	started	to	 shake	as	I
held	the	phone.	I	might	 as	well	have	been	casting	spells	over	her	for	all	the	good
this	was	doing.	After	 he	had	finished,	I	hung	up	and	slumped	down	onto	the	edge
of	the	 bed,	sunk	my	head	into	 my	hands.	I	 wanted	to	cry	 but	I	 couldn’t.	Behind
me,	my	mother’s	breath	continued	its	hum.	 The	sound	reminded	me	of	the	video
of	 the	black	 mamba	 I’d	 watched	when	 I	 was	a	child,	  even	though	 that	snake
hadn’t	made	a	sound.	The	hum	was	the	only	lively	thing	about	my	mother,	and	so
I’d	come	to	be	grateful	for	it,	 whatever	it	was.
        What	 was	the	ethical	thing	 to	do?	Was	it	 right	of	 me	to	 let	her	stay	in	 that
bed	courting	death,	practicing	for	 it,	even?	I	turned	this	question	over	in	my	 head
every	day,	playing	out	 the	possible	scenarios,	the	things	I	could	 do,	should	do.	I
knew	 the	statutes	for	  involuntary	 commitment	  in	 California,	  and	 my	 mother
didn’t	meet	those	burdens.	She	wasn’t	threatening	to	hurt	herself	 or	anyone	else.
She	wasn’t	 hearing	  voices	 or	 having	  visions.	 She	 was	 eating,	 though	 only
sporadically	and	only	when	she	knew	I	 wouldn’t	be	home	to	 see	her	do	it.	It	 had
only	been	a	week,	but	the	days	dragged	on,	weighed	on	me.	She	told	me	she	was
“tired”	 and	that	she	needed	“rest.”	I’d	heard	that	before,	but	 every	time	I	 thought
of	getting	someone	to	intervene	I	 thought	of	 the	last	time	and	my	 courage	failed
me.	The	last	time,	 when	she’d	gotten	out	 of	 the	hospital	after	 her	commitment,
she’d	looked	at	me	and	said,	“Never	again,”	and	I	knew	what	she	meant.
        I	 should	 have	 said	all	 of	  this	 to	 Katherine.	 She	was	a	 great	 doctor,	 an
empathetic	person,	but	when	I	tried	to	 broach	the	topic	of	 my	mother,	 my	words
turned	to	ashes	in	my	mouth.
        “Are	 you	all	right,	 Gifty?”	 Katherine	asked.
        She	was	giving	me	what	must	have	been	her	psychiatrist’s	stare,	intense	and
questioning.	I	couldn’t	hold	her	gaze.
        “Yeah,	I’m	 just	a	little	 stressed.	I	want	to	get	this	paper	submitted	before	the
end	of	the	quarter,	but	I	can’t	seem	to	make	myself	work	 on	it	these	days,”	I	said.
I	stared	out	at	the	palm	trees	as	a	quick	wind	blew	through	their	branches,	causing
the	fronds	to	sway.
        Katherine	nodded	at	me,	but	her	gaze	didn’t	change.	“Okay,”	she	said	softly.
“I	hope	you’re	taking	good	care	of	yourself.”
        I	 nodded,	but	I	 didn’t	even	know	 what	it	 would	 mean	to	take	good	care	of

70
myself,	what	that	would	 look	like.	 The	only	thing	 I	was	managing	to	take	care	of
was	my	mice,	and	even	they	had	had	their	bloody	scuffle	 just	weeks	before.	Me,
my	mother,	my	mice—we	were	all	 a	little	scuffed	up,	but	 trying	in	whatever	ways
we	knew	how.	I	thought	about	the	winter	 day	my	freshman	year	at	Harvard	when
I’d	finally	  walked	into	 counseling	and	 mental	health	services	to	 ask	for	 a	SAD
lamp.
        “I	 think	 it’s	the	 weather.	I	just	 feel	kind	 of	 sad.	Not	all	 the	time,”	 I	said	to
the	receptionist,	though	she	had	only	 asked	for	my	 name.	When	she	handed	me
the	lamp,	she	asked	if	I	wanted	to	start	seeing	a	counselor.	“Freshman	year	can	be
tough,”	she	said.	“You’re	far	from	 home,	your	classes	are	more	rigorous	than	they
were	in	high	school.	It	can	be	helpful	to	talk	to	someone.”
        I	 hugged	the	lamp	to	my	chest	and	shook	my	head.	The	rigor,	the	toughness,
I’d	wanted	those	things.

71
                                                        17





My	sophomore	year	at	Harvard	was	particularly	brutal.	The	magic	of	my	SAD
lamp	had	worn	off	and	I	spent	much	of	that	winter	trudging	to	class	through	snow
that	came	up	to	my	waist.	I’d	taught	my	mother	how	to	make	video	calls	on	her
computer,	and	so	sometimes	I	would	call	her,	thinking	 I	 would	tell	 her	how
unhappy	I	was,	but	then	her	face	would	greet	me	on	the	screen,	confused	and
annoyed	by	the	technology,	and	I’d	lose	my	resolve,	not	wanting	to	 add	my
burdens	to	her	own.
        To	make	matters	worse,	I	was	barely	hanging	on	in	my	Integrated	Science
course.	I	did	fine	on	the	homework	and	tests,	but	the	course	had	a	project	lab
component	that	required	working	in	small	groups,	and	every	day,	as	I	sat	mutely
in	class,	I	watched	my	participation	points	plummet.
        “The	class	would	really	benefit	from	hearing	your	thoughts,”	my	professor
would	sometimes	write	on	the	top	of	my	assignments.	Later,	in	my	dorm	room,	I
would	rehearse	the	kinds	of	things	I	might	say,	telling	my	reflection	about	all	of
my	project	ideas,	but	then	class	time	would	roll	around,	and	my	professor’s	eyes
would	fall	 on	me	and	I	 would	clam	up.	My	 small	group	started	ignoring	me.
Sometimes,	when	the	class	split	up	to	work	on	our	projects,	my	group	would
form	a	circle	with	me	on	the	outside.	I’d	shoulder	my	way	in	or,	more	often	than
not,	wait	for	someone	to	notice.
        Most	of	the	semester	passed	this	way.	Yao,	who	had	established	himself	as
the	leader	of	 our	small	group,	would	 order	everyone	around,	doling	out	our
assignments	for	the	night	and	shutting	down	any	of	the	ideas	proposed	by	women.
He	was	tyrannical,	misogynistic,	but	the	rest	of	the	group—Molly,	Zach,	Anne,
and	Ernest—were	easygoing	and	funny.	I	enjoyed	being	around	them,	even
though	they	merely	tolerated	me.
        Zach	was	the	clown.	At	five	foot	two,	he	was	shorter	than	both	Molly	and
me,	but	he	used	his	humor	and	his	intelligence	to	fill	up	whatever	room	he	was	in.
Most	days	he	spent	half	of	our	group	time	trying	out	little	bits	on	us	as	though	we

72
were	judges	on	a	stand-up	comedy	reality	 show.	It	 made	it	 hard	for	 us	to	know
when	he	was	being	genuine	or	when	he	was	setting	up	an	elaborate	joke,	and	so,
though	he	was	funny,	everyone	approached	anything	he	said	with	some	amount	of
discomfort.
        “I	  passed	by	these	dudes	in	the	 quad	who	 were	handing	 out	little	  orange
Bibles,”	Zach	said	one	day.
        “They’re	  so	pushy,”	  Molly	  said.	 “They	 practically	  shoved	one	 into	  my
pocket.”	Molly	 was	both	smart	and	striking,	 but	she	was	often	dismissed	because
her	voice,	 with	 its	 lilting,	  questioning	 sound,	made	people	 assume	they	could
ignore	anything	she	had	to	say.
        “If	  they	touched	you,	you	 could	scream	sexual	harassment,”	Ernest	said.	“I
mean,	it	wouldn’t	 be	the	 first	 time	someone	used	Christianity	 as	a	cover-up	for
sexual	assault.	This	is	Boston,	after	all.”
        “Oof,	 harsh,	dude,”	Yao	said.	He	turned	to	Zach.	“Did	you	take	the	Bible?”
        “Yeah,	 I	took	 it	and	then	I	climbed	 onto	John	Harvard’s	lap	and	just	started
waving	it	around	shouting	‘GOD	DOESN’T	EXIST!	  GOD	DOESN’T	 EXIST!’ ”
        “How	 do	you	know	God	doesn’t	exist?”	I	said,	interrupting	their	 laughter.
        They	all	turned	to	face	me.	The	mute	speaks?	their	faces	said.
        “Um,	 you’re	 not	serious,	are	you?”	Anne	 said.	She	was	the	smartest	one	in
our	group,	though	Yao	would	never	admit	it.	 Before	this,	I’d	 sometimes	catch	her
watching	me,	waiting	to	see	if	my	silence	harbored	brilliance,	 but	now	she	looked
at	me	as	though	I	had	finally	confirmed	her	suspicions	that	I	was	a	complete	idiot,
a	mistake	of	the	admissions	process.
        I	 liked	Anne,	 the	way	she	would	sit	back	 and	listen	to	the	rest	of	 the	group
fumble	 before	 swooping	in	 at	 the	last	 second	with	 the	right	  answer,	the	most
clever	idea,	leaving	Yao	grumbling	 and	huffy.	 I	 was	embarrassed	to	have	earned
her	ire,	 but	also,	I	 couldn’t	help	 myself.	 I	doubled	 down.	“I	 just	 don’t	think	  it’s
right	to	make	fun	of	 other	people’s	beliefs,”	I	said.
        “I’m	 sorry,	 but	believing	in	 God	isn’t	just	 ridiculous,	 it’s	fucking	 dangerous
too,”	Anne	 said.	“Religion	 has	been	used	to	justify	 everything	from	 war	 to	anti-
LGBT	legislation.	We	 aren’t	talking	about	some	harmless	thing	here.”
        “It	  doesn’t	have	to	be	 that	way.	 Belief	 can	be	 powerful	 and	intimate	 and
transformative.”
        Anne	shook	her	head.	“Religion	 is	the	opiate	of	 the	masses,”	she	said,	and	I
shot	her	a	killing	look.

73
        “Opioids	 are	the	opiates	of	the	masses,”	I	said.	I	 knew	what	I	sounded	like.
Wild,	crazed.
        Anne	 looked	at	me	as	though	I	 were	a	lizard	molting	 before	 her	very	eyes,
as	though	she	was	finally	seeing	me,	some	spark	of	life.	She	didn’t	press.
        Yao	 cleared	his	throat	 and	moved	the	group	 on	to	a	 safer	topic,	 but	I	 had
already	exposed	myself.	A	 backwoods	bama,	a	Bible	 thumper.	 I	thought	 of	 the
religious	student	 groups	on	 campus	that	 spent	some	of	  their	 days	hanging	up
flyers	in	the	dorms’	common	 rooms,	inviting	 people	to	worship.	Those	flyers	had
to	compete	with	the	hundreds	of	other	flyers,	for	 dance	marathons,	Greek	parties,
spoken-word	shows.	They	didn’t	stand	a	chance.	And,	though	I	hadn’t	worked	out
how	I	felt	 about	the	Christianity	of	 my	childhood,	I	 did	know	how	I	 felt	about	my
mother.	Her	devotion,	 her	faith,	 they	moved	me.	I	 was	protective	of	 her	right	 to
find	comfort	 in	 whatever	ways	she	saw	fit.	Didn’t	she	deserve	at	least	that	much?
We	have	to	get	through	this	life	somehow.
        My	 outburst	broke	the	dam,	and	after	that	day	I	started	speaking	up	more	in
class.	My	 grade	recovered,	 though	 my	 small	 group	didn’t	  bother	hiding	  their
disdain	for	 me.	 I	 don’t	 think	 any	 of	 my	 ideas	were	ever	 taken	seriously	 until
someone	else	repackaged	them	as	their	own.	After	 all,	what	 could	a	Jesus	freak
know	about	science?

74
                                                            18





I	have	been	saved	and	baptized	in	 the	Spirit,	 but	 I	have	never	been	baptized	 in
water.	Nana	was	 baptized	in	 water	as	a	 baby	at	 my	parents’	church	 in	 Ghana,
where	they	have	a	more	 capacious	attitude	toward	the	 rules	and	conventions	of
Protestantism	than	most	American	 Pentecostal	churches	have.	There	was	a	kind
of	“more	 is	more”	attitude	toward	religion	 at	my	mother’s	home	church.	Bring	 on
the	water,	 the	Spirit,	 the	 fire.	 Bring	 on	 the	speaking	in	 tongues,	the	 signs	and
wonders.	Bring	on	the	witch	doctor,	too,	if	 he	cares	to	help.	My	mother	never	saw
any	conflict	 between	believing	in	 mystics	and	believing	in	 God.	She	took	stories
about	 vipers,	  angels,	 tornadoes	 come	  to	  destroy	  the	  Earth	  literally,	  not
metaphorically.	She	buried	our	 umbilical	 cords	on	the	beach	of	her	 mother’s	sea
town	 like	 all	 the	 mothers	 before	 her,	 and	then	 she	 took	 her	 firstborn	 to	 be
blessed.	More	is	more.	More	blessing,	more	protection.
        When	 she	had	me	in	Alabama,	she	learned	that	many	Pentecostals	here	do
not	believe	in	baptizing	babies.	The	denomination	is	characterized	by	the	belief	in
one’s	ability	to	 have	a	personal	relationship	with	 Christ.	 To	choose	the	Lord,	 to
choose	salvation.	A	baby	could	not	choose	to	accept	Jesus	Christ	as	her	Lord	and
Savior,	so	while	Pastor	John	would	be	happy	to	say	a	prayer	for	 me,	he	wouldn’t
baptize	 me	 until	  I	  chose	it	  myself.	  My	  mother	 was	 disappointed	 by	  this.
“Americans	don’t	believe	in	God	 the	way	we	do,”	she	would	often	say.	She	meant
it	as	an	insult,	but	still,	she	liked	Pastor	John,	and	she	followed	his	teachings.
        When	 my	friend	 Ashley’s	little	 brother	 was	born,	my	family	 was	invited	 to
his	christening.	Ashley	stood	onstage	in	a	white	dress	and	white	shoes	with	crystal
kitten	heels.	I	 thought	she	looked	 like	 an	angel.	Colin	 cried	the	 entire	time,	 his
face	red,	his	mouth	sputtering.	He	didn’t	 seem	to	like	it	 very	much,	but	his	entire
family	 was	radiating	happiness.	Everyone	in	the	room	could	feel	it,	 and	I	wanted
it.
        “Can	I	 be	baptized?”	I	asked	my	mother.
        “Not	 until	you’re	saved,”	she	said.

75
        I	 didn’t	know	what	it	 meant	to	be	saved,	not	in	the	context	of	religion.	 Back
then,	when	people	at	 church	talked	 about	salvation,	 I	took	 the	 word	 literally.	 I
imagined	that	 I	 needed	to	be	 near	death	in	 order	 for	 salvation	 to	take	 hold.	 I
needed	to	have	Jesus	rescue	me	from	a	burning	building	or	pull	me	back	from	the
edge	of	a	cliff.	 I	thought	of	 saved	Christians	as	a	group	of	people	who	had	almost
died;	the	rest	of	 us	were	waiting	 for	 that	near-death	experience	to	come	 so	that
God	could	reveal	himself.	 I	 suppose	I’m	still	 waiting	 for	 God	to	 reveal	himself.
Sometimes,	the	children’s	 church	pastor	 would	 say,	“You	 have	to	 ask	Jesus	to
come	into	your	heart,”	 and	I	would	say	those	words,	“Jesus,	please	come	into	my
heart,”	and	then	I	would	spend	the	rest	of	the	service	wondering	how	I	would	ever
know	if	  he’d	accepted	my	invitation.	  I’d	press	my	 hand	to	my	 chest,	listen	 and
feel	for	its	thumping	 rhythm.	Was	he	there	in	my	heartbeat?
        Baptism	  seemed	easier,	 clearer	 somehow	 than	 almost	 dying	  or	 heart-
listening,	and	after	 Colin’s	 baptism	I	 became	obsessed	with	the	idea	 that	water
was	the	best	path	to	knowing	that	God	had	taken	root.	At	bath	time,	 I	would	 wait
for	my	 mother	to	 turn	her	back	 and	then	I	would	 submerge	myself	in	the	 water.
When	I	lifted	  myself	up,	my	 hair	would	 be	wet,	despite	the	shower	cap,	and	my
mother	would	curse	under	her	breath.
        Black	girl	 sin	number	one:	getting	your	hair	wet	when	it	wasn’t	wash	day.
        “I	 don’t	have	time	for	 this,	Gifty,”	  my	mother	 would	say	as	she	brushed	out
my	curls,	 braided	 my	 hair.	 After	 my	 third	  surreptitious	DIY	  baptism,	 I	 got	 a
spanking	so	bad	I	couldn’t	sit	 without	pain	 for	the	 rest	of	that	week.	 That	put	an
end	to	that.


                                                              —

When	the	wounded	mouse	finally	 died,	I	held	 his	little	 body.	I	 rubbed	the	top	of
his	head,	and	I	thought	of	it	 as	a	blessing,	a	baptism.	Whenever	I	fed	the	mice	or
weighed	them	 for	 the	lever-press	task,	 I	 always	thought	 of	 Jesus	in	the	 upper
room,	 washing	his	 disciples’	 feet.	 This	  moment	 of	 servitude,	 of	 being	 quite
literally	 brought	low,	always	reminded	me	that	 I	needed	these	mice	just	as	much
as	they	needed	me.	More.	 What	 would	 I	 know	 about	the	 brain	 without	 them?
How	could	I	 perform	 my	work,	 find	 answers	to	my	questions?	The	collaboration
that	the	mice	and	I	have	going	in	this	lab	is,	if	 not	holy,	 then	at	least	sacrosanct.	I
have	never,	will	 never,	tell	 anyone	that	I	sometimes	think	 this	 way,	because	I’m
aware	that	the	Christians	in	my	 life	 would	find	 it	 blasphemous	and	the	scientists
would	find	 it	 embarrassing,	but	the	more	I	 do	this	 work	 the	more	I	 believe	in	 a

76
kind	 of	 holiness	in	 our	connection	 to	 everything	on	 Earth.	Holy	  is	the	 mouse.
Holy	is	the	grain	the	mouse	eats.	Holy	is	the	seed.	Holy	are	we.


                                                              —

I	started	playing	music	around	the	apartment,	songs	that	I	knew	my	mother	liked.
I	wasn’t	really	optimistic	 that	music	 would	get	her	out	 of	bed,	but	I	 hoped	that	it
would,	at	the	very	least,	soothe	something	inside	of	 her.	I	played	schmaltzy	pop-
country	 songs	like	  “I	  Hope	 You	 Dance.”	 I	  played	 boring	 hymnals	 sung	 by
tabernacle	choirs.	I	 played	every	song	on	Daddy	 Lumba’s	roster,	imagining	 that
by	the	end	of	 “Enko	 Den”	she	would	be	 up,	boogying	around	the	house	like	 she
used	to	when	I	was	a	child.
        I	 also	started	cleaning	the	apartment	more,	 because	I	figured	she	probably
liked	the	familiar	  scent	of	bleach,	the	way	it	 clung	to	your	nose	hairs	hours	after
you’d	used	it.	 I’d	 spray	the	toxic	 all-purpose	cleaner	onto	 the	windowsill	  in	the
bedroom	and	watch	 the	mist	 of	 it	 float	 off	  and	away.	Some	of	 those	particles
probably	reached	her	in	the	bed.
        “Gifty,”	  she	said	one	day,	after	I’d	 wiped	the	 window	to	 gleaming.	“Would
you	get	me	some	water?”
        Tears	sprung	to	my	eyes	as	I	said,	“Yes,	of	course,”	with	so	much	glee	you’d
have	thought	she	was	asking	 me	to	 accept	a	Nobel	 Prize.	 I	 brought	a	 glass	of
water	back	 to	her	 and	watched	her	 sit	 up	to	 drink	 it.	 She	looked	 tired,	 which
seemed	improbable	to	 me	given	 that	she’d	done	nothing	 but	 rest	since	she	got
here.	I	never	thought	of	 her	as	old,	but	 in	a	little	 more	than	a	year	she	would	 be
seventy,	and	all	  of	 those	 years	were	 beginning	 to	 write	 themselves	onto	 her
sunken	cheeks,	her	hands,	hardened	from	labor.
        I	 watched	her	drink	  the	water	slowly,	 so	slowly,	 and	then	I	 took	 the	glass
from	her	after	she’d	finished.	“More?”	 I	 asked.
        She	shook	her	head	and	started	to	sink	back	down	under	the	covers	and	my
heart	sank	with	her.	Once	the	duvet	was	completely	draped	over	her,	covering	her
body,	nearly	to	her	 chin,	she	looked	at	me	and	said,	“You	 need	to	do	 something
about	your	hair.”
        I	 stifled	 my	laughter	and	brought	 my	hands	up	to	 my	dreadlocks,	wrapped
them	around	my	fingers.	My	mother	didn’t	 speak	to	me	for	a	month	the	summer	I
came	home	with	the	beginnings	of	locks.	 “People	will	 think	 you	were	raised	in	a
dirty	 home,”	she	argued	before	 falling	 silent	 for	 nearly	the	entire	 length	of	 my

77
stay,	and	now	those	locks	had	her	speaking	again,	if	only	to	 chastise	me.	Holy	is
the	black	woman’s	hair.

78
                                                        19





In	college	I	took	a	poetry	class	on	Gerard	Manley	Hopkins	to	satisfy	a	humanities
requirement.	Most	of	the	other	 science	majors	I	knew	took	 intro	to	 creative
writing	courses	to	fulfill	the	requirement.	“It’s	an	easy	A,”	one	friend	said.	“You
just,	like,	write	down	your	feelings	and	shit	and	then	the	whole	class	talks	about
it.	Literally	everyone	gets	an	A.”	The	idea	of	an	entire	classroom	full	of	my	peers
talking	about	the	 feelings	I’d	 somehow	cobbled	into	a	story	 terrified	 me.	I
decided	to	take	my	chances	with	Hopkins.
        My	professor,	an	incredibly	tall	woman	with	a	lion’s	mane	of	golden	curls,
walked	into	the	classroom	ten	minutes	late	every	Tuesday	and	Thursday.	“All
right,	then,	where	were	we?”	she’d	say,	as	if	we’d	already	been	talking	about	the
poems	without	her	and	she	wanted	us	to	catch	her	up.	No	one	ever	responded,
and	she’d	usually	glare	 at	 us	with	  her	piercing	 green	eyes	until	  someone
surrendered	and	stammered	out	something	nonsensical.
        “Hopkins	is	all	about	a	delight	in	language,”	she	said	one	day.	“I	mean,	listen
to	 this:	  ‘Cuckoo-echoing,	bell-swarmed,	lark-charmed,	rook-racked,	 river-
rounded.’	He’s	taking	so	much	pleasure	out	of	the	way	these	words	fit	together,
out	of	the	sound	of	them,	and	we,	the	readers,	get	equal	pleasure	reading	it.”
        She	looked	ecstatic	and	pained	as	she	said	this,	like	she	was	halfway	to
orgasm.	I	wasn’t	getting	equal	pleasure	from	reading	it.	I	wasn’t	even	getting	a
quarter	of	the	pleasure	my	professor	seemed	to	be	getting	simply	from	talking
about	it.	I	was	intimidated	by	her	and	I	hated	the	poetry,	but	I	felt	a	strange	sense
of	kinship	with	Hopkins	every	time	I	read	about	his	personal	life,	his	difficulty
reconciling	his	religion	with	his	desires	and	thoughts,	his	repressed	sexuality.	I
enjoyed	reading	his	letters	and,	inspired	to	some	romantic	ideal	of	the	nineteenth
century,	tried	writing	letters	of	my	own	to	my	mother.	Letters	in	which	I	hoped	to
tell	her	about	my	complicated	feelings	about	God.	“Dear	Ma,”	they	started,	“I’ve
been	thinking	a	lot	about	whether	or	not	believing	in	God	 is	compatible	with
believing	in	science.”	Or,	“Dear	Ma,	I	haven’t	forgotten	the	joy	I	felt	the	day	you

79
walked	me	 down	 to	 the	 altar	 and	the	 whole	 congregation	stretched	 out	 their
hands,	and	I	really,	truly	felt	the	presence	of	God.”	I	wrote	 four	such	letters,	all	of
which	could	have	been	a	different	 petal	on	the	flower	 of	 my	belief.	 “I	 believe	in
God,	I	 do	 not	believe	 in	God.”	 Neither	 of	 these	sentiments	felt	  true	to	 what	I
actually	felt.	  I	threw	 the	 letters	away,	 and	I	 gratefully	 accepted	my	 B–	 in	 the
course.


                                                              —

Nana	had	always	been	conflicted	 about	God.	He	 hated	the	youth	pastor	at	 First
Assemblies,	 a	 man	  in	  his	 early	  twenties	  who	  had	 just	  finished	  Masters
Commission,	 a	 kind	 of	  training	 camp	 for	  future	  spiritual	 leaders,	 and	 who
insisted	that	everyone	call	him	P.T.	instead	of	Pastor	Tom.
        P.T.	 was	interested	 in	 relating	to	 the	 youth	 on	their	 level,	 which	 for	 his
relationship	with	 Nana	meant	that	he	was	constantly	making	 up	slang	terms	that
he	assumed	black	 teenagers	were	 using.	“Whattup,	  broseph?”	 was	a	 favorite
greeting	of	his.	Nana	could	hardly	 even	look	at	him	 without	rolling	 his	eyes.	Our
mother	chided	him	for	 being	disrespectful,	but	we	could	tell	that	even	she	thought
that	P.T.	was	kind	of	an	idiot.
        Nana	was	thirteen	when	he	graduated	from	children’s	church	 and	moved	on
to	youth	group	 services.	I	missed	him	during	 Sunday	school	when	the	children’s
church	pastor	pulled	out	her	puppets	and	Nana	reluctantly	went	across	the	hall	to
listen	 to	 P.T.’s	 teachings.	I	  started	 to	 get	 a	 little	  restless	in	 those	 services,
squirming	around	in	my	seat	and	asking	to	go	to	the	bathroom	every	five	minutes,
until	 finally	 the	 pastors	decided	 it	 would	 be	all	 right	 for	  me	to	 go	to	 Sunday
school	with	Nana	as	long	as	I	returned	to	children’s	church	during	regular	 service
hours.	In	 those	early-morning	 classes,	Nana	sat	about	as	far	 away	from	  me	as
possible,	but	I	 didn’t	 mind.	 I	liked	 being	 in	the	 same	room	as	him,	 and	I	 liked
feeling	older,	 wiser	than	 the	other	children	 my	 age	who	were	stuck	 listening	to
the	children’s	 church	 pastor’s	little	  sketches,	which,	 by	 that	 time,	  had	grown
tiresome.	I	was,	even	then,	desperate	to	prove	my	competence,	my	superiority,	so
being	the	youngest	in	the	youth	group	felt	 like	 a	kind	of	 arrival,	 a	demonstration
of	my	goodness.
        Like	 the	children’s	 church	pastor,	P.T.	talked	 a	lot	about	sin,	 but	he	wasn’t
partial	to	 puppets.	He	paid	little	  attention	to	me	 and	interpreted	Scripture	 as	he
saw	fit.

80
        He	 said,	“If	  girls	only	 knew	 what	boys	think	 about	 when	they	wear	 those
low-cut	things	and	those	high-cut	things,	they	wouldn’t	wear	them	anymore.”
        He	said,	“There	are	a	lot	of	 people	out	there	who’ve	never	heard	the	Gospel,
and	they’re	just	busy	walking	in	sin	until	we	spread	the	good	news.”
        He	 said,	“God	  glories	in	 our	 commitment	 to	 him.	 Remember,	 he	is	 our
bridegroom	and	we	are	his	bride.	We	must	be	faithful	to	none	other.”
        P.T.	 was	forever	smirking	 and	drumming	his	 fingers	on	the	lip	 of	 the	table
as	he	talked.	He	was	the	kind	of	 youth	pastor	who	wanted	to	 make	God	hip	 in	a
way	that	almost	felt	 exclusionary.	His	wasn’t	the	God	of	 bookworms	and	science
geeks.	He	was	the	God	of	punk	 rock.	 P.T.	liked	 wearing	a	shirt	 that	proclaimed
JESUS	FREAK	across	the	front.	The	word	“freak”	written	there	next	to	“Jesus”	was
purposefully	 combative,	 incongruous,	as	if	  to	 shout,	“This	 isn’t	 your	 mother’s
Christianity.”	 If	 Jesus	was	a	club,	P.T.	and	other	youth	pastors	like	him	were	the
bouncers.
        One	day	 Nana	called	bullshit	 on	an	exclusionary	 God.	He	raised	his	 hand,
and	P.T.	paused	his	drumming,	tilted	his	seat	back.	“Shoot,	bro,”	he	said.
        “So	 what	if	 there’s	a	tiny	 village	somewhere	in	Africa	  that	is	 so	incredibly
remote	that	no	one	has	found	it	yet,	which	means	no	Christians	have	been	able	to
go	there	as	missionaries	and	spread	the	Gospel,	right?	Are	 all	 of	 those	villagers
going	to	 Hell,	  even	though	 there’s	no	 way	 that	 they	 could	 have	heard	 about
Jesus?”
        P.T.’s	smirk	 set	in	 and	his	eyes	narrowed	at	 Nana	a	bit.	 “God	 would	have
made	a	way	for	them	to	hear	the	good	news,”	he	said.
        “Okay,	 but	hypothetically.”
        “Hypothetically,	 dude?	Yeah,	they’re	going	to	Hell.”
        I	 was	shocked	by	this	answer,	by	the	smugly	satisfied	way	in	which	P.T.	had
consigned	an	entire	helpless	village	of	 Africans	 to	eternal	damnation	 without	 so
much	as	a	 blink.	 He	 didn’t	spend	even	 the	length	 of	 an	exhale	thinking	  about
Nana’s	question,	working	 on	 a	way	 out.	 He	didn’t	 say,	 for	 example,	that	 God
doesn’t	deal	 in	 hypotheticals,	 a	perfectly	  reasonable	answer	to	 a	 not	 entirely
reasonable	question.	His	willingness	 to	play	 into	 Nana’s	game	was	itself	 a	sign
that	he	saw	God	as	a	kind	 of	 prize	that	 only	some	were	good	 enough	to	win.	 It
was	like	he	wanted	Hell	for	those	villagers,	like	 he	believed	there	were	people	for
whom	Hell	is	a	given,	deserved.
        And	 the	part	that	bothered	me	most	was	that	I	couldn’t	shake	the	feeling	that

81
the	people	P.T.	 believed	deserved	Hell	 were	people	who	 looked	 like	 Nana	and
me.	I	was	seven,	but	I	wasn’t	stupid.	I	had	seen	the	pamphlets	that	proclaimed	the
great	need	for	  missionaries	 in	 various	other	 countries.	 The	 children	 in	  those
pamphlets,	their	distended	bellies,	the	flies	buzzing	around	their	eyes,	their	soiled
clothing,	they	were	all	the	same	deep,	dark	brown	as	me.	I	already	understood	the
spectacle	of	poverty,	the	competing	 impulses	to	help	and	to	look	 away	that	such
images	spurred,	but	I	 understood,	too,	 that	poverty	 was	not	a	 black	and	 brown
phenomenon.	I	had	seen	the	way	 the	kids	 at	school	 who	came	from	  the	trailer
park	walked	around,	their	short	fuses	sparked	by	a	careless	word	about	their	tight
shoes	or	“flooding”	pants,	and	I	had	seen	the	rotted-out	barns	and	farmhouses	off
the	back	roads	in	the	Podunk	 towns	just	minutes	 outside	my	city.	 “Don’t	 let	our
car	break	down	in	this	dirty	 village,”	 my	mother	 would	pray	in	Twi	 whenever	we
passed	through	one	of	these	towns.	She	used	the	word	akuraase,	the	same	word
she	would	use	for	 a	village	in	 Ghana,	but	I	 had	already	been	conditioned	to	 see
America	as	somehow	elevated	in	 relation	to	 the	rest	of	 the	world,	 and	so	I	 was
convinced	that	an	Alabama	village	couldn’t	be	an	akuraase	in	the	same	way	that	a
Ghanaian	 village	  could.	  Years	 after	  P.T.’s	  remarks	  I	  started	 to	  see	 the
ridiculousness	of	that	idea,	the	 idea	of	 a	refined	and	elevated	American	 poverty
that	implies	 a	base,	subhuman	third	 world.	 The	belief	 in	 this	 subhumanity	was
what	made	those	posters	and	infomercials	so	effective,	  no	different	 really	 from
the	commercials	for	  animal	shelters,	the	people	 in	these	infomercials	 no	 better
than	dogs.	P.T.’s	unconsidered	answer	was	no	doubt	just	a	careless	thought	from	a
man	who	was	not	accustomed	to	thinking	too	deeply	about	why	he	held	fast	to	his
faith,	but	for	 me,	that	day,	his	words	set	that	very	kind	of	thinking	into	 motion.
        I	 watched	P.T.	set	his	chair	legs	back	down	on	the	 ground	and	continue	his
teaching,	being	careful	 not	to	 let	his	 eyes	fall	on	 Nana.	Across	the	 room,	Nana
also	had	a	smug	look	on	his	face.	He	didn’t	go	to	youth	services	much	after	that.

82
                                                    20




Dear	God,
Buzz	says	that	Christianity	is	a	cult	except	that	it	started	so	long	ago	that
people	didn’t	know	what	cults	were	yet.	He	said	we’re	smarter	now	than
we	were	back	then.	Is	that	true?


Dear	God,
Would	you	show	me	that	you’re	real?

83
                                                        21





My	apartment	smelled	like	oil,	like	pepper,	like	rice	and	plantains.	I	set	my	bag
down	in	the	entryway	and	rushed	to	the	kitchen	to	find	a	sight	as	familiar	to	me
as	my	own	body:	my	mother	cooking.
        “You’re	up,”	I	said,	and	immediately	regretted	the	choked	excitement	in	my
voice.	I	didn’t	want	to	frighten	her.	I’d	seen	videos	of	cornered	black	mambas,
striking	before	slipping	away,	faster	than	a	blink.	Was	my	mother	capable	of	the
same?
        “You	don’t	have	eggs.	You	don’t	have	milk.	You	don’t	have	flour.	What	do
you	eat?”	she	said.	She	was	wearing	a	robe	she	must	have	found	in	one	of	my
drawers.	Her	left	breast,	deflated	from	the	weight	loss	and	shriveled	with	age,
peeked	out	through	the	thin	fabric.	When	we	were	children,	her	propensity	for
nakedness	had	embarrassed	Nana	and	me	no	end.	Now,	I	was	so	happy	to	see	her,
all	of	her,	I	didn’t	care.
        “I	don’t	really	cook,”	I	said.
        She	sucked	her	teeth	at	me	and	continued	working,	slicing	the	plantains,
salting	the	jollof.	I	heard	the	sizzle	of	the	oil,	and	that	smell	of	hot,	wet	grease
was	enough	to	make	my	mouth	water.
        “If	you	had	spent	time	in	the	kitchen	with	me,	helping	me,	you	would	know
how	to	make	all	of	this.	You	would	know	how	to	feed	yourself	properly.”
        I	held	my	breath	and	counted	to	three,	waiting	for	the	urge	to	say	something
mean	to	pass.	“You’re	here	now.	I	can	learn	now.”
        She	snorted.	So,	this	was	how	it	would	go.	I	watched	her	lean	over	the	pot	of
oil.	She	grabbed	a	handful	of	plantains	and	dropped	them	in,	her	hand	so	low,	so
close	to	the	oil.	The	oil	 sputtered	as	it	swallowed	the	plantains,	and	when	my
mother	lifted	her	hand	from	the	pot,	I	could	see	glistening	specks	from	where	the
oil	had	spit	at	her.	She	wiped	the	spots	with	her	index	finger,	touched	her	finger
to	her	tongue.	How	many	times	had	she	been	burned	like	this?	She	must	have
been	immune.

84
        “Do	 you	remember	that	time	 you	put	hot	 oil	on	Nana’s	foot?”	 I	asked	from
my	spot	at	the	counter.	I	wanted	to	get	up	and	help	her,	but	I	was	nervous	that	she
would	make	fun	of	 me	or,	worse,	tell	me	how	every	move	I	made	was	wrong.	She
was	right	that	I	had	avoided	her	kitchen	my	 entire	childhood,	but	 even	now,	even
with	my	 small	sample	size	of	 days	spent	cooking	with	 her,	it’s	 her	voice	 I	hear,
saying,	“You	clean	as	you	go,	you	clean	as	you	go,”	whenever	I	cook.
        “What	 are	you	talking	about?”
        “You	 don’t	remember?	We	were	having	a	party	at	the	house	and	you	put	oil
—”
        She	sharply	turned	to	face	me.	She	was	holding	a	mesh	strainer	in	her	hand,
high	up	in	the	air	like	 a	gavel	she	could	bring	down	at	any	moment.	I	saw	panic	in
her	face,	panic	that	covered	the	blankness	that	had	been	there	since	she’d	arrived.
        “I	 never	did	that,”	she	said.	“I	never,	never	did	that.”
        I	  was	 going	 to	 press	 her	 but	 then	  I	 looked	  into	 her	  eyes	and	 knew
immediately	that	 I	had	made	a	mistake.	 Not	in	 the	memory,	carried	 back	to	 me
through	that	smell	of	hot	oil,	but	 in	the	reminder.
        “I’m	 sorry.	I	must	have	dreamed	it,”	I	said,	and	she	brought	the	gavel	down.


                                                              —

My	 mother	 rarely	threw	 parties,	 and	when	 she	did,	 she	spent	the	 entire	week
leading	up	to	them	in	enough	of	a	cooking/cleaning	frenzy	to	make	you	wonder	if
we	were	hosting	 royalty.	 There	were	 a	handful	 of	 Ghanaians	in	 Alabama	who
made	up	the	Ghana	Association,	and	many	of	 them	had	to	 drive	 upward	of	 two
hours	to	come	to	 any	of	 the	gatherings.	My	 mother,	never	the	 life	 of	 the	party,
only	went	to	a	meeting	if	 the	drive	was	under	an	hour,	and	she	only	hosted	if	she
had	four	days	off	in	 a	row,	a	rare	enough	occurrence	to	mean	that	she	only	hosted
twice.
        She’d	bought	me	a	new	dress	and	Nana	new	slacks.	She	pressed	them	in	the
morning	and	then	laid	 them	out	on	our	beds,	threatening	death	if	 we	so	much	as
looked	at	them	wrong	before	 it	was	time	to	 get	into	them,	and	then	she	spent	the
rest	of	 the	 day	 cooking.	 By	 the	 time	 the	 first	  guests	arrived,	 the	house	 was
practically	sparkling,	fragrant	with	 the	scents	of	Ghana.
        It	 was	the	first	 time	 many	of	 the	other	Ghanaians	were	seeing	us	since	the
Chin	 Chin	 Man’s	departure,	and	 Nana	and	 I,	 already	outcasts	for	 our	 taciturn
mother,	 were	dreading	 the	 party,	 the	 stares,	the	 unsolicited	 advice	 from	  the

85
grown-ups,	the	teasing	from	the	other	kids.
        “We’ll	  stay	for	 five	 minutes	 and	then	we	can	 fake	sick,”	 Nana	 whispered
through	his	smile	as	we	greeted	an	auntie	who	smelled	like	baby	powder.
        “She’ll	 know	 we’re	 lying,”	 I	 whispered	 back,	remembering	 her	CIA-level
interrogation	into	 the	 mystery	of	 who	had	 stolen	a	Malta	 from	 the	back	 of	 her
closet.
        It	 didn’t	come	to	that.	By	 the	time	the	other	children	showed	up,	Nana	and	I
had	moved	from	 enduring	 to	 enjoying	 the	party.	 My	 mother	had	 made	bofrot,
puff-puff,	  balls	of	fried	 dough,	and	before	 long	all	of	 the	children	were	engaged
in	an	all-out	 war,	 the	bofrot	 as	our	 weapon.	The	rules	were	 ill-defined,	 but	 the
general	idea	of	the	 game	was	that	if	 you	were	hit	 with	 a	flying	  bofrot	 then	you
were	out.
        Nana	was,	as	usual,	an	expert	player.	He	was	fast,	he	had	a	good	arm,	and	he
was	especially	adept	 at	escaping	detection,	 for	 we	 all	 knew	 that	 if	 the	 adults
caught	us	wasting	food	  by	throwing	 it	  at	each	other,	 the	game,	 and	our	 lives,
would	surely	end.	I	knew	I	wasn’t	fast	enough	to	outrun	Nana,	and	so	I	hid	behind
our	couch,	waiting	 with	my	 pile	 of	bofrots,	 listening	for	 the	frustrated	 sighs	and
giggles	of	the	other	 children	 who’d	been	pelted	out.	That	 couch,	the	only	 couch
I’d	ever	 known,	was	so	old,	 so	ugly,	 that	it	 was	slowly	 giving	 up	on	itself.	 The
seams	on	one	of	the	cushions	had	burst,	leaving	its	stuffing,	like	guts,	spilling	out
from	 the	sides.	The	left	 arm	of	 the	couch	had	a	decorative	wooden	piece	nailed
in,	but	every	so	often	the	piece	would	fall	 off,	 nails	out,	and	Nana,	my	mother,	or
I	 would	 have	to	 shove	it	  back	 into	 the	upholstery.	 I	 must	 have	 knocked	 the
wooden	piece	off	to	get	behind	the	couch	that	day,	because	it	wasn’t	long	before	I
heard	Nana	scream.	 I	 slunk	out	 from	  behind	the	 couch	 to	 find	 him	 with	  the
wooden	piece	nailed	to	the	bottom	of	his	foot.
        Every	 uncle	and	auntie	 in	 the	room	 came	over	 to	hold	 court.	 My	 mother
could	 hardly	 shove	 her	 way	 through	  before	 everyone	 had	 offered	 up	  their
solutions	to	 the	problem.	 I	 quickly	 ate	 my	bofrots,	 hiding	 the	 evidence	of	 my
involvement,	as	the	adults	in	the	room	got	louder	 and	louder.	Finally,	 my	mother
got	to	Nana.	She	sat	him	down	 on	that	treacherous	couch	and,	without	 a	hint	 of
ceremony,	pulled	the	wooden	piece,	nail	and	all,	from	Nana’s	foot,	leaving	behind
a	perfect,	bleeding	hole.
        “Lockjaw,	  my	sister,”	one	of	the	aunties	said.
        “It’s	 true,	that	nail	might	give	him	 lockjaw.	You	 can’t	take	any	chances.”
        The	 din	 started	up	again	as	the	 adults	discussed	tetanus	prevention.	Nana

86
and	I	 rolled	  our	 eyes	at	 each	other,	 waiting	 for	  the	 grown-ups	to	 stop	 their
posturing,	slap	a	Band-Aid	on	his	foot,	 and	call	it	a	day.	But	there	was	something
about	their	 talk,	 the	way	they	 were	working	 themselves	up	 with	 memories	and
ideas	of	Ghana,	their	old	home.	It	 was	like	they	were	turning	 themselves	on	with
these	mentions	of	folk	 remedies,	turning	 themselves	on	and	showing	each	other
up,	proving	that	they	hadn’t	lost	it,	their	Ghanaianness.
        My	 mother	scooped	Nana	up	into	her	arms	and	carried	him	into	the	kitchen,
the	entire	 party	 trailing	 after	 her.	She	put	 a	 small	pot	 of	 oil	 on	 the	stove	and
dipped	a	silver	spoon	in	it	and,	with	 Nana	screaming,	the	grown-ups	encouraging,
and	the	children	looking	on	in	fear,	 she	touched	the	hot	oiled	spoon	to	the	hole	in
Nana’s	foot.
        Could	 my	mother	 have	forgotten	that?	The	time	 she	had	stopped	believing
in	the	 powers	of	 a	tetanus	vaccination	and	had	 instead	left	 Nana’s	health	up	to
folk	 wisdom.	Nana	 had	been	so	angry	at	her	afterward,	 so	angry	and	 confused.
Surely,	she	remembered.
        I	 set	the	table	while	 my	 mother	 scooped	rice	and	fried	 plantains	onto	 two
plates.	She	sat	down	next	to	me	and	the	two	 of	 us	ate	in	silence.	That	 food	was
better	than	anything	I	had	eaten	in	months,	years	even,	better	still	for	having	been
the	one	sign	 of	 life	 from	  a	woman	who	 had	done	 nothing	but	 sleep	since	her
arrival.	I	 ate	it	hungrily.	 I	 accepted	seconds	and	did	the	dishes	while	my	mother
looked	on.	Evening	came,	and	she	got	back	into	bed,	and	by	the	time	I	left	for	the
lab	the	next	morning,	she	still	had	not	gotten	up.

87
                                                        22





A	mouse	with	a	fiber-optic	 implant	on	its	head	looks	like	something	out	of	a
science-fiction	movie,	though	I	suppose	any	creature	with	a	fiber-optic	implant
on	its	head	would.	I	often	attached	such	implants	to	my	mice’s	heads	so	that	I
could	deliver	light	into	their	brains	during	my	experiments.	Han	came	into	the	lab
one	day	to	 find	 me	attaching	a	fiber-optic	 patch	cord	to	 one	of	 my	 mice’s
implants.	Both	Han	and	the	mouse	didn’t	seem	the	least	bit	interested	in	what	I
was	doing.
        “Don’t	you	think	it’s	 weird	how	quickly	we	get	used	to	things?”	I	said	to
Han.	The	patch	cord	was	connected	to	a	blue	LED	that	I	would	use	to	deliver
light	the	next	time	the	mouse	performed	the	lever	experiment.
        Han	hardly	looked	up	from	his	own	work.	“What	do	you	mean?”	he	said.
        “I	mean	that	if	anyone	else	walked	in	here	and	saw	this	mouse	with	all	of
this	intense	hardware	fastened	onto	its	head	they’d	find	it	a	little	strange.	They’d
think	we	were	creating	cyborgs.”
        “We	are	creating	cyborgs,”	he	said.	And	then	he	paused,	looked	at	me.	“I
mean,	there’s	some	debate	about	whether	nonhumans	can	be	considered	cyborgs,
but	given	the	fact	that	‘cyborg’	itself	is	an	abbreviation	of	‘cybernetic	organism,’	I
think	it’s	safe	to	say	you	can	extend	the	definition	to	any	organic	matter	that’s
been	biomechanically	engineered,	right?”
        I’d	brought	this	on	myself.	I	spent	the	next	fifteen	minutes	listening	to	Han
talk	about	the	Future	of	Science	Fiction,	which	was	perhaps	the	most	I’d	ever
heard	him	talk	about	anything.	I	was	bored	by	the	conversation	at	first,	but	it	was
nice	to	see	him	so	animated	by	something	that	I	ended	up	getting	caught	up	in	it
despite	myself.
        “My	brother	always	said	he	wanted	bionic	legs	so	that	he	could	be	faster	on
the	basketball	court,”	I	said	without	thinking.
        Han	pushed	up	his	glasses	and	leaned	in	closer	to	his	mouse.	“I	didn’t	know
you	had	a	brother,”	he	said.	“Does	he	still	play	basketball?”

88
        “He,	 um.	He…”	  I	couldn’t	 seem	to	get	the	 words	out.	I	 didn’t	 want	to	 see
Han’s	ears	turn	red,	that	telltale	sign	of	 mortification	  or	pity.	 I	wanted	to	 remain
who	I	 was	to	him,	 without	 coloring	our	 relationship	with	 stories	of	 my	 personal
life.
        Han	 finally	 looked	 up	from	  his	work	 and	turned	 to	 face	me.	 “Gifty?”	  he
said.
        “He	 died.	It	was	a	long	time	ago.”
        “Jesus,	I’m	so	sorry,”	Han	said.	He	held	my	gaze	for	a	long	time,	longer	than
either	of	us	was	used	to,	and	I	was	grateful	that	he	didn’t	say	anything	more.	That
he	didn’t	ask,	as	so	many	people	do,	how	it	happened.	It	embarrassed	me	to	know
that	I	would	have	been	embarrassed	to	talk	about	Nana’s	addiction	with	Han.
        Instead	I	 said,	“He	 was	incredible	 at	basketball.	He	 didn’t	 need	the	bionic
legs.”
        Han	nodded	and	flashed	me	a	sweet,	quiet	smile.	Neither	 of	 us	really	knew
what	to	do	 or	 say	next,	so	I	 asked	Han	who	 his	favorite	 science-fiction	 writers
were,	hoping	that	a	change	of	subject	might	melt	away	the	lump	that	was	forming
in	my	throat.	Han	took	the	hint.


                                                              —

A	year	 or	so	after	 my	 mother	shoved	the	 box	of	 Nana’s	cleats	and	jerseys	and
soccer	balls	into	the	corner	 of	 our	garage,	Nana	came	home	from	 school	with	 a
note	from	 his	P.E.	teacher.	“Basketball	 tryouts	on	Wednesday.	We’d	love	 to	see
Nana	there,”	the	note	said.
        That	summer,	Nana	had	hit	 six	feet	tall	 at	just	thirteen	 years	old.	I’d	helped
my	mother	 measure	him	on	the	 wall	 just	off	  the	kitchen,	 climbing	 up	onto	 her
shoulders	and	placing	 the	faint	  pencil	 mark	 where	Nana’s	head	 touched.	“Ey,
Nana,	we’ll	have	to	lift	the	ceiling	 soon,”	my	mother	teased	once	the	tape	measure
snapped	back	into	its	case.	Nana	rolled	his	eyes,	but	he	was	smiling,	proud	of	his
genetic	luck.
        Basketball	was,	of	 course,	a	logical	sport	for	 a	tall,	athletically	 gifted	 child,
but	we	were	a	soccer	family	in	football	 country.	It	 never	really	occurred	to	any	of
us.	And,	though	we	never	admitted	it	to	ourselves	or	to	each	other,	we	all	felt	like
a	change	in	sport	would	 be	an	insult	 to	the	 Chin	Chin	 Man,	 who	had	once	said
that	his	time	 would	 be	better	spent	watching	 giraffes	 in	the	 wild	 than	watching
basketball	players	on	television.

89
        But,	 clearly,	Nana	missed	sports.	His	body	was	of	 a	kind	 that	needed	to	be
in	motion	 for	 him	 to	 feel	 at	ease.	He	was	 always	fidgeting,	 bouncing	his	 legs,
rolling	his	 neck,	cracking	his	 knuckles.	He	wasn’t	meant	to	sit	 still,	 and	those	of
us	who	had	loved	to	watch	him	 play	soccer	knew	that	there	was	something	right,
true,	real	about	Nana	in	motion.	He	was	himself,	beautiful.	 My	mother	 signed	the
consent	form.
        It	 was	clear	right	away	that	this	was	the	sport	that	he	was	intended	to	play.	It
was	like	something,	in	his	body,	in	 his	mind,	clicked	 into	 place	once	he	held	that
basketball	in	his	hands.	He	was	frustrated	with	himself	for	 being	behind	the	other
players,	having	not	 started	the	 sport	when	 he	was	younger,	 and	so	my	 mother
bought	a	hoop	she	couldn’t	really	afford	 and	assembled	it,	with	the	help	 of	Nana
and	me.	It	 stood	 there	in	 our	 driveway,	 and	the	 very	 second	it	 was	erected	it
became	like	a	totem	for	Nana.	He	was	out	there	every	day	for	hours,	worshipping
it.	By	 his	 third	 game	he	was	his	 team’s	fifth-highest	 scorer.	 By	the	 end	of	 the
season	he	was	the	best.
        My	 mother	 and	I	 used	to	 attend	his	 games	and	sit	 in	 the	very	 back.	We
weren’t	versed	in	 the	 sport	and	neither	 of	 us	ever	 bothered	learning	 the	rules.
“What’s	happening?”	 one	of	 us	would	 whisper	to	 the	other	 whenever	a	whistle
blew,	but	 it	 was	pointless	to	ask	 questions	when	we	didn’t	 really	 care	what	the
answers	were.	It	 didn’t	 take	 long	 for	 people	 to	 notice	Nana,	 then	 us.	Parents
started	cozying	up	to	my	mother,	trying	to	get	her	to	sit	closer	to	the	front,	 next	to
them,	so	that	 they	could	 say	things	 like	 “Boy,	 does	he	have	a	 future	 ahead	of
him.”
        “What	 kind	of	 nonsense	is	that?”	my	mother	would	say	in	the	car	on	the	way
back.	“Of	 course	he	has	a	future	ahead	of	him.	He	has	always	had	a	future	ahead
of	him.”
        “They	 mean	in	basketball,”	I	said.
        She	glared	at	me	through	the	rearview.	“I	know	what	they	mean,”	she	said.
        I	  didn’t	 understand	 why	  she	was	 upset.	 She	 had	 never	 been	like	  the
stereotypical	 immigrant	 parents,	 the	 ones	 who	 smack	 their	 kids	  around	 for
anything	less	than	an	A,	who	won’t	let	their	 children	play	sports	or	attend	dances,
who	pride	 themselves	on	their	  oldest,	who	 is	a	 doctor,	their	  middle,	 who	is	 a
lawyer,	and	are	overly	worried	 about	their	youngest,	who	wants	to	study	finance.
My	 mother	certainly	 wanted	us	to	 be	successful,	to	 live	 in	such	 a	way	that	 we
wouldn’t	end	up	having	to	work	tiring,	 demanding	jobs	like	she	did.	But	that	same
tiring,	 low-paying	work	 meant	 that	she	was	often	 too	busy	to	 know	 if	 we	were

90
making	good	grades	and	too	broke	to	get	us	help	if	we	weren’t.	The	result	 of	this
was	that	she	had	taken	 to	simply	 trusting	 us	to	 do	the	 right	 thing,	and	 we	had
rewarded	that	trust.	It	insulted	her,	I	 think,	that	people	were	so	keen	to	talk	about
Nana’s	basketball	prowess	as	 the	key	 to	 his	 future,	 as	 though	he	 didn’t	 have
anything	else	to	 offer.	 His	 athleticism	 was	a	God-given	 talent,	 and	my	 mother
knew	better	than	to	question	what	 God	gives,	but	she	hated	the	idea	that	anyone
might	believe	that	this	was	Nana’s	only	gift.
        Sometimes,	when	Nana	was	feeling	generous,	he’d	let	me	play	HORSE	with
him	 in	 the	 driveway.	 I	 liked	 to	 think	  that	 I	 held	 my	 own	 in	 those	weekend
afternoon	games,	but	I’m	sure	Nana	went	easy	on	me.
        We	 lived	 in	a	 rented	house	at	the	end	of	 a	 cul-de-sac,	and	the	top	 of	 our
driveway,	 where	 the	  basketball	 hoop	 stood,	 was	 the	 peak	 of	  a	 small	 hill.
Whenever	one	of	 us	 missed	a	shot,	 if	 we	 weren’t	fast	 enough,	the	 ball	 would
bounce	off	 the	backboard	and	launch	down	that	 hill,	 gathering	speed	as	it	went.
Though	I	was	an	energetic	child,	I	was	lazy,	lousy	at	sports.	I	dreaded	chasing	the
ball	down	the	hill	and	would	make	little	 bargains	with	Nana	so	that	he	would	do	it
instead.	When	I	 missed	 my	“S”	  shot,	I	 promised	 him	 I	 would	 wash	all	 of	 his
dishes	for	a	week.	 It	took	 Nana	five	 long	strides	to	 get	down	to	 the	bottom,	 six
strides	to	get	back	up.
        “Do	 you	think	the	Chin	 Chin	Man	would	have	liked	 basketball	if	he’d	grown
up	playing	it?”	I	asked.
        I	 was	setting	up	a	shot	from	inside	the	frame	of	the	garage.	It	was	physically
impossible	to	get	the	ball	as	high	as	I	would	need	to	in	order	to	sink	it	from	 there,
but	I	hadn’t	yet	studied	physics,	and	I	had	an	abundance	of	misplaced	confidence
in	my	skills.	 I	missed	the	shot	by	several	feet	and	chased	it	down	before	 it	could
start	its	descent.
        “Who?”	 Nana	said.
        “Daddy,”	  I	 said,	the	 word	 sounding	strange	 to	my	 ears.	 A	 word	 from	 a
language	I	used	to	speak	but	was	forgetting,	like	 the	Twi	 our	 parents	had	taught
us	when	we	were	small	but	then	had	grown	too	tired	to	keep	up.
        “I	 don’t	give	a	fuck	what	he	thinks,”	 Nana	said.
        My	 eyes	widened	at	the	use	of	the	swear	word.	They	were	all	understood	to
be	forbidden	 in	our	 house,	though	our	mother	 used	the	Twi	 ones	with	 abandon
because	she	thought	we	didn’t	know	what	they	meant.	Nana	wasn’t	looking	at	me.
He	was	setting	up	his	shot.	I	 stared	at	his	long	 arms,	the	veins	tracing	their	 way
from	biceps	to	hand,	pulsing,	exclamation	points	on	those	newly	formed	muscles.

91
He	hadn’t	answered	my	question,	but	it	didn’t	really	matter.	He	was	answering	his
own	question,	one	whose	large,	looming	presence	must	have	been	something	of	a
burden	to	him,	and	so	he	lied	to	try	 to	get	out	from	 under	its	weight.	I	 don’t	care,
he	told	himself	 every	time	 he	spoke	to	the	Chin	Chin	 Man	 on	the	phone.	I	don’t
care,	when	he	scored	twenty	points	in	a	game,	looked	up	to	the	stands	to	find	his
bored	sister	and	mother	and	no	one	else.	I	don’t	care.
        Nana	made	the	shot	from	  the	crest	of	 our	driveway’s	hill.	 It	 was	a	shot	he
knew	I	couldn’t	 make.	He	threw	the	ball	at	me,	hard.	I	 caught	it	against	my	chest
and	told	myself	not	to	 cry	as	I	walked	to	 the	spot	where	Nana	had	stood.	I	stared
at	the	 little	 red	 target	on	 the	backboard	 and	tried	 to	 channel	everything	 I	 had
toward	it.	 A	 couple	of	months	 later,	Nana	would	 climb	 a	ladder	and	scrape	that
red	rectangle	off,	 hoping	that	he	would	 learn	to	make	his	shots	by	feel,	 by	sense
memory.	 I	 bounced	 the	 ball	 a	 couple	 of	 times	  and	looked	  at	 Nana,	whose
expression	was	indiscernible.	I	missed	the	 shot,	and	the	game	ended.	Well	 after
the	sun	set	that	night,	 Nana	was	still	 out	 in	 our	driveway,	 shooting	free	 throws
against	the	backdrop	of	the	moon.


                                                              —

In	Hamilton	  and	Fremouw’s	1985	 study	on	 the	effects	 of	 cognitive	 behavioral
training	 on	basketball	 free-throw	 performance,	 researchers	asked	three	college
basketball	players	with	 low	 game-to-practice	 free-throw	 ratios	to	 listen	 to	tape
recordings	with	  instructions	 for	  deep	muscle	 relaxation.	 The	 men	 were	 also
tasked	 with	  watching	  videotapes	  of	  themselves	 playing	  basketball,	  while
attempting	to	 reconstruct	 the	thoughts	 they	 were	having	 in	 each	moment	 that
played	back	to	them.	The	researchers	wanted	them	to	identify	any	moments	when
they	experienced	negative	self-evaluation	and	to	 instead	try	to	 cultivate	 positive
self-statements.	So,	instead	of	thinking	  “I’m	 the	worst.	 I’ve	 never	been	good	at
anything	in	my	life.	 How	did	I	 even	make	it	onto	this	team?”	they	were	to	aim	for
“I	 got	 this.	 I’m	  capable.	I’m	 here	 for	  a	reason.”	 By	 the	 end	 of	 the	 training
program,	all	three	subjects	had	improved	by	at	least	50	percent.
        I	 don’t	know	what	 thoughts	ran	through	Nana’s	mind	in	those	days.	I	wish	I
did.	Because	of	my	career,	I	would	give	 a	lot	to	be	able	to	inhabit	 someone	else’s
body—to	 think	 what	they’re	 thinking,	 feel	 what	 they’re	feeling.	 For	 a	copy	 of
Nana’s	thoughts,	from	birth	to	death,	bound	in	book	form,	 I	would	give	absolutely
anything.	Everything.	 But	 since	 accessing	his	mind	 has	never	been	 possible,	I
resort	to	speculating,	assuming,	feeling—modes	of	logic	with	 which	 I	have	never

92
been	entirely	  comfortable.	 My	  guess	is	 that	 it	 wasn’t	 just	  Nana’s	body	 that
couldn’t	sit	 still.	 He	 had	 a	mind	 that	 was	always	thrumming.	  He	was	curious,
intense,	often	quiet,	 and	when	 he	asked	a	question	there	were	 a	hundred	more
lurking	 behind	it.	 This	 constant	striving	for	 exactness,	the	right	 position	for	 his
legs,	the	right	 thing	to	 say,	was	what	made	him	 someone	who	could	 shoot	free
throws	for	 hours	on	end,	 but	it	 also	made	him	 someone	who	had	a	harder	time
changing	the	narrative—getting	from	 a	negative	self-statement	to	a	positive	 one.
When	he	said,	“I	don’t	give	a	fuck	 what	he	thinks,”	he	said	it	in	 such	a	way	that	it
was	abundantly	clear	to	 me	 that	this	 was	precisely	 what	he	 cared	most	deeply
about.	And	because	Nana	cared	deeply,	thought	deeply,	I	imagine	that	these	were
the	kinds	of	negative	statements	he	would	reconstruct	if	he	were	to	have	watched
a	video	of	 himself	 playing	 basketball	or	simply	 living	 his	 life.	 It	 didn’t	 hurt	his
game	any,	but	it	hurt	him	in	other	ways.
        Maybe	it	 would	have	helped	if	we	were	the	kind	 of	family	 who	talked	about
our	feelings,	who	indulged	in	 an	“I	 love	you,”	a	little	 aburofo	 nkwaseasԑm,	every
now	and	again.	Instead,	I	never	told	 Nana	how	proud	I	 was	of	him,	 how	much	 I
loved	seeing	him	on	the	basketball	court.	On	the	game	days	when	our	mother	was
at	work,	I	 would	walk	 to	Nana’s	high	school	to	watch	him	play,	 and	then	I	would
wait	for	  him	 to	finish	  talking	 to	the	 other	players	 and	come	out	 of	 the	locker
room	so	that	he	and	I	could	walk	back	home	together.	“Good	job,	 Nana,”	I	would
say	when	he	finally	 came	out	 in	a	fog	 of	 Axe	 body	spray.	Nana’s	coach	always
left	as	soon	as	the	final	whistle	blew,	 so	the	only	adult	who	would	 still	 be	around
was	the	night	 janitor,	  a	man	 whom	 both	Nana	 and	I	 avoided	 because	his	job
always	made	us	think	about	our	father.
        “Y’all	 sure	don’t	act	like	any	siblings	I’ve	ever	seen,”	the	janitor	said	that	one
night.	“I	  mean,	‘Good	 job,	 Nana,’	 like	 he’s	your	 employee	or	 your	 student	or
something.	You	should	be	giving	him	a	hug.”
        “Come	on,	man,”	 Nana	said.
        “I’m	  serious,	y’all	act	 like	 you	don’t	 hardly	 know	each	other.	 Go	on,	 give
your	sister	a	hug,”	he	said.
        “Nah,	 man,	 we’re	good,”	 Nana	said.	He	 started	walking	 toward	 the	 door.
“Let’s	go,	Gifty,”	 he	said,	but	I	was	still	standing	there,	looking	at	the	janitor,	 who
was	giving	me	a	kids-these-days	kind	of	head	shake.
        “Gifty!”	  Nana	shouted	without	turning,	and	I	ran	to	catch	up.
        I’d	left	 our	house	when	it	was	still	light	out,	but	by	 the	time	the	two	of	us	got
outside	it	was	a	hot	 and	humid	night.	 Fireflies	 flashed	their	 greetings	all	around

93
us.	Nana’s	long	strides	meant	I	had	to	hustle	to	keep	up	with	 him,	a	half-shuffle,
half-jog	that	I	 had	perfected	over	the	years.
        “Do	 you	think	it’s	weird	 we	don’t	hug?”	I	asked.
        Nana	 ignored	me	 and	quickened	 his	pace.	These	were	 the	Nana-ignores-
everybody	days,	when	 my	 mother	and	 I	 would	 steal	commiserating	 glances	at
each	other	after	one	of	his	moody	 groans.	To	Nana,	my	mother	would	 say,	“You
think	you	 and	me	are	size?	Fix	your	face.”	 To	me	she	would	say,	“This	 too	shall
pass.”
        We	lived	 about	a	mile	and	a	half	away	from	 the	school,	an	easy	walk	by	our
mother’s	standards,	but	 one	we	 dreaded.	Sidewalks	 in	 Huntsville	 were	 mostly
decorative.	People	drove	their	SUVs	to	grocery	stores	two	blocks	away,	their	 air-
conditioning	 on	 full	 blast.	 The	 only	 people	who	 walked	 were	 people	like	  us,
people	who	 had	to	 walk.	  Because	they	had	 one	car,	 one	parent	 who	 worked
double	 shifts	  even	 on	  game	 days.	 Because	 walking	  was	 free	  and	 public
transportation	was	either	nonexistent	or	unreliable.	I	 hated	the	honking,	the	 slurs
yelled	out	through	rolled-down	 windows.	Once,	while	I	 was	walking	by	myself,	 a
man	in	a	pickup	 truck	 had	driven	slowly	 next	to	 me,	staring	at	me	so	hungrily	 I
grew	afraid	and	ducked	into	 the	library,	 hid	 among	the	books	until	I	 was	certain
he	hadn’t	followed	me.	But	I	liked	 walking	with	 Nana	on	those	spring	nights	when
the	weather	was	just	starting	its	quick	turn	 from	 pleasant	to	oppressive,	when	the
cicadas’	songs	gave	way	to	those	of	the	katydids.	I	loved	Alabama	in	the	evenings,
when	everything	got	still	 and	lazy	 and	beautiful,	 when	the	sky	felt	 full,	  fat	with
bugs.
        Nana	and	I	 turned	onto	 our	street.	One	 of	the	 streetlamps	was	out,	and	so
there	was	a	minute-long	stretch	of	near	darkness.	Nana	stopped	walking.	He	said,
“Do	you	want	a	hug?”
        My	 eyes	were	still	 adjusting	 to	that	 patch	of	 dark.	I	 couldn’t	 see	his	face,
couldn’t	tell	 if	  he	was	serious	or	 just	 making	 fun	 of	 me,	 but	I	 considered	the
question	carefully	anyway.	“No,	not	really,”	 I	said.
        Nana	started	laughing.	He	walked	those	last	couple	of	blocks	unhurriedly,	at
my	pace	so	that	I	could	walk	beside	him.

94
                                                        23





I	dreaded	going	back	to	my	apartment	and	finding,	always	finding,	that	little	had
changed,	and	so	I	started	spending	more	and	more	time	in	my	lab.	I	thought	of	it
as	“communing	with	the	lab	mice,”	but	there	was	hardly	anything	interesting,	let
alone	spiritual,	about	my	 humdrum	days	and	 long	afternoons.	Most	 of	 my
experiments	didn’t	even	require	me	to	do	much	other	than	check	in	on	them	once
a	day	to	make	sure	no	major	mishaps	had	occurred,	so	I	mostly	just	sat	in	my
frigid	office,	staring,	shivering,	at	my	blank	Word	document,	trying	to	conjure	up
the	motivation	to	write	 my	paper.	It	was	boring,	but	 I	preferred	this	familiar
boredom	to	the	kind	I	found	at	home.	There,	boredom	was	paired	with	the	hope
of	its	relief,	and	so	it	took	on	a	more	menacing	tint.
        In	the	lab,	at	least,	I	had	Han.	He	was	using	brain-mapping	tools	to	observe
mouse	behaviors,	and	he	was	the	only	person	I	knew	who	spent	more	time	in	the
lab	than	I	did.
        “Are	you	sleeping	here	now?”	I	asked	Han	one	day	when	he	walked	in	with
a	toothbrush	case.	“Don’t	you	ever	worry	you’re	going	to	die	here	and	no	one	will
find	your	body	for	days?”
        Han	shrugged,	pushed	up	his	glasses.	“That	Nobel	Prize	isn’t	going	to	win
itself,	Gifty,”	he	said.	“Besides,	you’d	find	me.”
        “We	have	got	to	get	out	more,”	I	said,	and	then	I	sneezed.	The	problem	with
spending	so	much	time	at	the	lab	around	my	mice	was	that	I	was	allergic	to	them.
A	common	allergy	in	my	field.	Years	of	coming	into	contact	with	their	dander,
urine,	saliva,	had	left	my	immune	system	battle-weary	and	weakened.	While	most
people’s	symptoms	included	the	regular	itchy	eyes/runny	nose	combination,	I	had
the	particular	pleasure	of	bursting	into	a	bloom	of	itchy	rashes	anytime	I	so	much
as	touched	my	skin	without	washing	my	hands.	Once	the	rash	had	even	appeared
on	my	eyelid.
        “Stop	scratching,”	Raymond	said	whenever	I	absentmindedly	reached	for
the	ever-present	patch	on	my	upper	back	or	underneath	my	breasts.	We	had	been

95
together	for	 a	couple	 of	 months,	and	though	 some	of	 the	shine	had	 come	off,
there	was	still	nothing	I	 loved	more	than	watching	him	 move	through	the	kitchen
with	 such	grace—flicking	 salt,	 chopping	peppers,	licking	 sauce	from	 the	tip	 of
his	index	finger.	 That	 morning,	I	 was	sitting	 on	a	stool	in	 his	kitchen,	 watching
him	 slowly	 stir	 his	scrambled	 eggs,	the	movement	 of	 his	 wrist	 so	hypnotic,	 I
hadn’t	noticed	what	I	was	doing	to	my	own	body.
        I	 had	asked	Raymond	to	warn	me	if	he	caught	me	scratching,	but	that	didn’t
stop	me	from	 being	incredibly	 annoyed	with	him	 whenever	he	did.	 Don’t	tell	me
what	to	do.	It’s	my	body,	my	mind	would	scream	at	him,	but	my	mouth	would	say,
“Thank	you.”
        “Maybe	 you	 should	 see	a	doctor,”	 he	 said	one	day	 after	 he	watched	 me
swallow	my	breakfast	of	Benadryl	and	orange	juice.
        “I	 don’t	need	to	see	a	doctor.	They’ll	just	tell	 me	what	I	already	know.	Wear
gloves,	wash	my	hands,	blah	blah	blah.”
        “Blah	 blah	 blah?	You’ve	been	clawing	 your	 legs	in	 your	sleep.”	 Raymond
was	eating	a	proper	breakfast—eggs	with	toast,	coffee.	He	offered	me	a	bite,	 but
I	was	always	running	late	 in	those	days.	No	 time	to	 eat,	no	time	 to	waste.	“You
know,	 for	 someone	in	 the	 med	school,	 you’re	really	 funny	  about	doctors	 and
medicine,”	he	said.
        He	was	referring	to	 the	time,	a	few	months	before,	when	a	particularly	nasty
case	of	strep	 throat	had	 led	a	 doctor	at	 the	urgent	 care	clinic	 to	 prescribe	 me
hydrocodone	in	addition	 to	the	 usual	antibiotics.	Raymond	had	gone	with	 me	to
pick	up	 the	medicine	 from	 the	pharmacy,	but	 when	we	 got	home	I	 flushed	 the
painkillers	down	the	toilet.
        Now,	  I	  said,	 “Most	  people’s	immune	  systems	are	 highly	  capable	 and
efficient.	 Overprescription	is	a	huge	problem	in	this	 country,	and	if	we	don’t	 take
charge	of	 our	own	 health,	 we’re	susceptible	to	 all	 kinds	of	  manipulation	 from
pharmaceutical	companies	who	profit	off	 of	keeping	us	ill	and—”
        Raymond	 threw	 his	 hands	up	in	  surrender.	“I’m	  just	 saying,	if	  a	doctor
prescribes	me	the	good	stuff,	I’m	taking	it.”
        The	good	 stuff.	 I	didn’t	 say	anything	to	Raymond.	I	 just	 walked	out	of	 the
apartment,	got	in	my	car,	and	drove	to	the	lab,	my	skin	screaming,	weeping.


                                                              —

I	had	grown	 more	 careful	about	 how	I	 handled	the	mice	 after	 my	 first	 year	of

96
graduate	school.	I	washed	my	hands	more	often.	I	never	touched	my	eyes.	It	was
rare	for	 me	 to	 get	reactions	as	serious	 as	the	ones	I	 used	to	 get	back	 when	 I
thought	I	was	invincible,	but	 still,	spending	hours	there	communing	with	the	mice
left	me	a	little	worse	for	 wear	by	the	time	I	finished	 up	each	day.
        Staying	in	the	lab	for	 that	long	worked	on	my	mind	 as	well.	The	slowness	of
this	work,	  the	way	 it	 takes	 forever	 to	 register	 even	the	 tiniest	 of	 changes,	it
sometimes	left	me	asking	What’s	the	point?
        What’s	the	point?	became	a	refrain	 for	  me	as	I	 went	through	the	 motions.
One	of	my	mice	in	 particular	brought	those	words	out	every	time	I	 observed	him.
He	 was	hopelessly	addicted	 to	 Ensure,	 pressing	the	 lever	 so	 often	 that	 he’d
developed	a	psychosomatic	limp	 in	anticipation	 of	 the	 random	shocks.	Still,	 he
soldiered	on,	hobbling	 to	that	 lever	to	 press	and	press	and	press	again.	Soon	he
would	be	one	of	 the	mice	 I	 used	in	optogenetics,	but	not	 before	I	 watched	him
repeat	his	doomed	actions	with	that	 beautifully	 pure,	deluded	hope	of	 an	addict,
the	hope	that	says,	This	time	will	be	different.	This	time	I’ll	make	it	out	okay.
        “What’s	 the	point	 of	 all	of	 this?”	is	 a	question	that	separates	humans	from
other	 animals.	 Our	 curiosity	  around	 this	 issue	has	 sparked	 everything	 from
science	to	literature	to	philosophy	to	religion.	 When	the	answer	to	this	question	is
“Because	God	deemed	it	so,”	we	might	feel	comforted.	 But	what	if	 the	answer	to
this	question	is	“I	don’t	know,”	 or	worse	still,	“Nothing”?

97
                                                            24





According	to	a	2015	study	by	T.	M.	Luhrmann,	 R.	Padmavati,	H.	Tharoor,	and	A.
Osei,	schizophrenics	 in	  India	 and	 Ghana	 hear	voices	 that	 are	 kinder,	  more
benevolent	than	the	 voices	 heard	by	 schizophrenics	in	 America.	 In	 the	 study,
researchers	interviewed	 schizophrenics	 living	  in	 and	 around	 Chennai,	 India;
Accra,	Ghana;	and	San	Mateo,	California.	What	they	found	 was	that	many	of	the
participants	in	Chennai	and	Accra	 described	their	experiences	with	the	voices	as
positive	 ones.	They	 also	 recognized	the	 voices	 as	 human	voices,	 those	 of	 a
neighbor	or	a	sibling.	 By	contrast,	none	of	 the	San	Mateo	participants	 described
positive	 experiences	with	 their	 voices.	 Instead,	they	 described	 experiences	of
being	bombarded	by	harsh,	hate-filled	voices,	by	violence,	intrusion.
        “Look,	 a	crazy	person,”	my	 aunt	said	to	me	that	day	in	 Kumasi,	as	casually
as	if	she	were	pointing	 out	the	weather.	The	 sea	of	people	in	Kejetia	 didn’t	 part
for	him,	 didn’t	 back	away	in	fear.	If	 his	 presence	was	weather,	it	was	a	cloud	on
an	otherwise	clear	day.	It	wasn’t	a	tornado;	it	wasn’t	even	a	storm.


                                                              —

My	 mom	 would	 often	 tell	 me	and	Nana	 about	a	 ghost	that	 used	to	haunt	 her
cousin’s	apartment	in	those	early	days	of	her	living	in	the	United	States.
        “I	 would	turn	 the	light	off	 and	he	would	turn	it	 back	on.	He	would	move	the
dishes	around	and	shake	the	room.	Sometimes	I	could	feel	him	touching	my	back
and	his	hand	felt	like	a	broom	brushing	my	skin.”
        Nana	and	I	 laughed	at	her.	“Ghosts	aren’t	real,”	 we	said,	and	she	chided	us
for	becoming	too	American,	 by	which	she	meant	we	didn’t	believe	in	anything.
        “You	 don’t	think	ghosts	are	real,	but	just	wait	until	 you	see	one.”


                                                              —

98
The	ghost	my	 mother	 saw	came	 around	only	 when	her	 cousin	was	 out	of	  the
apartment,	which	was	fairly	often,	as	she	was	a	full-time	student	who	also	worked
part-time	 at	a	 Chick-fil-A.	   My	 mother	 had	been	struggling	 to	find	  a	job.	 She
spent	most	of	 those	days	 at	home	alone	 with	 baby	Nana.	 She	was	bored.	 She
missed	the	Chin	Chin	Man	and	ran	up	her	cousin’s	phone	bill	making	calls	to	him,
until	her	cousin	threatened	to	kick	 her	out.	Her	house	rules:	don’t	cost	me	money
and	don’t	have	any	more	babies.	My	mother	stopped	phoning	Ghana,	leaving	her
sex	life	 an	ocean	away.	This	 was	around	the	 time	she	started	seeing	the	 ghost.
Whenever	she	told	 the	two	 of	 us	stories	about	 the	ghost,	she	spoke	about	 him
fondly.	 Though	 he	frustrated	  her	with	  his	 little	 tricks,	  she	liked	 that	 broom-
brushed	feeling	on	her	back;	she	liked	the	company.


                                                              —

I	 read	 the	 Luhrmann	  study	 the	 day	 it	  came	 out	 in	  the	 British	 Journal	 of
Psychiatry,	and	 I	  couldn’t	 stop	 thinking	  about	 it.	  What	 struck	  me	 was	 the
relational	quality	 between	the	 Ghanaian	and	Indian	 participants	 and	the	 voices
they	heard.	In	 Chennai	they	 were	the	 voices	of	 family;	  in	 Accra,	the	 voice	 of
God.	Maybe	 the	participants	 accepted	the	experiences	as	positive	because	they
understood	these	voices	as	real—a	real	and	living	god,	kith	and	kin.


                                                              —

My	mom	 had	been	staying	with	me	for	about	a	week	and	a	half	when	it	 occurred
to	me	that	there	was	something	more	I	 could	be	doing.	Before	 I	 left	for	 work	 in
the	morning,	when	I	 brought	her	a	bowl	of	 soup	and	a	glass	of	water,	I	would	 sit
with	 her	for	  a	while	 and	brush	 my	 hand	along	whatever	 portion	 of	 skin	 went
uncovered	by	the	 blanket.	If	  I	was	 feeling	bold,	 I’d	 pull	 the	blanket	 down	just
slightly	so	that	I	 could	rub	her	 back,	I’d	squeeze	her	hand,	and	sometimes,	a	few
precious	times,	she	would	squeeze	my	hand	back.
        “Look	 at	you	 becoming	soft	like	 an	American,”	 she	said	one	day.	Her	back
was	turned	to	 me	 and	I	 had	just	 finished	 pulling	  the	covers	up	 over	 her	bare
shoulders.	Mockery	was	her	preferred	 way	of	 displaying	affection,	 a	sign	of	 her
old	self	 surfacing.	I	 felt	 like	 I	 was	finding	  a	single	tooth	 of	 a	titanosaur	fossil,
excited	but	overwhelmed	by	the	bigger	bones	that	were	yet	buried.
        “Me?	 Soft?”	 I	said	with	 a	little	 laugh,	but	my	voice	 mocked	her	back,	said,
“You,	you’re	the	soft	one.”

99
        My	 mother	 turned	 with	 great	effort	  so	that	she	was	 facing	 me.	Her	 eyes
narrowed	for	a	second	and	I	braced	myself,	 but	then	her	face	softened;	she	even
smiled	a	little.	“You	 work	too	much.”
        “I	 learned	that	from	you,”	 I	said.
        “Well,”	  she	said.
        “Do	 you	 want	to	come	to	 the	lab	 sometime?	You	could	 see	what	I	do.	 It’s
boring	usually,	but	I’ll	do	a	surgery	the	day	you	come	so	it’ll	be	interesting.”
        “Maybe,”	 she	said,	and	that	 was	enough	for	me.	 I	reached	out	my	 hand	to
hers.	I	squeezed,	but	this	was	the	last	bone	I	would	find	 today,	maybe	for	 weeks
longer.	She	left	her	hand	limp.

100
                                                        25





Before	my	mother	came	to	stay	with	me,	I	realized	that	I	no	longer	had	a	Bible.	I
knew	she	was	in	bad	shape	and	probably	wouldn’t	notice,	but	it	nagged	at	me	to
think	of	her	reaching	for	one	and	not	being	able	to	find	it.	I	went	to	the	campus
bookstore	and	purchased	a	New	King	James	Version	with	the	same	amount	of
embarrassment	and	fear	of	being	caught	that	one	might	have	when	purchasing	a
pregnancy	test.	No	one	batted	an	eye.
        At	first,	 I	kept	 the	Bible	on	the	nightstand,	where	my	mother	had	always
kept	our	Bibles,	but,	as	far	as	I	could	tell,	she	never	touched	it.	It	rested	on	that
nightstand	in	the	same	position,	day	in,	day	out,	gathering	dust.	After	a	while,
when	I	came	in	to	sit	with	 her,	I	would	pick	 it	up	 and	start	to	flip	through	it,
reading	passages	here	and	there,	quizzing	myself	to	see	whether	or	not	I	could
remember	all	of	those	hundreds	of	Bible	verses	I	had	committed	to	memory	over
the	years.	In	college,	whenever	I	struggled	to	remember	all	of	the	proteins	and
nucleic	acids	I	needed	to	know	intimately	for	my	major,	I	would	think	about	the
surfeit	of	 Bible	verse	knowledge	taking	up	space	in	my	brain	and	wish	that	I
could	empty	it	all	out	to	make	room	for	other	things.	People	would	pay	a	lot	of
money	to	someone	who	could	turn	the	brain	into	a	sieve,	draining	out	all	of	that
now-useless	knowledge—the	exact	way	your	ex	liked	to	be	kissed,	the	street
names	of	the	places	you	no	longer	live—leaving	only	the	essential,	the	immediate.
There	are	so	many	things	I	wish	I	could	forget,	but	maybe	“forget”	isn’t	quite
right.	There	are	so	many	things	I	wish	I	never	knew.
        The	thing	is,	we	don’t	need	to	change	our	brains	at	all.	Time	does	so	much
of	the	emptying	for	us.	Live	long	enough	and	you’ll	forget	almost	everything	you
thought	you’d	always	remember.	I	read	the	Bible	as	if	for	the	first	time.	I	read	at
random,	the	rich	and	grandiose	storytelling	of	the	Old	Testament,	the	intimate
love	letters	of	the	Gospels,	and	I	enjoyed	it	in	a	way	that	I	hadn’t	when	I	was	a
child,	when	I	had	such	a	hawkish	approach	to	memorizing	Scripture	that	I	almost
never	took	the	time	to	think	about	what	I	was	reading,	let	alone	savor	the	words.

101
While	reading	from	 1	 Corinthians,	I	found	 myself	 moved	by	the	language.	“This
is	actually	quite	beautiful,”	 I	said	to	myself,	to	my	mother,	to	no	one.


                                                              —

Here’s	a	verse	from	 the	 book	of	 John:	 In	the	beginning	was	the	 Word,	and	 the
Word	 was	with	 God,	 and	the	 Word	 was	God.	 I	 wrote	 about	this	 verse	in	 my
childhood	journal.	 I	 wrote	about	how	 writing	 itself	 made	me	feel	 closer	to	God
and	how	my	 journal	 keeping	 was	a	particularly	  holy	 act,	given	 that	it	 was	the
Word	that	 was	with	God,	 that	was	God.	 In	those	days	my	journal	 was	my	 most
prized	possession	and	I	took	my	writing	 very	 seriously.	I	 took	words	seriously;	I
felt	 like	 those	opening	words	 of	 John’s	were	written	 just	 for	  me.	I	 thought	 of
myself	as	a	lost	apostle,	my	journal	as	a	new	book	of	the	Bible.	I	was	young	when
I	wrote	that	 entry,	maybe	seven	or	eight,	and	I	was	so	very	smug	about	it.	 Proud
of	how	 well	 it	was	written.	 I	 was	almost	tempted	to	 show	it	 to	my	 family	 or	 to
Pastor	John.
        So	it	 was	a	bit	of	a	shock,	years	later,	when	P.T.	delivered	a	sermon,	one	of
his	few	  memorable	ones,	in	  which	 he	 told	 us	all	 that	 the	 word	 “Word”	  was
translated	from	the	Greek	word	Logos,	which	didn’t	really	 mean	“word”	at	all,	but
rather	something	closer	to	 “plea”	 or	even	“premise.”	 It	 was	a	small	betrayal	 for
my	little	  apostle’s	heart	to	 find	 out	 that	 I	 had	gotten	my	 journal	 entry	 wrong.
Worse	still,	 I	 felt	 then,	was	the	 betrayal	of	 language	in	 translation.	Why	 didn’t
English	have	a	 better	word	 than	“Word”	  if	  “Word”	  was	not	precise	 enough?	I
started	to	approach	my	Bible	with	suspicion.	What	else	had	I	missed?
        Even	 though	I	 felt	 ambushed,	I	 did	like	  the	ambiguity	 that	 the	revelation
introduced	into	 that	verse.	In	 the	beginning	 there	was	an	idea,	a	 premise;	there
was	a	question.


                                                              —

My	junior	 year	of	 college,	I	 went	to	a	church	service	by	 myself.	I	 wore	a	simple
black	dress	and	a	big	floppy	hat	with	which	 I	could	 easily	hide	my	face,	though	a
woman	in	a	 hat	at	a	university	 church	service	 was	a	strange	enough	sight	that	I
probably	drew	more	attention	to	myself,	 not	less.	I	went	to	the	very	last	pew,	and
I	hadn’t	 but	bent	my	 knees	to	 sit	down	 before	I	 felt	 sweat	start	to	 bead	on	my
brow.	The	prodigal	daughter	returns.
        The	 reverend	that	day	 was	a	woman,	 a	professor	in	 the	 Harvard	Divinity

102
School	whose	name	I’ve	forgotten	now.	She	preached	on	literalism	in	 the	church
and	she	began	the	sermon	by	asking	the	congregation	to	ponder	this	question:	“If
the	Bible	is	the	infallible	 word	of	God,	 must	we	approach	it	literally?”
        When	 I	 was	a	 child,	 I	 would	 have	 said	yes,	emphatically	 and	 without	 a
moment’s	thought.	What	I	 loved	best	about	the	Bible,	 particularly	 the	outlandish
moments	in	the	Old	 Testament,	was	that	thinking	about	it	 literally	 made	me	feel
the	strangeness	and	dynamism	of	the	world.	I	can’t	tell	you	how	much	sleep	I	lost
over	Jonah	and	that	whale.	I	used	to	pull	my	 covers	up	all	the	way	over	my	 head
and	shimmy	down	into	the	dark,	breath-damp	cavern	it	created,	and	I	would	think
of	Jonah	on	that	 ship	to	 Tarshish	and	I	 would	think	 of	 the	punitive,	 awful	 God
who	ordered	him	thrown	 overboard	to	be	swallowed	whole	by	a	giant	fish.	 And	I
would	feel	my	breath	shorten	in	that	confined	 space	and	I	would	be	amazed,	truly
amazed	by	God,	by	Jonah,	by	the	whale.	The	fact	that	these	sorts	of	things	didn’t
ever	seem	to	happen	in	the	 present	did	nothing	 to	keep	 me	from	 believing	 that
they	happened	 in	 the	 age	of	  the	 Bible,	 when	 everything	 was	 weighted	with
import.	 When	 you’re	 that	 young,	 time	 already	 seems	to	 crawl.	 The	 distance
between	ages	four	and	five	is	 forever.	The	 distance	between	the	present	and	the
biblical	 past	is	unfathomable.	If	 time	 was	real,	then	anything	at	all	 could	be	real
too.
        The	 reverend’s	sermon	that	 day	was	 beautiful.	 She	approached	the	Bible
with	 extraordinary	  acuity,	  and	 her	 interpretation	  of	  it	  was	 so	 humane,	 so
thoughtful,	that	 I	became	ashamed	of	the	fact	 that	I	 very	rarely	associated	those
two	things	with	religion.	 My	 entire	life	 would	have	been	different	if	 I’d	 grown	up
in	this	woman’s	church	instead	of	in	 a	church	that	seemed	to	shun	intellectualism
as	a	trap	of	 the	 secular	world,	 designed	to	undermine	 one’s	faith.	 Even	Nana’s
hypothetical	question	about	villagers	in	Africa	 had	been	treated	as	a	threat	instead
of	as	an	 opportunity.	 The	P.T.	 who	had	revealed	that	 in	 the	beginning	 was	the
Logos,	the	idea,	the	question,	was	the	same	P.T.	who	had	refused	to	think	 about
whether	or	not	those	hypothetical	villagers	could	be	saved	and	in	so	doing	refused
the	premise,	the	question	itself.
        When	 Pastor	John	preached	against	the	ways	of	the	 world,	 he	was	talking
about	drugs	and	alcohol	and	sex,	yes,	but	he	was	also	asking	our	church	to	protect
itself	against	a	kind	 of	progressivism	that	for	 years	now	had	been	encroaching.	I
don’t	mean	progressive	in	a	political	sense,	though	that	was	certainly	a	part	of	it.	I
mean	progress	in	the	sense	of	the	natural	way	 in	which	 learning	something	new
requires	getting	rid	of	something	old,	like	 how	discovering	that	the	world	is	round
means	that	you	can	no	longer	hang	on	to	the	idea	that	you	might	one	day	fall	 off

103
the	edge	of	the	Earth.	And	now	that	you	have	learned	that	something	you	thought
was	true	was	never	true	at	all,	every	idea	that	you	hold	firm	 comes	into	question.
If	 the	Earth	is	 round,	then	is	God	 real?	Literalism	 is	helpful	 in	 the	fight	 against
change.
        But	 while	it	 was	easy	to	be	literal	about	some	teachings	of	the	Bible,	it	 was
much	harder	 to	 be	literal	  about	others.	 How,	 for	 instance,	 could	 Pastor	John
preach	literally	about	the	sins	of	 the	flesh	when	his	own	daughter	got	pregnant	at
seventeen?	It’s	almost	too	cliché	to	be	 believable,	but	it	 happened.	Mary,	as	she
was	ironically	   named,	 tried	  to	 hide	  her	 condition	  for	  months	  with	  baggy
sweatshirts	and	fake	  colds,	but	 it	  wasn’t	long	 before	  the	entire	 congregation
caught	on.	And	soon	Pastor	John’s	sermons	about	the	sins	of	the	flesh	took	 on	a
different	 weight.	 Instead	of	 a	punitive	  God,	we	 were	told	 of	 a	forgiving	  God.
Instead	of	 a	judgmental	 church,	 we	 were	encouraged	to	 be	an	 open	one.	The
Bible	did	not	change,	but	the	passages	he	chose	did;	the	way	that	he	preached	did
as	well.	By	the	time	Mary’s	due	date	rolled	around,	she	and	the	baby’s	father	were
married	and	all	was	forgiven,	but	 I	never	forgot.	 We	read	the	Bible	how	we	 want
to	read	it.	It	doesn’t	change,	but	we	do.


                                                              —

I	became	deeply	 interested	in	 the	 idea	of	 Logos	 after	 P.T.’s	sermon.	I	 started
writing	in	 my	journal	 more	often,	but	 the	nature	of	my	entries	changed.	Whereas
before,	they	were	simply	recordings	of	my	day	and	the	things	I	wanted	God	to	do,
after,	they	 became	lists	of	 all	 the	questions	that	I	 had,	all	 the	things	that	 didn’t
quite	make	sense	to	me.
        I	 also	started	paying	more	attention	to	my	mother.	When	she	spoke	Fante	on
the	phone	with	her	 friends,	she	became	like	 a	girl	 again,	giggling	and	gossiping.
When	she	spoke	Twi	 to	me,	she	was	her	mother-self,	 stern	and	scary,	warm.	 In
English,	she	was	meek.	She	stumbled	and	was	embarrassed,	and	so	to	hide	it	she
demurred.	Here’s	a	journal	entry	from	around	that	time:


        Dear	God,
        The	Black	Mamba	took	me	and	Buzz	out	to	eat	today.	The	waitress
        came	over	and	asked	what	we	wanted	to	drink	and	TBM	said	water,	but
        the	waitress	couldn’t	hear	her	and	asked	her	to	repeat	herself	but	she
        didn’t	and	so	Buzz	answered	for	her.	Maybe	she	thought	the	waitress
        didn’t	understand	her?	But	she	was	talking	so	quietly	it	was	like	she	was

104
        talking	to	herself.


        There	were	other	moments	like	this,	where	the	woman	whom	I	thought	of	 in
my	head	as	fearsome	shrank	down	 to	someone	I	could	 hardly	 recognize.	And	 I
don’t	think	she	did	 this	because	she	wanted	to.	I	think,	rather,	that	she	just	never
figured	out	how	to	translate	who	she	really	was	into	this	new	language.

105
                                                            26





Mary,	the	pastor’s	pregnant	daughter,	was	the	subject	of	gossip	around	our	small
evangelical	community	for	 nine	months	and	beyond.	As	her	belly	 swelled,	so	did
the	rumors.	That	 she	had	conceived	the	baby	in	 the	First	 Assemblies’	baptismal
one	Sunday	evening	 after	 hours.	 That	the	 baby	 was	fathered	 by	 a	 NASCAR
driver	 whose	mother	 was	 a	member	 of	  our	 congregation.	When	 Pastor	 John
pulled	Mary	out	of	 school	to	be	homeschooled	by	her	mother,	we	all	assumed	that
the	school	had	something	to	do	with	the	pregnancy.	Maybe	it	had	happened	there.
Throughout	all	 of	 this	 conjecture,	Mary	 didn’t	 say	a	 word.	 When	the	 father,	 a
sweet,	shy	boy	from	 a	neighboring	 church,	 finally	 revealed	himself,	 the	two	 of
them,	child	 bride	and	bridegroom,	 were	married	 before	her	third	 trimester.	 The
whisperings	slowed	but	they	didn’t	stop.
        The	 problem	 was	that	it	 wasn’t	just	 Mary	 who	 had	gotten	 pregnant.	That
year,	 four	  other	 fourteen-	  to	 sixteen-year-old	  girls	 from	  our	  church	 made
revelations	of	their	 own.	Not	 to	mention	 the	girls	 from	 churches	around	town.	I
was	twelve.	The	most	sex	ed	I	 had	gotten	was	earlier	that	 year	in	middle	 school
when	a	woman	from	  a	Baptist	church	 in	 Madison	had	visited	 our	 science	class
two	days	in	a	row	to	tell	 us	that	our	bodies	were	temples	that	shouldn’t	allow	just
anyone	in.	Then	she	assigned	homework,	an	essay	with	the	prompt	“Write	 about
why	patience	is	a	virtue.”	  All	 of	 the	language	was	vague	and	metaphorical.	Our
holy	temples;	our	silver	 boxes;	our	special	gifts.	 I	don’t	 think	she	said	the	words
“penis”	or	 “vagina”	once.	I	 left	with	 no	idea	what	sex	actually	 was.	But	sin	I	was
familiar	 with,	 and	as	I	watched	all	the	older	 girls	carry	 their	sins	on	their	 bellies
for	 the	 entire	  world	 to	  see,	I	 understood	 that	 for	  these	 girls	 to	 be	 young,
unmarried,	pregnant,	meant	that	a	particular	kind	of	 shame	had	descended	on	my
congregation.
        Soon	after	 Melissa,	the	last	of	 the	five	 girls,	announced	her	pregnancy,	my
church	had	an	intervention	of	 sorts.	I	wasn’t	told	where	we	were	going,	but	 I	and
all	the	other	preteen	girls	climbed	into	 the	church	van	and	were	driven	downtown

106
to	an	old	warehouse	building	that	looked	like	it	was	ready	to	be	torn	down.
        There	were	several	other	girls	 already	there.	Most	 of	them	 were	older	than
us;	one	was	visibly	pregnant.	The	room	was	set	up	as	though	for	a	board	meeting,
and	at	the	head	of	 the	table	sat	a	woman	with	 dishwater-blond	 hair.	She	looked
like	someone	who	had	probably	been	pretty	and	popular	only	a	couple	of	decades
before	 but	then	 had	 left	 high	 school,	 where	admiration	  had	come	 easily	 and
plentifully,	 and	had	suffered	in	the	real	world.
        “Come	on	in,	 girls,	grab	a	seat,”	she	said.
        I	 and	my	 fellow	  church	girls	 took	 seats	at	the	end	 of	 the	table.	 “Do	 you
know	what’s	going	on?”	we	whispered	to	 each	other.	The	girls	who	 were	already
there	glared	at	us,	mean	in	their	boredom.
        “How	 many	 of	you	 have	already	had	sex?”	the	woman	asked	once	we	had
settled	in.
        Everyone	looked	around	but	no	one	raised	their	hand,	not	even	the	pregnant
girl.
        “Come	on,	now.	Don’t	 be	shy,”	she	said.
        Slowly	hands	started	to	go	up	all	around	me.	I	made	my	silent	judgments.
        “This	  here	building	 used	 to	be	 a	place	 where	 women	came	 to	kill	  their
babies,	but	God	saw	fit	 to	 turn	it	 around.	He	 laid	it	 on	 my	pastor’s	heart	to	use
this	place	for	good	instead	of	 for	evil,	 and	so	now	we	bring	girls	 like	you	 in	here
to	teach	 y’all	about	 how	 God	wants	 you	to	 wait.	 I’m	 telling	 you	 girls,	 even	if
you’ve	already	had	sex	before,	you	 can	ask	God	to	 forgive.	 You	 can	leave	here
better	than	when	you	came	in.	Amen?”
        For	 the	 next	eight	 hours,	Miss	 Cindy,	 as	she	asked	to	 be	called,	 took	 us
through	her	 course	 on	 abstinence.	She	showed	 us	slideshows	 of	 the	 spotted,
oozing,	stop-sign-red	genitalia	afflicted	 by	 STDs.	She	spoke	about	her	own	teen
pregnancy.	(“I	 love	my	 daughter	and	I	believe	 everything	happens	for	 a	reason,
but	if	 I	could	go	back	and	tell	my	 younger	self	to	keep	her	legs	closed,	I	would.”)
The	only	good	part	about	all	of	this	was	when	we	got	Steak-Out	for	lunch.
        At	 one	point,	 six	 hours	in,	Miss	 Cindy	 said,	“If	  you	and	I	 were	neighbors
and	we	went	into	 a	covenant	agreement	so	that	our	lambs	could	 graze	freely	on
each	other’s	land,	we	would	have	to	seal	that	covenant	by	slaughtering	one	of	our
lambs.	A	 covenant	is	 not	 a	promise.	 It’s	so	 much	more	 than	that.	 A	 covenant
requires	bloodshed.	Remember	that	the	Bible	says	that	marriage	is	a	covenant	and
when	you	 sleep	 with	 your	  husband	on	 your	 wedding	 night	 and	 your	 hymen

107
breaks,	that	blood	is	what	is	sealing	your	covenant.	If	you’ve	already	had	sex	with
other	men,	you’ve	already	made	promises	you	can’t	keep.”
        We	 spent	the	rest	of	our	time	 wide-eyed	with	fear,	 looking	at	the	wreckage
of	this	woman	and	wondering	who,	what,	had	wrecked	her.


                                                              —

I	have	made	 promises	I	 can’t	keep,	but	 it	 took	 me	a	 while	to	 make	 them.	For
years,	Miss	Cindy’s	 words	were	enough	to	 keep	me	 from	 exploring	 the	“secret
world”	 between	my	 legs	 lest	I	 destroy	 my	 imaginary	 marriage	 before	 it	 even
began.	Not	too	long	after	my	eight-hour	 session	in	the	abandoned	abortion	clinic,
I	started	my	period.	 My	mother	 placed	her	hand	on	my	shoulder	and	prayed	that
I’d	 be	a	 good	steward	of	  my	womanhood,	 and	then	 she	handed	me	 a	box	 of
tampons	and	sent	me	on	my	way.
        It’s	 ridiculous	 to	me	 now	to	 think	 about	how	limited	  my	understanding	of
human	anatomy	was	back	then.	I	stared	at	the	tampon	applicator.	I	 put	it	 against
my	outer	labia	and	pushed.	I	watched	the	white	tail	 of	 the	tampon	slip	out	of	 the
applicator	as	both	fell	 to	the	ground.	I	repeated	this	with	 half	of	 the	box	before	 I
gave	up,	decided	it	 was	best	to	 keep	some	things	a	 mystery.	It	 wasn’t	until	 my
freshman	year	in	college,	in	biology	class,	that	I	learned	what	and	where	a	vagina
truly	was.
        In	 class	that	day,	 I	 stared	at	the	 diagram	in	 wonder,	 the	secret	world,	 an
inner	world,	 revealed.	I	 looked	 around	at	my	 classmates	and	could	see	in	their
business-as-usual	faces	that	they	already	knew	all	 of	 this.	Their	 bodies	had	not
been	kept	from	 them.	It	 was	neither	the	 first	 nor	the	last	time	 at	Harvard	 that	I
would	feel	 as	though	I	was	starting	from	 behind,	 trying	to	 make	up	for	 an	early
education	that	 had	 been	 full	  of	  holes.	I	  went	 back	 to	 my	 dorm	  room	 and
tentatively,	furtively	  pulled	out	 a	hand	mirror	  and	examined	myself,	 wondering
all	the	while	how,	if	 I	hadn’t	left	my	 town,	if	 I	hadn’t	continued	my	education,	this
particular	hole,	 the	question	 of	anatomy,	 of	 sex,	would	have	 been	filled.	 I	 was
tired	of	learning	things	the	hard	way.


                                                              —

“Sorry	 for	 being	kind	 of	 a	bitch	 back	 there.	It’s	 just	 weird	to	 hear	people	 talk
about	Jesus	in	a	science	class,	you	know?”
        Anne	 from	 my	 small	 group	had	 caught	up	 with	 me	after	 my	 outburst	 in

108
Integrated	Science.	I	didn’t	bother	telling	her	that	I	hadn’t	mentioned	Jesus	at	all.	I
just	quickened	 my	pace	through	the	 quad,	which	was	eerily	 empty	at	 that	hour.
She	kept	walking	with	me	until	 we	reached	my	building,	and	then	she	stood	there
and	stared	at	me.
        “Do	 you	live	here	too?”	I	asked.
        “No,	 but	I	thought	we	could	hang	out.”
        I	 didn’t	want	 to	hang	out.	I	 wanted	her	to	leave.	I	 wanted	that	class	to	end,
school	to	end,	the	world	to	end,	so	that	everyone	could	forget	about	me	and	what
a	fool	I	had	made	of	myself.	I	looked	 at	Anne	as	if	for	the	first	 time.	Her	 hair	was
piled	up	on	top	of	 her	head	in	a	messy	bun	pierced	through	with	chopsticks	from
the	dining	 hall.	Her	 cheeks	were	red	 from	 walking	 or	 the	weather.	She	looked
tired	and	a	little	mean.	I	let	her	in.
        That	year	the	two	 of	us	became	inseparable.	I	don’t	know	how	 it	happened,
really.	 Anne	 was	a	 senior.	 She	and	 her	group	 of	  many-gendered,	multiracial
friends	made	 me	feel	 like	 maybe	there	 was	a	place	 for	 me	in	 that	 East	Coast
tundra.	Anne	was	funny,	strange,	beautiful,	and	mordant.	 She	didn’t	suffer	 fools,
and	sometimes	I	was	the	fool.
        “It’s	 ridiculous.	 Like	 do	you	have	to	 spend	the	rest	of	your	 life	 flagellating
yourself	for	 all	 the	shit	you	 think	 you’ve	done	wrong	that	 ‘God’	doesn’t	approve
of?”	she	said	one	day	toward	the	middle	of	 our	spring	 semester,	when	the	winter
weather	had	started	 to	relent	 and	 a	few	 flowers	 were	 just	 beginning	 to	break
ground,	stretch	toward	the	 sun.	We	were	sitting	 on	my	 bed	while	 Anne	skipped
class	and	I	waited	for	my	next	one	to	start.	Sometimes	she	would	spend	the	whole
day	in	my	room.	 I’d	finish	 all	 my	classes	and	come	back	to	find	her	curled	up	 in
my	bed,	laptop	 warming	her	stomach	as	she	binge-watched	Sex	and	the	City	for
the	millionth	 time.
        Anne	 always	said	 “God”	 with	 air	 quotes	and	an	 eye	roll.	 Her	 father	 was
Brazilian	and	her	mother	 was	American.	They	 had	met	at	a	Buddhist	meditation
retreat	in	 Bali	 before	 abandoning	religion	 altogether	and	 moving	to	 Oregon	 to
raise	their	 two	children	 godlessly.	Anne	 looked	 at	me	 as	one	might	 look	 at	an
alien	who	had	dropped	 from	 the	sky	and	needed	to	 be	taught	how	to	 assimilate
into	human	life.
        “I	 don’t	flagellate	myself.	I	 don’t	even	believe	in	God	anymore,”	I	said.
        “But	 you’re	 so	rigid	 with	 yourself.	 You	never	 skip	class.	You	 don’t	drink.
You	won’t	even	try	drugs.”
        “That’s	 not	because	of	 my	 religion,”	 I	 said	with	 a	look	 that	 I	 hoped	said,

109
Drop	it.
        “You’re	 weird	about	sex.”
        “I’m	 not	weird	about	sex.”
        “You’re	 a	virgin,	aren’t	you?”
        “Lots	 of	people	are	virgins.”
        Anne	 moved	over	on	 the	bed	so	that	 she	was	facing	me.	She	leaned	in	 so
close	to	me	that	I	could	feel	her	breath	on	my	lips.
        “Have	you	ever	been	kissed?”	she	asked.

110
                                                            27





Basketball	season	started	in	November,	but	 for	 Nana	the	 sport	was	year-round.
He	went	to	basketball	camp	in	the	summers,	played	on	his	school	team	during	the
season,	and	spent	all	year	long	in	 our	 driveway	 or	heading	over	 to	the	 outdoor
courts	in	and	around	Huntsville	so	that	he	could	 play	pickup	games	with	the	kids
there.	 My	  mother	 and	 I	  were	 subjected	 to	 hours	 upon	  hours	 of	 watching
basketball	on	television.	When	Nana	had	friends	over,	all	of	 them	would	 shout	at
the	television	loudly	 and	unintelligibly,	 as	though	the	players	on	the	screen	owed
them	something.	Nana	 joined	 in	 when	others	were	 there,	but	 when	it	 was	just
him,	he	watched	silently	and	with	intense	concentration.	Sometimes,	he	even	took
notes.
        It	 wasn’t	 long	before	 college	 recruiters	 started	showing	 up	to	 his	 games.
Alabama,	Auburn,	 Vanderbilt,	  UNC.	 Nana	played	 well	 regardless	of	 who	 was
watching.	My	 mother	and	I	 made	more	of	an	effort	  to	learn	the	rules	so	that	we
could	better	share	in	his	victories,	but	 even	as	we	tried,	we	knew	it	didn’t	 matter.
Nana	was	the	triumph.	It	 was	only	the	beginning	of	his	 sophomore	year’s	season,
and	he	had	broken	 records	statewide.	All	 the	 practices	and	workouts	 and	away
games	made	it	 easy	for	  Nana	to	 worm	 his	 way	 out	 of	 Wednesday-night	 and
Sunday-morning	services	at	First	 Assemblies.	I	 knew	 it	 hurt	 my	mother	 to	 see
Nana	choosing	ball	 over	 God,	so,	instead	 of	 heading	to	 youth	group,	 I	 started
going	to	“big	church.”	 I	wanted	to	sit	 beside	her,	to	have	her	feel	like	at	least	one
of	her	children	still	 cared	about	what	she	cared	about.
        I	 was	eight,	then	nine.	I	was	bored.	If	I	fell	 asleep,	as	I	often	did,	my	mother
would	pinch	my	arm	and	stage-whisper,	“Pay	attention.”
        I	 don’t	remember	the	sermons	very	well,	but	 I	remember	the	altar	calls	that
came	at	the	end	of	them	every	Sunday.	Pastor	John’s	speech	was	always	the	same.
To	this	day	I	can	recite	it	from	 memory:
        “Now,	  I	 know	 someone	out	 there	 is	 sitting	 with	 a	 heavy	 heart.	I	 know
someone	out	there	is	tired	of	carrying	a	cross.	And	I’m	 telling	you	now,	you	don’t

111
have	to	leave	here	the	same	as	when	you	came	in.	 Amen?	 God’s	got	a	plan	for
you.	Amen?	All	you	have	to	do	is	ask	Jesus	into	your	heart.	He’ll	do	the	rest.”
        Pastor	John	would	say	this,	and	then	the	worship	leader	would	rush	up	to	the
piano	and	start	to	play.
        “Is	 there	anyone	who’d	like	 to	come	 down	to	the	altar	 today?”	Pastor	John
would	ask,	the	music	filling	 up	the	room.	“Is	there	anyone	who’d	like	to	give	their
life	to	Christ?”
        After	 a	few	 months	of	big	 church,	I	noticed	 my	mother	sneaking	glances	at
me	whenever	Pastor	John	made	his	altar	call.	 I	knew	 what	those	glances	meant,
but	I	wasn’t	ready	for	that	long	walk	 down	to	the	altar,	for	the	entire	congregation
to	train	their	eyes	on	me,	praying	that	Jesus	take	my	sins	away.
        I	still	 wanted	my	sins.	I	still	wanted	my	childhood,	 my	freedom	to	fall	 asleep
in	big	 church	with	 little	 consequence.	I	didn’t	 know	 what	would	 become	of	 me
once	I	crossed	the	line	from	sinner	to	saved.


                                                              —

Nana	couldn’t	decide	on	 a	school.	He	would	 often	talk	 through	 his	pro/cons	list
with	 me	while	 our	mother	 was	at	work.	 He	 wanted	to	stay	in	 the	 South	but	he
didn’t	want	to	 feel	like	 he	had	barely	left	 home.	He	wanted	to	go	pro	 eventually,
but	he	also	wanted	to	have	a	good,	normal	college	experience.
        “Maybe	 you	should	call	Daddy	and	see	what	he	thinks,”	I	said.
        Nana	glared	at	me.	The	Chin	Chin	 Man	had	recently	called	to	tell	us	that	he
was	remarrying,	  and	since	 then	 Nana	 had	 stopped	talking	  to	 him.	 It	  hadn’t
occurred	to	either	of	us	that	he	and	my	mother	had	gotten	divorced.	He	was,	until
that	day,	our	long-distance	father,	her	long-distance	husband.	Now	who	would	he
be?
        On	 the	days	when	 he	called,	 which	 were	fewer	 and	further	  between,	my
mother	would	pass	the	phone	to	me	and	I	would	 spend	my	requisite	two	minutes
making	small	talk	about	the	weather	and	school,	until	the	Chin	Chin	Man	asked	if
I	would	put	Nana	on	the	line.
        “He	 has	basketball,”	I	would	say,	as	Nana	stared	at	me,	furiously	shaking	his
head.	After	I	 hung	up	the	phone,	I	 would	wait	 for	our	 mother	to	chastise	me	for
lying	or	Nana	for	refusing	to	 talk,	but	she	never	did.
        She	had	to	work	 the	day	of	Nana’s	game	against	Ridgewood	High.	It	wasn’t
a	big	game.	Ridgewood	was	ranked	second	to	last	in	the	state,	and	everyone	was

112
expecting	an	easy	win	for	Nana’s	team.
        I	 made	a	quick	 snack	for	myself	 and	then	walked	 to	the	game.	The	 stands
were	nearly	 empty	 and	 so	 I	 chose	 a	seat	 in	 the	 middle	 and	 pulled	 out	 my
homework.	Nana	and	his	teammates	did	their	warm-ups,	and	occasionally	he	and
I	would	make	eye	contact	and	shoot	each	other	silly	faces.
        The	first	  half	of	 the	game	went	as	expected.	Ridgewood	was	down	 fifteen
and	Nana’s	team	was	taking	it	pretty	easy,	treating	the	game	like	it	was	practice.	I
finished	my	 math	homework	 right	 around	when	 the	buzzer	rang	for	 halftime.	 I
waved	at	Nana	as	he	and	his	team	went	to	the	locker	room,	and	then	I	picked	 up
my	science	homework.
        I	 was	in	 the	fourth	 grade,	and	our	 science	unit	for	 that	 month	was	on	 the
heart.	For	homework,	 we	were	to	draw	 a	picture	of	 the	human	heart	 with	all	 its
ventricles	and	 valves	and	 pulmonary	 veins.	While	  I	 enjoyed	 science,	I	 was	 a
horrible	artist.	I	 had	brought	along	my	pack	of	colored	pencils	and	my	textbook.	I
spread	them	out	on	the	bleachers	next	to	me	and	began	to	draw,	staring	from	my
blank	 sheet	of	  paper	 to	 the	 example	 heart	 in	 my	  book.	 I	 started	 with	  the
pulmonary	veins,	then	the	inferior	 vena	cava.	I	messed	up	the	right	ventricle	 and
started	to	erase,	just	as	the	second	half	 of	the	 game	kicked	off.	  I	got	 frustrated
with	myself	 easily,	even	in	those	days,	whenever	I	felt	I	wasn’t	getting	something
exactly	right.	  That	frustration	  sometimes	led	 to	 quitting,	 but	 something	about
being	at	Nana’s	game,	watching	him	and	his	teammates	win	so	effortlessly,	made
me	feel	like	I	could	 draw	the	perfect	heart	if	only	I	 stuck	with	it.
        I	 was	staring	 at	my	 heart	when	 I	 heard	a	loud	 shout.	I	 couldn’t	 see	what
happened	at	first,	but	then	I	 spotted	Nana	on	the	ground,	hugging	his	knee	to	his
chest	and	motioning	 toward	 his	 ankle.	I	 rushed	 down	to	 the	 court	 and	paced,
unsure	of	how	to	make	myself	useful.	The	medic	 came	onto	the	court	and	started
asking	Nana	some	questions,	but	I	couldn’t	hear	anything.	Finally,	they	decided	to
take	him	to	the	emergency	room.
        I	rode	with	 him	in	 the	back	of	the	ambulance.	We	weren’t	a	family	who	held
hands,	but	we	were	 a	family	 who	 prayed.	I	 bowed	my	 head	and	whispered	my
prayers	as	Nana	stared	blankly	at	the	ceiling.
        Our	 mother	met	us	at	the	hospital.	I	didn’t	 dare	ask	who	was	watching	Mrs.
Palmer,	but	I	remember	being	as	worried	about	my	mother	being	able	to	keep	her
job	as	I	 was	about	Nana.	He	was	still	in	 pain	but	attempting	 to	be	stoic	about	it.
He	looked	more	annoyed	than	anything	else,	no	doubt	already	thinking	 about	the
games	he	would	have	to	miss,	the	time	he	would	have	to	take	off.

113
        “Nana,”	 the	doctor	said	when	he	came	into	the	room.	“I’m	a	big,	big	fan.	My
wife	 and	I	saw	you	in	 the	game	against	Hoover,	and	you	 were	just	 on	fire.”	 He
looked	 too	 young	 to	 be	 a	 doctor,	 and	 he	 had	 that	 thick,	  slow	 drawl	 some
southerners	have,	as	though	each	word	has	to	wade	through	molasses	before	it	can
leave	the	mouth.	Both	my	mother	and	I	kept	looking	 at	him	with	no	small	amount
of	distrust.
        “Thank	 you,	sir,”	Nana	said.
        “The	  good	 news	 is	  nothing’s	 broken.	 Bad	  news	 is	 you’ve	 torn	  some
ligaments	in	your	ankle.	Now	there’s	not	much	we	can	do	for	that	area,	other	than
have	you	rest	 it	 and	ice	it.	 Should	 heal	up	 on	its	 own.	I’ll	  prescribe	you	 some
OxyContin	 for	 the	 pain	 and	then	 have	you	 follow	 up	 with	 your	 primary	 care
doctor	in	a	few	weeks	to	see	how	it’s	coming	along.	We’ll	get	you	back	out	on	the
court	in	no	time,	all	right?”
        He	 didn’t	wait	 for	 any	of	 us	to	speak.	He	just	 got	up	and	left	 the	room.	 A
nurse	came	in	behind	 him	with	 some	aftercare	 instructions,	and	the	 three	of	 us
made	our	way	to	the	car.	I	don’t	really	remember	much	else	from	that	day.	I	don’t
remember	going	to	the	pharmacy	 to	pick	 up	the	pills.	 I	 don’t	remember	if	 Nana
got	crutches	or	a	brace,	if	 he	spent	the	rest	of	the	day	 sprawled	out	in	our	 living
room	with	 his	foot	elevated,	eating	ice	cream	while	 our	mother	waited	on	him	 as
though	he	were	a	king.	Maybe	all	of	those	things	happened;	maybe	none.	It	was	a
bad	day,	but	the	 nature	of	 its	badness	was	utterly	ordinary,	 just	regular	 old	shit
luck.	Ordinary	 is	how	I’d	always	thought	of	us,	our	foursome	 that	had	turned	into
a	trio.	  Regular,	even	 if	 we	 stuck	 out	 like	 sore	thumbs	 in	 our	 tiny	  corner	of
Alabama.	I	 wish	 now,	though,	 that	I	 could	 remember	every	 detail	of	 that	 day,
because	then	maybe	I	could	 pinpoint	 the	 exact	moment	 we	shifted	 away	from
ordinary.

114
                                                        28





I	was	getting	too	attached	to	the	mouse	with	the	limp.	I	couldn’t	help	feeling	sorry
for	it	every	time	it	hobbled	toward	that	lever,	ready	for	punishment	and	pleasure.
I	watched	its	little	tongue	poke	out,	lapping	up	the	Ensure.	I	watched	it	shake	off
the	foot-shocks,	then	go	back	for	more.
        “Have	you	ever	tried	Ensure?”	I	asked	Han	one	day	at	the	lab.	After	nearly	a
year	of	working	together,	we	had	finally	broken	the	ice.	The	fire-hydrant-red,
telltale	discomfort	of	his	ears	had	become	a	thing	of	the	past.
        He	laughed.	“Do	I	look	like	an	old	lady	or	a	mouse	to	you?”
        “I	think	I’m	going	to	buy	some,”	I	said.
        “You’re	joking.”
        “Aren’t	you	even	a	little	bit	curious?”
        He	shook	his	head,	but	I’d	made	up	my	mind.	I	left	the	lab	and	drove	to	the
nearest	Safeway.	I	bought	two	of	the	original,	one	in	chocolate	and	one	in	butter
pecan	just	for	the	novelty	of	it.	I	had	stopped	coming	to	this	Safeway	because	of
the	cashier	I	wanted	to	sleep	with,	but	I	faced	her	boldly,	Ensure	in	hand.	I	gave
her	a	look	that	I	hoped	said	I’m	trying	to	take	control	of	my	own	health.	For	a	brief
second	I	imagined	her	thinking,	What	a	 strong	woman,	imagined	her	getting
turned	on	by	my	unlikely	but	empowered	choice	of	beverage	and	then	sneaking
me	into	the	storage	room	to	show	me	more.	Instead,	she	didn’t	even	make	eye
contact.
        Afterward,	I	 speeded	all	the	way	back	to	the	lab.	There	were	often	cops
patrolling	this	little	patch	of	road	for	speeders,	but	my	Stanford	Medical	School
bumper	sticker	had	gotten	me	out	of	at	least	one	ticket.	The	policeman	that	day
had	collected	my	license	and	registration,	all	while	making	small	talk.
        “What	do	you	study?”	he	asked.
        “What?”
        “Your	bumper	sticker.	What	kind	of	doctor	are	you?”

115
        I	didn’t	 bother	correcting	him.	Instead	I	said,	“I’m	 a	neurosurgeon.”
        He	 whistled	and	handed	me	back	my	 things.	“You	 must	be	real	 smart,”	he
said.	“You	should	protect	that	brain	of	yours.	Go	slower	next	time.”


                                                              —

Han	started	laughing	the	second	he	saw	me	walk	in	with	the	bottles.
        “You	 sure	I	can’t	tempt	you?”	I	 asked.	“Don’t	you	want	to	know	what	all	 the
fuss	is	about?”
        “You’re	 pretty	 weird,”	 Han	 said,	as	though	this	was	just	 then	occurring	 to
him	for	 the	first	 time,	 and	then	he	shrugged,	resigned	himself	to	my	 strangeness
and	the	experiment.	“You	know	 just	as	well	as	I	do	 that	even	after	we	drink	 this,
we	still	 won’t	 understand	what	the	fuss	 is	about.	We’re	 not	 mice.	We	 can’t	get
addicted	to	this	stuff.”
        He	 was	 right,	 of	  course.	I	  wasn’t	expecting	 to	 get	 high	 from	  drinking
fortified	 chocolate	milk.	 I	 wasn’t	really	expecting	anything	other	 than	a	little	 fun
and,	silly	as	it	was,	a	base	point	from	 which	I	 could	relate	to	 that	limping	 mouse
who	had	caught	my	attention.
        I	 shook	 the	bottle	 of	 chocolate	and	 then	cracked	 it	 open.	I	 gulped	down
some	of	it	and	then	handed	it	to	Han,	who	took	a	couple	of	sips.
        “Not	 bad,”	 he	said,	and	then,	 seeing	the	look	 on	my	face,	 “What’s	 wrong,
Gifty?”
        I	 swallowed	another	sip	of	Ensure.	Han	was	right.	It	wasn’t	bad,	but	it	wasn’t
good	either.	  “My	  brother	 was	 addicted	 to	 opioids,”	  I	 said.	 “He	 died	  of	 an
overdose.”


                                                              —

The	first	 time	 I	 saw	Nana	high,	 I	didn’t	 understand	what	 I	was	seeing.	He	 was
slumped	down	on	 the	couch,	 his	eyes	rolled	 back,	 a	faint	 smile	 on	 his	face.	 I
thought	he	was	half	asleep,	dreaming	the	sweetest	of	dreams.	Days	went	by	like
this,	then	a	week.	Finally,	 I	figured	 it	 out.	No	 dream	could	wreak	the	 havoc	this
wreaked.
        It	 took	me	a	while	 to	gather	the	courage,	but	I	once	asked	Nana	if	he	could
describe	what	it	 felt	 like	 when	he	took	 the	pills	 or	 shot	up.	He	 was	six	months
into	his	addiction,	 two	 and	a	half	years	away	from	 his	 death.	I	don’t	know	 what

116
emboldened	me	to	ask	a	question	like	 that.	Up	until	 that	point	 I	 had	exercised	a
“don’t	dare	mention	it”	 kind	 of	policy,	 figuring	 that	if	 I	avoided	any	talk	of	 drugs
or	addiction,	then	the	problem	would	 go	away	on	its	own.	But	it	 wasn’t	just	that	I
avoided	mentioning	Nana’s	addiction	because	I	wanted	it	to	go	away;	it	was	that	it
was	so	ever-present	that	mentioning	it	felt	ridiculous,	redundant.	In	just	 that	short
amount	of	 time,	 Nana’s	addiction	had	become	 the	sun	around	which	 all	 of	 our
lives	revolved.	I	didn’t	want	to	stare	directly	at	it.
        When	 I’d	asked	Nana	what	 it	felt	 like	 to	 be	high,	he	 had	smirked	at	 me	a
little	and	rubbed	his	forehead.
        “I	 don’t	know,”	 he	said.	“I	can’t	describe	it.”
        “Try.”
        “It	 just	feels	good.”
        “Try	  harder,”	I	 said.	 The	anger	in	 my	 voice	 surprised	us	both.	 Nana	had
already	become	accustomed	to	all	the	 yelling	and	pleading	 and	crying	from	  our
mother	as	she	tried	to	urge	him	to	stop,	but	I	 never	yelled.	I	 was	too	scared	to	be
angry,	too	sad.
        Nana	couldn’t	bring	 himself	to	look	 at	me,	but	when	he	finally	 did,	I	 looked
away.	For	years	before	he	died,	I	 would	 look	at	his	 face	and	think,	 What	a	pity.
What	a	waste.
        Nana	sighed	and	said,	“It	feels	amazing,	like	 everything	inside	my	head	just
empties	out	and	then	there’s	nothing	left—in	a	good	way.”

117
                                                            29





My	 mother	had	 to	work	 the	 Sunday	night	 after	 Nana’s	accident.	The	bottle	 of
OxyContin	had	not	yet	started	to	dwindle	 at	a	rate	faster	than	it	 should	have,	and
so	we	didn’t	yet	know	to	worry	about	anything	other	than	his	ankle.	She	had	taken
the	week	off	  to	care	for	 him,	 until	 an	angry	 voice	mail	 from	 her	boss	sent	her
back	to	the	Palmer	house.
        I	asked	her	if	 she	would	take	me	to	church	on	her	way	to	her	night	shift,	and
she	was	so	excited	to	 see	me	wanting	to	 go	to	 church	on	my	 own,	 without	 her
prodding,	that	she	didn’t	even	seem	to	mind	that	it	was	out	of	her	way.
        There	 weren’t	that	 many	people	 there	that	 evening.	I	 chose	a	 seat	in	 the
middle	pew	 and	urged	myself	to	 stay	awake.	The	worship	 leader	that	night	 was
the	woman	with	the	warbling	voice.
        “To	  hiiiiim	   whooo	 siiiiiits	   onnnnn	 the	 thronnnnneeeee,”	she	 sang,	 her
vibrato	so	strong	that	it	threw	her	a	half	step	off	beat.
        I	 clapped	along,	fighting	 the	 urge	to	plug	 my	ears	until	 some	other	 soloist
got	a	chance	to	shine.
        After	  worship,	 Pastor	John	went	 up	to	 the	 pulpit.	 He	 preached	from	 the
book	of	 Isaiah,	a	short,	 dull	sermon	that	 did	little	  to	move	 the	few	 congregants
who	had	decided	to	 get	some	God	in	 before	their	 workweek.	 Even	Pastor	John
seemed	bored	by	his	own	message.
        He	cleared	his	throat	 and	said	a	quick	closing	prayer,	and	then	he	made	the
altar	call.
        “Now,	  I	 know	 someone	out	 there	 is	 sitting	 with	 a	 heavy	 heart.	I	 know
someone	out	there	is	tired	of	carrying	a	cross.	And	I’m	 telling	you	now,	you	don’t
have	to	leave	here	the	same	as	when	you	came	in.	 Amen?	 God’s	got	a	plan	for
you.	Amen?	All	 you	 have	to	do	is	ask	Jesus	into	your	 heart.	He’ll	do	 the	rest.	Is
there	anyone	who’d	like	to	 come	down	to	the	 altar	today?	Is	there	anyone	who’d
like	to	give	their	life	 to	Christ?”

118
        The	sanctuary	was	quiet.	People	started	looking	at	their	watches,	packing	up
their	Bibles,	counting	down	the	number	of	hours	they	had	left	 until	Monday	came
and	work	beckoned.
        I	 didn’t	 move	at	 all.	Something	came	 over	me.	Something	 came	over	me,
filled	 me	 and	took	 hold.	I	 had	 heard	that	altar	 call	 hundreds	of	 times	and	felt
absolutely	nothing.	 I	 had	 prayed	my	  prayers,	written	 my	 journal	  entries,	 and
heard	only	the	faintest	whisper	 of	Christ.	 And	 that	whisper	was	one	I	distrusted,
because	maybe	it	was	the	whisper	of	my	mother	or	of	 my	own	 desperate	need	to
be	good,	to	 please.	I	 hadn’t	expected	to	 hear	the	 loud	knocking	 on	 my	 heart’s
door,	but	that	night	I	 heard	it.	I	 heard	it.	These	days,	because	I	have	been	trained
to	ask	 questions,	I	 find	 myself	 questioning	 that	moment.	 I	 ask	myself,	 “What
came	over	you?”	I	say,	“Be	specific.”
        I	 had	never	felt	anything	like	 it	before,	and	I	 have	never	felt	anything	like	it
since.	Sometimes	I	tell	myself	that	I	made	it	 all	up,	the	feeling	of	 my	heart	full	 to
bursting,	the	desire	to	know	God	and	be	known	by	him,	but	that	is	not	true	either.
What	I	 felt	 that	night	 was	real.	It	was	as	real	as	anything	a	person	can	feel,	 and
insofar	as	we	know	anything	at	all,	I	knew	what	I	needed	to	do.
        I	 was	in	 the	fourth	 grade.	I	 raised	my	 hand	as	I	 had	been	taught	to	 do	in
school.	Pastor	John,	who	had	been	closing	his	Bible,	saw	me	in	that	tiny	crowd,	in
that	center	pew.
        “Praise	God,”	 he	said.	“Praise	God.	Gifty,	come	on	down	to	the	altar.”
        I	 walked	that	long,	lonely	walk	 of	trembling.	 I	 knelt	down	before	my	 pastor
as	he	placed	a	hand	on	 my	 forehead	and	I	 felt	 the	 pressure	of	his	 hand	like	 a
beam	of	light	from	 God	himself.	 It	was	almost	unbearable.	And	the	smattering	of
congregants	in	the	sanctuary	of	 the	First	 Assemblies	of	 God	stretched	out	their
hands	toward	me	and	prayed,	some	under	their	 breaths,	some	shouting,	some	in
tongues.	And	I	repeated	Pastor	John’s	prayer,	asking	Jesus	to	come	into	my	heart,
and	when	I	stood	up	to	leave	the	sanctuary,	I	knew,	 without	even	the	slightest	of
doubts,	that	God	was	already	there.

119
                                                            30





Being	saved	was	incredible.	 Every	day	I	 would	 head	to	school,	 and	look	 at	my
classmates	with	delicious	pity,	worrying	 over	their	poor,	poor	 souls.	My	salvation
was	a	secret,	a	wonderful	secret,	burning	hot	in	my	heart,	and	what	a	shame	it	was
that	they	didn’t	have	it	 too.	Even	Mrs.	 Bell,	my	 teacher,	was	the	recipient	of	one
of	my	benevolent	smiles,	my	lunchtime	prayers.
        But	this	 was	Alabama,	and	who	was	I	kidding?	My	secret	wasn’t	mine	at	all.
As	soon	as	I	told	Misty	Moore	 that	I	was	saved,	she	told	me	that	she’d	been	saved
two	years	before,	and	I	felt	 embarrassed	by	what	little	joy	 I’d	carried	for	 a	week.
Consciously,	I	knew	it	 wasn’t	a	contest,	but	subconsciously,	I	thought	I	 had	won,
and	to	hear	that	Misty	Moore,	 a	girl	 who	had	once	lifted	 up	her	shirt	at	recess	so
that	Daniel	Gentry	could	see	the	rumor	of	 her	breasts,	had	been	sanctified	before
me,	a	girl	 with	 no	rumors	 to	speak	of,	 stung.	The	shine	wore	 off,	 but	I	 did	 my
best	to	hold	 on	 to	the	 feeling	 of	 all	 those	hands	stretched	out	 toward	 me,	the
sanctuary	buzzing	with	prayers.
        My	 mother	 was	back	at	 work,	 and	Nana	was	always	asleep	on	the	couch.
There	was	 no	one	 to	 share	my	 good	news	 with.	 I	 started	volunteering	 at	 my
church	in	an	attempt	to	make	use	of	my	salvation.	There	wasn’t	much	that	needed
to	be	done	 at	the	First	 Assemblies.	Occasionally,	 I	 would	pick	 up	 the	hymnals
that	had	been	 left	 in	 the	pews	and	 put	them	 back	in	 their	 places.	About	 once
every	two	months	my	church	 would	take	a	van	down	 to	the	soup	kitchen	to	 help
serve,	but	more	often	than	not,	I	 would	be	the	only	person	to	show	up.	P.T.,	who
drove	the	van	for	those	trips,	would	 take	one	look	at	me,	standing	in	 my	raggedy
jeans	and	T-shirt,	and	sigh.	“Just	you	today,	 huh?”	he’d	ask,	and	I’d	wonder	who
else	he’d	been	expecting.
        The	 First	  Assemblies	of	  God	 also	 had	 a	fireworks	  stand,	 just	 off	  the
highway	at	 the	Tennessee	border,	called	 Bama	Boom!.	 I	 still	 don’t	 understand
why	we	had	it.	 Maybe	we	got	it	 under	the	guise	of	ministry.	 Maybe	 it	was	about
earning	a	little	 extra	money.	I	suspect	now	that	Pastor	John	just	 had	a	fireworks

120
kink	and	used	our	church	to	live	it	 out.	I	was	technically	too	young	to	volunteer	at
the	stand,	but	it	 wasn’t	as	though	people	came	around	to	check	ID,	 so	once	in	a
while	I	would	 put	my	name	on	the	sign-up	sheet	and	head	to	the	border	with	P.T.
and	the	older	youth	group	kids,	who	were	much	more	interested	in	hanging	out	at
the	stand	selling	rocket	blasters	than	they	were	in	ladling	soup	for	the	homeless.
        I	 could	tell	 that	P.T.	and	the	 youth	didn’t	 really	want	me	 around,	but	I	 was
used	to	keeping	quiet	and	out	 of	the	 way.	They	put	 me	at	the	register	because	I
was	the	only	one	who	could	 ring	people	up	without	 having	to	 use	the	head-sized
calculator	we	kept	under	the	counter.	 I	would	 sit	at	the	counter	working	 my	 way
through	my	huge	stack	of	books	while	P.T.	 set	off	fireworks	 outside.	We	 weren’t
supposed	to	use	the	merchandise	without	paying,	so	every	time	P.T.	 skulked	off
with	a	box	of	 Roman	candles,	I	would	clear	 my	throat	loudly	 and	make	sure	that
he	knew	that	I	knew.
        Ryan	Green	was	one	of	 the	youth	 volunteers.	He	was	Nana’s	age,	and	he’d
been	over	at	our	house	for	a	couple	of	Nana’s	parties.	I	knew	him	 well	enough	to
dislike	him,	 but	if	 I’d	 known	him	 better,	known	that	he	was	the	biggest	dealer	at
the	high	school,	I	 probably	 would	have	hated	him.	 He	was	loud,	 mean,	dumb.	I
never	signed	up	to	 volunteer	if	  I	 saw	his	name	on	 the	sheet,	but	he	 was	P.T.’s
protégé,	and,	as	such,	he	got	to	come	sometimes	even	when	the	list	was	full.
        “Hey,	 Gifty,	 when’s	your	brother	gonna	get	back	on	the	court?	We’re	getting
our	asses	whooped	without	him.”
        It	 was	two	months	after	 Nana’s	injury.	 The	doctor	 said	that	he	was	healing
up	nicely,	 but	he	was	still	 being	 cautious	with	 his	right	 side,	favoring	 his	 other
ankle,	scared	to	get	hurt	 again.	Our	 mother	 and	Nana’s	doctor	had	cut	 him	 off
from	 the	pain	pill	 refills,	  but	still,	 we	would	 find	 him	 on	the	 couch	more	often
than	not,	watching	television,	or	simply	 looking	ahead	with	that	dreamy	stare.	He
had	started	going	back	to	practice,	but	he	still	wasn’t	putting	much	weight	 on	that
leg	and	he	always	came	home	complaining	of	pain.
        “I	 don’t	know,”	 I	said	to	Ryan.
        “Well,	 shit.	Tell	 him	we	need	him.”
        I	 made	 a	noncommittal	  noise	and	 went	 back	to	 my	 book.	 Ryan	 looked
outside	to	make	 sure	P.T.	wasn’t	heading	back	 in.	He	 was	different	 in	 front	 of
P.T.,	still	 loud	and	obnoxious,	but	with	 a	prayerful	 edge.	He	didn’t	 curse	or	spit.
He	raised	both	 hands	during	worship	 and	closed	his	eyes	tightly,	 singing	loudly
and	swaying	softly.	 I	 disliked	 him,	 not	 just	because	of	 his	duplicitousness,	but
because	he	always	carried	an	empty	plastic	water	bottle	 around	so	that	he	could

121
spit	his	dip	into	 it.	 And	I	 would	see	that	thin	brown	 liquid	 sloshing	around	in	the
bottle,	and	I	would	 see	the	way	he	looked	at	me	 as	though	I	were	no	better	than
the	sludge	he	spit	from	his	mouth,	 and	it	would	force	 me	to	remember	that	there
was	an	imbalance	in	my	world.
        “Hey,	 why	you	always	reading	them	books?”	he	asked.
        I	shrugged.
        “Be	 better	if	 you	 tried	sports	like	 your	 brother.”	He	 raised	his	hands	up	in
mock	surrender,	though	I	hadn’t	said	anything.	“Don’t	 call	 the	NAACP	 on	me	or
nothing,	but	them	books	ain’t	 gonna	get	you	nowhere	and	sports	just	might	do	it.
Too	bad	Nana	don’t	play	football	though.	That’s	a	real	game.”
        He	reached	across	the	counter	and	shut	my	book.	I	 opened	it	and	he	shut	it
again.	I	kept	 the	book	closed	and	looked	 up	at	 him	with	 all	 of	 my	fury,	 and	he
laughed	and	laughed.
        P.T.	finally	 came	in,	and	Ryan	immediately	straightened	up.
        “Anybody	 come	in	here	yet?”	P.T.	asked.
        I	 was	burning	mad,	but	I	knew	that	telling	on	Ryan	would	only	make	my	life
worse.	He	 pulled	 out	 that	water	 bottle	 and	 spit	into	  it,	 still	 smiling	 from	  the
memory	of	 his	devilment.	In	 church	that	Sunday,	I	 saw	Ryan	up	in	the	first	 pew
standing	next	to	P.T.,	 his	arms	stretched	up	 toward	Heaven	and	tears	streaming
down	his	face	 as	the	worship	 leader	asked,	“How	 great	is	 our	God?”	 I	 tried	 to
focus	on	the	music.	I	tried	to	 focus	on	Christ,	but	I	 couldn’t	stop	looking	at	Ryan.
If	the	Kingdom	 of	 Heaven	allowed	someone	like	him	in,	 how	could	there	also	be
a	place	for	me?

122
                                                        31





I	miss	thinking	in	terms	of	the	ordinary,	the	straight	line	from	birth	to	death	that
constitutes	most	people’s	lives.	The	line	of	those	drug-addled	years	of	Nana’s	life
is	not	so	easy	to	draw,	so	direct.	It	zigs	and	it	zags	and	it	slashes.
        Nana	got	hooked	on	the	OxyContin;	that	much	became	clear	to	my	mother
about	two	months	in,	when	he	asked	to	go	back	to	the	doctor	for	a	second	refill.
She	said	no,	and	then	she	found	more	hidden	in	his	light	fixture.	She	thought	the
problem	would	just	go	away,	because	what	did	we	know	about	addiction?	What,
other	than	the	“just	say	no”	campaigns,	was	there	to	guide	any	of	us	through	the
jungle	of	this?
        I	didn’t	really	understand	what	was	going	on	yet.	I	just	knew	that	Nana	was
always	sleepy	or	sleeping.	His	head	was	always	nodding,	chin	to	chest,	before
rolling	or	bouncing	violently	back	up.	I	would	see	him	on	our	couch	with	this
dreamy	look	on	his	face	and	wonder	how	an	ankle	injury	had	knocked	him	so
flat.	He,	who	had	always	been	in	motion,	how	could	he	now	be	so	still?	I	asked
my	mother	for	money,	and	the	few	times	she	gave	it	to	me,	I	walked	to	Publix
and	picked	up	instant	coffee.	No	one	in	our	house	had	ever	touched	coffee,	but	I
had	heard	the	 way	people	talked	 about	it	 at	 church,	how	 rapturously	they
approached	the	dispensers	in	the	Sunday	school	classroom.	I	fixed	the	coffee	in
our	kitchen,	following	the	instructions	on	the	back	of	the	package.	I	stirred	the
powder	into	the	water	until	it	turned	a	deep,	dark	brown.	I	tasted	it	and	found	it
disgusting	and	so	figured	it	would	be	 sufficiently	medicinal.	I’d	 present	it	to
Nana,	push	his	shoulder,	his	chest,	try	to	rouse	him	long	enough	for	him	to	drink
it.	He	never	did.
        “Can	you	die	from	sleeping?”	I	asked	my	fourth-grade	teacher,	Mrs.	Bell,
after	school	one	day.
        She	was	sitting	at	 her	 desk,	shuffling	 the	papers	from	 the	homework
assignment	we	had	all	turned	in.	She	gave	me	a	funny	look,	but	I	was	used	to
getting	funny	looks	for	the	questions	I	asked.	Always	too	many,	too	strange,	off

123
topic.
        “No,	 sweetie,”	Mrs.	Bell	said.	“You	 can’t	die	from	sleeping.”
        I	don’t	know	 why	I	put	my	faith	 in	her.


                                                              —

Nana	sweat	so	much	that	his	shirts	were	drenched	through	mere	minutes	after	he
put	them	 on.	This	 was	after	 my	 mother	cleaned	out	 his	light	 fixture,	  throwing
away	the	last	of	the	prescription	pills	that	he	had	squirreled	away.	He	had	to	keep
a	trash	 can	nearby	 at	 all	 times	 because	he	was	 constantly	vomiting.	  He	 was
constantly	shaking.	 He	shit	 himself	  more	 than	once.	 He	looked	 like	  walking,
breathing	misery,	and	I	was	more	scared	for	him	 then,	sick	in	his	sobriety,	 than	I
had	been	when	he	was	high.
        My	 mother	wasn’t	scared	at	all.	She	was	a	caregiver	by	profession,	and	she
did	what	 she	had	always	done	when	 a	patient	 was	in	 distress.	She	would	hoist
Nana	up,	lifting	 him	 by	the	armpits,	 and	lower	him	 into	the	 bathtub.	She	always
closed	the	door,	but	I	 could	hear	them.	Him,	 embarrassed	and	angry;	her,	down-
to-business.	She	washed	him	the	 way	she	had	when	 he	was	a	 child,	 the	way	 I
knew	 she	must	 have	washed	Mr.	  Thomas,	 Mrs.	 Reynolds,	Mrs.	  Palmer,	 and
everyone	else	in	between.
        “Lift	  your	 leg,”	I’d	 hear	her	command,	and	then	softer,	 gentler,	“Ebeyeyie.”
It	will	 be	all	right.
        There	 must	be	some	Oedipal	 shame	about	lying	 in	the	 bathtub	at	 sixteen,
crying	as	your	mother	washes	the	shit	and	vomit	and	sweat	off	your	body.	I	would
avoid	Nana	for	 several	hours	after	 one	of	 these	cleanings,	because	I	knew	 that
somehow	my	being	 witness	made	him	 feel	all	 the	 worse.	He’d	skulk	 off	  to	his
room	and	hide	there	until	the	entire	event	had	to	be	repeated.
        But	 if	 I	 saw	my	 mother	 in	the	 moments	after	 she’d	cleaned	her	firstborn
child,	I	 would	go	 stand	by	her,	be	buoyed	by	her	 and	this	wellspring	 of	strength
she	seemed	so	capable	of	drawing	from.	She	never	had	even	the	faintest	 hint	of
shame.	She	would	see	me,	my	worry	and	fear	and	embarrassment	and	anger,	and
she	would	say,	“There	will	come	a	time	when	you	will	need	someone	to	wipe	your
ass	for	you,”	and	that	would	be	that.


                                                              —

124
My	mother	 was	accustomed	to	sickness.	She	knew	what	it	 meant	to	 be	close	to
death,	to	be	around	it.	She	knew	that	there	was	a	sound	to	it,	that	raspy,	gurgling
noise	that	comes	out	and	up	from	 whatever	part	 of	the	 body	where	death	hides,
lurking,	waiting	 its	turn,	waiting	for	 life	 to	tag	out.
        She	was	with	Mrs.	 Palmer	in	her	final	 hours.	Like	 my	mother,	Mrs.	 Palmer
had	been	a	pious,	churchgoing	woman,	and	she’d	requested	that	my	mother	be	at
her	bedside	to	read	her	Scripture	before	she	went	on	to	receive	her	reward.
        “This	 is	 what	 death	sounds	like,”	  my	 mother	 said,	and	she	imitated	  that
crackling	 noise.	“You	  shouldn’t	be	 afraid	 of	 it,	  but	you	 should	 know	 it.	 You
should	know	it	when	you	hear	it,	because	it	is	the	last	sound	and	we	all	make	it.”
        Mrs.	 Palmer	had	been	given	morphine	to	ease	her	pain.	She	had	smoked	all
her	life,	even	in	that	final	 week,	and	her	lungs	had	become	ornamental.	Instead	of
an	exhale	there	was	collapse,	and	 every	inhale	was	a	 whisper.	Morphine	 didn’t
reshape	her	lungs	into	the	air-filled	sponges	they	were	meant	to	be,	but	it	offered
a	distraction,	telling	 the	brain,	 “Instead	of	 air,	I	 can	give	you	a	kind	 of	 freedom
from	need.”
        “That’s	what	drugs	are	for,”	 my	mother	lectured	Nana	and	me	the	first	 night
she	returned	home	from	Mrs.	Palmer’s	bedside.	“To	ease	pain.”
        Nana	rolled	his	eyes	and	stomped	off,	and	my	mother	sighed	a	heavy	sigh.
        I	 was	afraid	 of	 death	 and	of	 pain.	I	 was	 afraid	 of	 old	people.	 When	my
mother	came	home	from	 Mrs.	 Palmer’s	house,	I	wouldn’t	go	near	her	 until	after
she	had	taken	a	shower,	washed	off	whatever	it	was	I	worried	was	clinging	to	her
skin.	When	she	smelled	like	 my	 mother	again,	I	 would	 go	to	her,	 sit	beside	her
and	listen	 to	her	 talk	 about	 Mrs.	 Palmer’s	decline	 as	though	I	  were	gathering
before	a	campfire	 waiting	 for	 the	woman	holding	 a	flashlight	 to	her	 face	to	tell
ghost	stories.
        Where	shall	I	go	from	 your	Spirit?	Or	where	shall	I	flee	 from	your	 presence?
If	 I	ascend	to	heaven,	you	are	there!	If	I	make	my	bed	in	Sheol,	you	are	there!	If	I
take	the	wings	of	the	morning	and	dwell	in	the	uttermost	parts	of	the	sea,	even	there
your	hand	 shall	lead	me,	and	 your	right	 hand	shall	 hold	me.	My	 mother	 would
read	me	the	Scriptures	that	she	had	read	to	Mrs.	Palmer,	and	this	one	in	particular
always	stood	out.	To	 this	 day,	it	 brings	tears	to	 my	 eyes.	You	are	not	 alone,	it
says,	and	that	is	a	comfort,	not	to	the	dying,	but	to	those	of	us	who	are	terrified	of
being	left	behind.
        Because	really,	it	wasn’t	Mrs.	Palmer’s	death	that	I	was	afraid	of;	that	wasn’t
the	reason	my	mother	had	started	trying	to	teach	us	about	the	sound	and	the	relief

125
of	pain.	I	 was	scared	for	Nana.	Scared	of	Nana	and	the	death	rattle	 that	none	of
us	wanted	to	acknowledge	we	were	listening	 for.	 I	have	seen	people	who	suffer
from	addiction	 and	the	family	and	friends	 who	love	them	in	various	places	and	at
various	points	in	 my	life.	 I’ve	 seen	them	sitting	 on	stoops	and	on	park	 benches.
I’ve	been	with	 them	 in	 the	lobbies	of	 rehab	 centers.	And	the	 thing	 that	always
strikes	me	is	 how	there	is	 always	someone	in	the	room	 who	is	 listening	for	 the
sound,	waiting	 for	 the	arrival	 of	 that	 rasping	rattle,	 knowing	 that	it	 will	  come.
Eventually,	it	 will	 come.	The	Scriptures	my	 mother	read	were	as	much	for	 us	as
they	were	for	 Mrs.	 Palmer.	My	 mother	 and	I	wanted	blessed	assurance	because
Nana	couldn’t	offer	us	assurances	of	any	kind.


                                                              —

I	don’t	know	 how	she	did	it,	 but	my	 mother	convinced	Nana	to	accompany	us	to
the	First	Assemblies	one	Sunday.	He	was	still	detoxing,	too	 weak	to	protest.	The
three	of	us	walked	into	the	sanctuary,	but	we	didn’t	take	our	regular	seats.	We	sat
in	 the	back	 with	  Nana	at	 the	 aisle	so	 that	 he	 could	 get	up	 and	 head	to	 the
bathroom	if	  he	needed	to.	 He	 looked	better	 than	he	 had	in	 days.	I	 knew	 this
because	I	couldn’t	stop	looking	at	him.
        “Jesus,	Gifty,”	 he’d	say	whenever	he	caught	me	staring	at	him	for	those	long
stretches,	drinking	him	in.	 It	was	like	 my	gaze	hurt	him,	 which	should	have	been
enough	to	get	me	to	leave	him	alone,	but	I	couldn’t	make	myself	look	 away.	I	felt
like	I	 was	watching	some	major	natural	event—newly	hatched	sea	turtles	heading
toward	the	lip	 of	 the	ocean,	bears	coming	 out	of	 hibernation.	 I	was	waiting	 for
Nana	to	emerge,	new,	reborn.
        In	 the	church	I	 grew	up	in,	 people	cared	about	rebirth.	For	 months	on	end,
all	across	the	South,	all	over	the	world,	 revival	tents	are	erected.	Preachers	stand
at	pulpits	  promising	 people	that	 they	 can	 rise	 from	 the	 ashes	of	 their	  lives.
“Revival	fire	 fall,”	  I	used	to	sing	along	with	the	 choir,	jubilantly	  asking	that	God
raze	everything	to	the	ground.	I	stole	glances	at	Nana	at	the	end	of	our	pew,	and	I
thought,	Surely	the	fire	has	fallen?
        “Nana?”	 Ryan	Green	said	as	he	entered	the	sanctuary.	He	clapped	Nana	on
the	shoulder,	and	Nana	shrank	from	his	touch.	“When	are	you	getting	back	out	on
the	court?”	he	asked.	“I	 mean,	it’s	great	to	see	you	in	church	and	everything,	 but
church	ain’t	where	we	need	you.”	He	laughed	to	himself.
        “I’ll	 be	back	soon,”	Nana	said.	“My	ankle’s	healing	up.”

126
        Ryan	 looked	at	 him	 skeptically.	 “Like	 I	 said,	we’re	 getting	killed	  without
you.	Prayer	ain’t	helping	 the	guys	we	got	out	 there	playing	now.	 I’d	be	happy	to
help	you	out	if	there’s	anything	you	need	in	order	to	get	you	back	on	the	court.”
        My	 mother	shot	Ryan	a	killing	look.	 “You	don’t	talk	 to	my	son,”	she	said.
        “Hey,	 I’m	sorry,	Mrs.—”
        “Get	 away	from	us,”	she	said,	so	loud	this	time	that	a	few	people	in	the	pew
in	front	of	 us	turned.
        “I	 didn’t	mean	any	disrespect,	ma’am,”	Ryan	said,	amused.
        When	he	left,	 Nana	leaned	against	the	edge	of	the	pew.	My	 mother	put	her
hand	on	his	shoulder,	and	he	shrugged	it	away.

127
                                                            32




        Dear	God,
        At	church	today,	Bethany	said	her	mom	doesn’t	want	her	coming	over	to
        our	house	after	service	anymore.	I	told	Buzz,	but	he	didn’t	care.


        I	 knew	without	asking	that	my	 mother	expected	us	to	keep	Nana’s	addiction
close	to	the	chest,	and	the	secret	ate	away	at	me	like	moths	in	cloth.	I	wished	for
a	priest,	a	confessional	booth,	but	finally	I	just	settled	for	 my	friend	 Bethany.	The
Sunday	after	 I	  confessed,	she	 told	 me	 she	 wasn’t	allowed	  to	 play	 with	  me
anymore,	and	suddenly,	I	 knew:	addiction	 was	catching,	 shameful.	I	 didn’t	 talk
about	Nana’s	addiction	again	until	 college,	when	one	of	 my	lab	 mates	asked	me
how	I	 knew	 so	much	 about	the	 side	effects	 of	 heroin.	 When	 I	 told	 her	about
Nana,	she	said,	“This	would	make	such	a	good	TED	Talk.”	I	laughed	but	she	kept
going.	“Seriously,	Gifty,	  you’re	amazing.	You’re	like	 taking	the	pain	 from	 losing
your	brother	and	you’re	turning	it	 into	this	 incredible	research	that	might	actually
help	people	like	him	one	day.”	I	laughed	a	little	more,	tried	 to	shrug	her	off.
        If	 only	 I	were	so	noble.	If	 only	 I	even	felt	so	noble.	The	 truth	is	there	were
times	when	 my	 mother	 and	 I	 had	been	 driving	 all	 over	 Huntsville	  for	 hours
searching	for	Nana,	times	 when	I	 saw	him	strung	out	 in	front	  of	the	 carp-filled
pond	at	Big	Spring	Park	when	I	would	think,	 God,	I	wish	it	was	cancer,	not	for	his
sake	but	  for	 mine.	  Not	  because	the	 nature	 of	 his	  suffering	  would	 change
significantly	 but	because	the	nature	of	my	suffering	would.	 I	would	 have	a	better
story	than	the	one	I	had.	I	 would	have	a	better	 answer	to	the	questions	“Where’s
Nana?	What	happened	to	Nana?”
        Nana	is	 the	reason	I	began	this	 work,	 but	not	in	 a	wholesome,	made–for–
TED	 Talk	 kind	 of	  way.	Instead,	 this	 science	was	a	 way	 for	 me	 to	 challenge
myself,	to	 do	something	 truly	 hard,	and	in	 so	doing	 to	work	 through	 all	of	 my
misunderstandings	about	his	addiction	and	all	of	 my	 shame.	Because	I	still	have
so	much	shame.	I’m	full	  to	the	brim	 with	 it;	 I’m	 spilling	 over.	I	 can	look	 at	my
data	again	and	again.	I	can	look	 at	 scan	after	scan	of	 drug-addicted	brains	shot

128
through	with	 holes,	Swiss-cheesed,	atrophied,	irreparable.	I	 can	watch	that	blue
light	flash	through	the	brain	 of	a	mouse	and	note	the	behavioral	changes	that	take
place	because	of	it,	and	know	how	many	years	of	difficult,	  arduous	science	went
into	those	tiny	changes,	and	still,	still,	think,	Why	 didn’t	Nana	stop?	Why	didn’t	he
get	better	for	us?	For	me?


                                                              —

He	was	on	a	bender	the	day	we	found	 him	 sprawled	out	in	Big	 Spring	Park.	 On
the	grass,	spread	out	like	that,	he’d	looked	like	an	offering.	 To	whom,	for	 what,	I
couldn’t	say.	He’d	 been	sober	for	 maybe	a	couple	 of	 weeks,	but	then	 he	didn’t
come	home	one	night,	and	we	knew.	One	night	turned	into	two,	turned	into	three.
My	 mother	 and	I	  couldn’t	 sleep	for	 waiting.	  As	 the	two	 of	  us	drove	 around
looking	 for	 him,	 I	 thought	about	how	 tired	 Nana	must	 have	been,	tired	 of	 our
mother	washing	him	in	the	bathtub	like	 he’d	reverted	to	his	original	state,	tired	of
all	the	nothing	 in	a	bad	 way.	I	don’t	 know	who	 he	scored	from	 after	 our	doctor
stopped	writing	him	 prescriptions,	but	it	 must	have	been	easy	enough	that	day	in
the	park	because	he	was	gone,	just	gone.
        My	 mother	wanted	me	to	help	her	get	him	in	the	car.	She	hoisted	him	up	by
the	armpits	and	 I	grabbed	his	 legs	but	I	 kept	 dropping	 them,	and	then	 I	would
start	crying	and	she	would	yell	at	me.
        The	thing	I	 will	 never	forget	is	that	people	were	watching	us	do	all	of	this.	It
was	the	middle	 of	 a	workday	 and	 there	were	 people	out	in	 that	 park	 drinking
coffee,	taking	 their	smoke	breaks,	and	no	one	lifted	 a	finger.	 They	just	 watched
us	with	some	curiosity.	We	were	three	black	people	in	distress.	Nothing	to	see.
        By	the	time	 we	got	Nana	in	the	car,	I	was	doing	that	snuffling	non-cry	cry	of
children	who’ve	been	told	to	stop	crying.	I	couldn’t	stop	crying.	I	 was	sitting	in	the
back	with	Nana’s	head	in	my	lap	and	I	was	certain	that	he	was	dead,	and	I	was	too
scared	to	tell	my	mother	because	I	knew	I	would	get	in	trouble	for	 even	hinting	at
his	death,	and	so	I	just	sat	there,	snuffling,	with	a	dead	man	on	my	lap.
        Nana	wasn’t	 dead.	We	got	 him	 to	 the	house	and	he	woke	 up,	 but	in	 that
zombie-like	 way	that	people	who	 got	a	little	  too	high	 wake	up.	He	 didn’t	 know
where	he	was.	My	mother	pushed	him	and	he	stumbled	backward.
        “Why	 do	you	keep	doing	 this?”	she	screamed.	She	started	slapping	him	and
he	didn’t	even	lift	his	hands	to	his	face.	By	that	point	he	was	twice	her	size.	All	he
would	have	had	to	do	was	grab	her	arm,	push	her	back.	He	did	nothing.

129
        “This	 has	to	stop,”	she	kept	saying	as	she	hit	him.	“This	has	to	stop.	This	has
to	stop.”	 But	 she	couldn’t	 stop	hitting	  him	 and	he	 couldn’t	 stop	being	 hit.	 He
couldn’t	stop	any	of	it.
        My	 God,	my	God,	how	ashamed	I	still	am.

130
                                                        33





Most	of	the	time	in	my	work,	I	begin	with	the	answers,	with	an	idea	of	the	results.
I	 suspect	that	 something	is	 true	 and	 then	I	  work	 toward	 that	 suspicion,
experimenting,	tinkering,	until	I	find	 what	I	 am	looking	 for.	 The	ending,	the
answer,	is	never	the	hard	part.	The	hard	part	is	trying	to	figure	 out	what	the
question	is,	trying	to	ask	something	interesting	enough,	different	enough	from
what	has	already	been	asked,	trying	to	make	it	all	matter.
        But	how	do	you	know	when	you	are	nearing	a	true	end	instead	of	a	dead
end?	How	do	you	finish	the	experiment?	What	do	you	do	when,	years	into	your
life,	you	figure	out	that	the	yellow	brick	road	you’ve	been	easing	down	leads	you
directly	into	the	eye	of	the	tornado?


                                                          —

My	mother	hit	Nana,	and	Nana	stood	still.	Finally,	I	stepped	in	between	them,	and
when	the	first	of	my	mother’s	slaps	landed	on	my	face,	she	withdrew	her	hands,
flattened	them	to	her	sides,	looking	all	around	the	room	in	a	crazed	panic.
        She	didn’t	believe	in	apologizing	to	children,	but	this,	the	flattened	hands
and	look	of	horror,	was	the	closest	she	had	ever	come.
        “This	ends	here,”	she	said.	“This	ends	today.”	She	stood	there	for	a	while
longer,	watching	her	two	children.	My	face	was	stinging	from	 the	slap,	but	I
didn’t	dare	lift	 my	 hand	to	soothe	it.	Behind	me,	Nana	was	dazed,	still	high,
hurting.	He	hadn’t	spoken.
        Our	mother	left	the	room,	and	I	eased	Nana	toward	the	couch.	I	pushed	him
a	little	and	he	fell	onto	it,	 crumpled	into	a	ball	at	the	armrest,	his	head	nestled
near	the	spot	where	the	treacherous	wooden	piece	had	once	been.	I	took	off	his
shoes	and	looked	at	his	foot,	healed	scar-less,	leaving	no	trace	of	nail,	of	oil.	I
draped	a	blanket	over	him	and	sat	down,	and	we	stayed	like	that	for	the	rest	of
the	night.	For	the	rest	of	the	night,	I	watched	him	come	down,	nod	off,	whimper.

131
This	is	it,	I	thought,	because	surely	none	of	us	could	take	another	day	like	this.
        By	 morning	our	 mother	had	come	up	 with	a	solution.	 She	had	been	awake
all	night	 making	 calls,	though	I	 don’t	 know	who	 she	talked	to,	 who	 she	trusted
with	the	 addiction	 that	we	had	been	doing	 our	best	to	 keep	secret.	Nana,	sober
now,	was	all	apologies,	repeating	the	old	 mantra:	I’m	sorry.	 It	 will	 never	happen
again.	I	promise	you,	it	will	 never	happen	again.
        Our	mother	 listened	patiently	to	all	of	 those	words	we	had	heard	before	and
then	she	said	something	 new.	“There’s	 a	place	in	 Nashville	 that	 will	 take	 you.
They’re	coming	 to	pick	 you	up	 and	they’ll	 be	here	in	 five	 minutes.	I’ve	 already
packed	a	bag	for	you.”
        “What	 place,	Ma?”	Nana	said,	taking	a	step	back.
        “It’s	 a	good,	Christian	place.	They’ll	know	 what	to	do.	They	can	help	you	so
you	won’t	be	as	sick	as	last	time.”
        “I	 don’t	 want	to	go	to	 rehab,	Ma.	I’ll	 quit.	 I	 promise,	I’m	 done.	Really,	I’m
done.”
        Outside,	 we	 heard	a	car	 pull	 up.	 Our	 mother	 went	 into	 the	kitchen	  and
started	packing	 food	  into	 Tupperware.	 We	  could	 hear	 her	 prattling	 around,
shuffling	 through	 all	 those	lids	 she	kept	 in	 perfect	 order,	stacked	 by	size	 and
labeled.
        “Gifty,	   please,”	 Nana	 hissed,	 turning	  to	  me	 for	  the	 first	   time.	  “Say
something	to	her.	I—I	can’t…”
        His	 voice	trailed	 off	 and	his	eyes	filled	 with	tears.	The	sound	of	 my	name,
the	tenderness	with	  which	 he’d	 spoken	it,	  made	me	 feel	 as	though	 I’d	  been
dunked	in	cold	water.
        Our	 mother	 packed	the	 Tupperware	into	  what	she	still	  called	“polythene
bags,”	grocery	bags	that	she	collected	and	reused	like	they	would	run	out	one	day.
She	brought	the	food	and	a	suitcase	into	the	living	room	and	stood	before	us.
        “We	 shouldn’t	keep	them	waiting,”	she	said.
        Nana	trained	his	pleading	eyes	on	me.	He	looked	at	me,	and	I	looked	 away,
and	outside,	the	car	horn	beeped.


                                                              —

Before	I	 started	my	 thesis	project,	 I	 had	 floundered	 a	bit,	 trying	 to	 figure	 out
what	to	 do.	I	 had	 ideas	and	impressions	but	 I	 couldn’t	 make	 them	coalesce,	I

132
couldn’t	figure	 out	the	right	 question.	I	 would	waste	months	on	 one	experiment,
find	 that	 it	 led	 nowhere,	then	 backtrack	 only	to	 end	 up	in	 the	 same	place	as
before.	The	real	 problem	was	the	 fact	that	 I	didn’t	 want	to	 look	 at	the	question
that	was	staring	me	right	in	the	face:	desire,	restraint.	Though	I	had	never	been	an
addict,	addiction,	and	the	avoidance	of	 it,	 had	been	running	my	life,	 and	I	didn’t
want	to	give	it	even	one	more	second	of	my	time.	But	of	 course,	there	it	was.	The
thing	 I	 really	 wanted	to	 know.	 Can	 an	animal	 restrain	 itself	 from	  pursuing	a
reward,	especially	when	there	is	risk	 involved?	Once	I	 had	that	question	figured
out,	everything	else	started	to	fall	into	place.


                                                              —

The	 rehab	 in	 Nashville	 was	 a	 thirty-day	  program.	 The	 facility	   didn’t	 allow
visitors,	but,	 after	Nana’s	detox	 period	ended,	every	Friday	 we	were	 allowed	to
call	and	talk	to	him	for	 a	few	minutes.	The	calls	were	depressing.	“How	are	you?”
I	would	 ask.	 “Fine,”	 Nana	 would	 say,	and	then	 silence	would	 hang	in	 the	air,
counting	us	down	to	the	end	of	the	phone	call.	It	 was	the	Chin	Chin	Man	 all	over
again,	and	I	worried	that	 this	would	be	the	 way	of	things,	 that	Nana	and	I	would
spend	a	lifetime	of	silent	minutes,	strangers	on	the	phone.
        I’m	 glad	I	didn’t	 get	a	chance	to	talk	to	Nana	while	 he	was	detoxing.	I	don’t
think	 I	could	 have	withstood	 watching	him	 sweat	out	his	 addiction	 again.	As	it
was,	those	sober	Friday	 calls	were	 enough	to	break	 my	 heart.	Every	 week	the
sound	of	his	voice	changed.	He	was	still	angry	at	our	mother	and	me,	still	 feeling
betrayed,	but	every	week,	his	voice	got	a	little	clearer,	a	little	stronger.
        My	 mother	 and	I	 drove	to	 Nashville	to	 pick	 him	 up	on	his	 last	day	there.
After	 thirty	 days	of	 shitty	rehab	food,	 he	told	us	that	 all	he	wanted	to	 eat	was	a
chicken	sandwich.	We	pulled	 into	the	nearest	Chick-fil-A,	  and	Nana	and	I	 sat	at
the	booth	while	our	mother	ordered.	Thirty	 days,	three	Friday	phone	calls,	and	we
had	so	little	 to	say	to	each	other.	 When	our	mother	 came	back	with	 our	 orders,
the	three	of	us	ate,	making	the	same	dull	small	talk	we’d	made	before.
        “How	 are	you	feeling?”	my	mother	asked.
        “Good.”
        “I	 mean,	how—”
        Nana	took	 our	mother’s	hand	in	his.	 “I’m	 good,	Ma,”	he	said.	“I’m	 going	 to
stay	sober.	I’m	focused	and	I	really,	really	want	to	get	better,	okay?”
        “Okay,”	 she	said.

133
        Has	anyone	ever	been	watched	with	 as	much	intensity	 as	a	beloved	family
member	just	out	of	 rehab?	My	mother	 and	I	looked	at	 Nana	as	though	our	gazes
were	the	 only	 thing	 that	would	 keep	 him	 there,	rooted	 in	 the	 bright	 red	seat,
dipping	 waffle	  fries	 in	 sweet-and-sour	sauce.	Above	 his	 head,	 there	was	 the
Chick-fil-A	  cow	urging	us	to	“eat	mor	 chikin.”	 I’d	always	found	 those	ads	clever,
and	I’d	always	had	a	strange	southern	pride	in	this	place	that	retained	its	Christian
values	even	as	it	grew.	 Years	later,	after	 my	 politics	 and	religion	 had	changed,
when	friends	 were	protesting	the	 restaurant	I	couldn’t	 make	myself	 do	 it.	 All	 I
could	think	 about	was	that	Saturday	with	Nana,	how	happy	I’d	felt	 to	be	with	 my
family,	to	 say	a	quick	prayer	of	healing	over	our	trays	of	fast	food.
        As	 we	finished	 eating,	Nana	 told	us	about	 how	the	 staff	 at	the	rehab	 had
taken	them	through	 morning	prayers	and	taught	them	 meditation.	 Nana	was	the
youngest	one	there	by	a	 mile,	 and	the	staff	 had	been	kind	 and	encouraging.	In
group	therapy	meetings	every	evening,	the	patients	talked	not	simply	 about	their
troubles	but	also	about	their	hopes	for	the	future.
        “What	 did	 you	 say?”	I	 asked.	The	future	 was	 something	I	 hadn’t	allowed
myself	to	 think	 about	for	 some	time.	 While	 Nana	was	sick,	 our	lives	moved	 in
slow	motion	and	at	great	speed	simultaneously,	making	it	 impossible	to	see	what
direction	things	might	take.
        “I	 just	 said	that	I	 want	to	 get	right,	 you	know.	 Play	basketball,	spend	time
with	y’all.	That	kind	 of	thing.”


                                                              —

How	does	an	animal	restrain	itself	from	 pursuing	a	reward,	especially	when	there
is	risk	involved?	By	the	time	my	 mother	came	to	stay	with	me	in	California,	 I	had
started	to	 get	a	clearer	 picture	 of	 the	 answer	to	 this	question	 that	 I	 had	been
obsessing	over	for	most	of	my	graduate	career,	this	test	to	which	I	 had	submitted
many	mice	and	many	hours	of	my	life.	 I’d	found	 hints	of	the	two	 different	 neural
circuits	mediating	 reward-seeking	behavior,	 and	I	 had	looked	 at	the	neurons	to
see	if	  there	was	 any	 detectable	difference	  in	 pattern.	 Once	 I’d	 confirmed	  a
difference,	 I	used	calcium	 imaging	 to	record	 the	mice’s	 brain	activity	  so	that	I
could	determine	which	of	 the	two	circuits	 was	important	to	the	behavior.	Finally,
at	the	end	of	 all	 of	 this,	I	 had	almost	enough	information	  to	write	 a	 paper	that
showed	that	if	 one	were	to	 use	optogenetics	to	stimulate	the	mPFC→NAc	  risk-
encoding	cells,	then,	yes,	it	was	possible	to	suppress	reward	seeking.

134
        All	 of	  this	behavior	manipulation,	all	 of	  this	 tweaking	and	adjusting,
injecting	and	imaging,	to	find	out	that	restraint	was	possible,	that	it	could,	through
arduous	science,	be	done.	All	of	this	work	to	try	to	get	to	the	bottom	of	the	thing
that	had	no	bottom:	Nana	relapsed	just	fourteen	hours	after	leaving	rehab.

135
                                                            34





Opioids	work	 on	the	reward	 circuits	 of	the	 brain.	The	first	 time	 you	take	 them,
your	brain	is	so	flooded	 with	 dopamine	that	you	are	left	 thinking	 that,	like	 food,
like	sex,	opioids	are	good	for	you,	necessary	for	the	very	survival	of	your	 species.
“Do	 it	 again!	Do	 it	 again!”	 your	brain	 tells	 you,	but	 every	time	 you	 listen,	the
drugs	work	 a	 little	 less	and	demand	 a	little	  more,	until	  finally	 you	 give	 them
everything	 and	get	 nothing	 in	  return—no	 rush,	 no	 surge	of	  pleasure,	just	  a
momentary	relief	from	 the	misery	of	withdrawal.
        I	 attended	 a	lecture	 Han	 was	giving	  about	the	 process	of	  imaging	 cells
involved	with	 reward	expectation.	The	lecture	hall	wasn’t	packed,	so	Han	spotted
me	as	soon	as	I	walked	in.	He	shot	me	a	little	wave.
        I	 took	  a	seat	 in	 the	 back	 as	Han	 got	 started.	On	 the	 projector	  screen,
dopamine	neurons	spun	purple	with	small	green	flashes	throughout.
        “The	 green	that	 you’re	seeing	up	 there	are	 the	active	 release	sites	on	the
dopamine	neurons,”	Han	said,	using	his	 laser	pointer	to	 indicate	the	spots.	“The
mesocortical,	mesolimbic,	and	nigrostriatal	 dopamine	pathways	are	what	we	call
the	 reward	 pathways,	 all	 right?	  They’re	 the	  ones	that	  activate	 when	 we’re
expecting	or	receiving	a	reward.”
        Han	scanned	the	room,	and	I	gave	him	a	thumbs-up	when	his	eyes	landed	on
me.	He	grinned,	then	coughed	to	cover	up	the	grin.	He	continued	lecturing,	 and	I
looked	 around	 the	 room.	 Ambitious	  undergrads	 mostly,	 attending	 a	 midday
neuroscience	lecture	perhaps	for	class	credit,	or	perhaps	because	they	wanted	to
pursue	a	career	in	the	field,	or	perhaps	just	out	of	plain	old	curiosity.
        When	Han	finally	 finished,	 I	waited	for	 the	room	to	clear.	I	sat	in	my	seat	as
he	started	 shuffling	 the	 papers	on	 his	 desk.	I	 raised	 my	 hand,	 but	he	 wasn’t
looking	at	me	so	I	cleared	my	throat	loudly.	“Excuse	me,	Professor?”	I	said.
        He	started	laughing,	leaned	against	the	desk.	“Yes,	Gifty?”
        “Are	 you	telling	me	that	when	I	get	a	‘like’	on	my	 Facebook	posts,	dopamine
is	released?”

136
“Why	yes,	right	you	are,”	he	said.
“What	about	when	I	do	something	bad?”	I	asked.
Han	shrugged.	“Depends.	What	kind	of	thing?	How	bad	are	we	talking?”
“Bad,	bad,”	I	said,	and	he	just	laughed	and	laughed.

137
                                             35




Dear	God,
I	wish	Nana	would	just	die	already.	Please,	just	let	this	be	over.

138
                                                        36





All	of	 the	self-help	literature	I’ve	read	says	that	you	have	to	talk	about	your	pain
to	move	through	it,	but	the	only	person	I	ever	felt	like	I	wanted	to	talk	to	about
Nana	was	my	mother	and	I	knew	she	couldn’t	handle	it.	It	felt	unfair,	to	pile	my
pain	on	top	of	hers,	and	so	I	swallowed	it	instead.	I	wrote	journal	entries	that
grew	increasingly	frantic,	increasingly	desperate,	until	I	reached	that	one,	heinous
line.
        “God	will	  read	what	 you	write,	 and	 he	will	  answer	your	writing	 like
prayers,”	my	mother	once	said.	The	night	I	 wished	for	 my	brother’s	death	I
thought,	Good,	so	be	it,	but	by	the	light	of	morning,	when	I	realized	that	I	had
written	a	sentence	for	which	I	would	never	forgive	myself,	I	ripped	it	out	of	my
notebook,	tore	it	to	shreds,	then	flushed	it	down	the	toilet,	hoping	God	would
forget.	What	had	I	done?	When	Nana	relapsed,	I	burrowed	in	my	shame.	I	went
quiet.
        I	went	quiet	and	my	mother	went	insane.	She	became	a	kind	of	one-woman
child	hunter,	driving	up	 and	down	the	streets	of	Huntsville	searching	for	my
brother.	At	church	she	would	move	up	to	the	altar	during	praise	and	worship	and
dance	around	like	a	woman	possessed.	If	the	song	made	any	mention	of	“falling
on	one’s	knees”	she	would	take	it	literally,	thudding	down	immediately	in	a	way
that	seemed	painful.
        Church	gossip	is	as	old	as	the	church	itself,	and	oh	how	my	church	loved	to
gossip.	Years	later,	Mary,	the	 pastor’s	daughter,	would	become	the	worship
leader.	Her	toddler	would	run	around	the	sanctuary	every	morning	before	she
took	him	to	the	nursery,	and	everyone	would	smile	sweetly	at	him,	all	the	while
remembering	the	circumstances	under	which	he	came	to	be.	That	gossip	was	as
juicy	as	a	peach.	My	congregation	got	fat	on	it,	but	when	Mary	got	married	we
starved.	Before	that	there	was	Nana	and	my	mother’s	ridiculous	dances	at	the
altar.	If	Mary’s	pregnancy	was	a	peach,	then	Nana	had	been	a	feast.
        Everyone	knew	that	Nana	had	gotten	hurt	in	a	game,	but	it	took	them	a

139
while	to	 catch	 up	to	 his	addiction.	 Every	 Sunday,	when	Pastor	John	 asked	for
prayer	requests,	my	mother	and	I	would	 put	Nana’s	name	in	the	basket.	Pray	for
his	healing,	we	said,	and,	at	first,	it	was	easy	for	everyone	to	assume	we	meant	his
ankle.	But	how	long	does	it	take	God	to	heal	a	sprained	ankle?


                                                              —

“I	  heard	 he’s	on	  drugs,”	 Mrs.	  Cline	  said.	 She	 was	 a	 deacon	 at	 the	 First
Assemblies.	Fifty-five	 years	old,	unmarried,	 straight	as	a	broom	with	lips	 so	thin
they	looked	like	a	slit	across	her	face.
        “No,”	 Mrs.	 Morton	gasped.
        “Oh	 yes,	honey.	Why	do	 you	think	 he	doesn’t	come	around	here	anymore?
He’s	not	playing	this	season,	so	we	know	he’s	not	too	busy.”
        “That’s	sad.	That’s	sad	he’s	on	drugs.”
        “It	  is	sad,	but—and	 I	 really	do	 hate	to	 say	this—their	 kind	 does	seem	to
have	a	taste	for	 drugs.	I	 mean,	they	are	always	 on	drugs.	That’s	why	 there’s	so
much	crime.”
        “You’re	 right.	I	 have	noticed	that.”
        I	 had	 been	studying	my	 Bible	 verses	in	 the	 Sunday	school	room	 when	 I
overheard	that	conversation	in	 the	hallway.	 If	 I’d	 heard	it	 today,	I	 know	what	 I
would	have	done.	I	 would	 have	marched	outside	and	told	 them	that	 there	is	 no
data	to	support	the	idea	that	black	people	are	biologically	 more	given	to	drugs	or
crime	than	 any	other	race.	I	 would	 have	marched	out	 of	that	 church	and	 never
looked	back.
        But	 I	was	ten	years	old	and	I	was	ashamed.	I	sat	stock	still	 in	my	 chair	and
hoped	that	they	couldn’t	hear	me	on	the	other	side	of	the	door.	I	gripped	the	open
flaps	of	 my	Bible	 so	tightly	 that	I	 left	 marks	pressed	into	the	 pages.	When	they
left,	I	 let	 out	the	breath	I	 was	holding,	and	pinched	 the	skin	between	my	 thumb
and	index	 finger,	 a	 trick	 I’d	 picked	 up	 to	 help	 keep	me	 from	 crying.	 In	 that
moment,	and	for	 the	 first	 time	 in	my	 life	 really,	 I	 hated	Nana	so	completely.	 I
hated	him,	and	I	hated	myself.


                                                              —

I	am	not	a	psychologist	or	a	historian	or	a	social	scientist.	I	can	examine	the	brain
of	a	depressed	animal,	but	I	am	 not	given	to	thinking	 about	what	 circumstances,

140
if	 any,	led	up	to	 that	depression.	Like	 everyone	else,	I	get	a	part	 of	 the	story,	a
single	line	to	study	and	recite,	to	memorize.
        When	 I	was	a	child,	 no	one	 ever	said	the	words	“institutionalized	  racism.”
We	hardly	 even	said	 the	word	 “racism.”	  I	 don’t	 think	 I	 took	 a	single	 class	in
college	that	talked	about	the	physiological	effects	of	years	of	personally	mediated
racism	and	internalized	 racism.	 This	 was	before	studies	 came	out	that	 showed
that	black	 women	 were	four	  times	more	 likely	  to	die	 from	  childbirth,	  before
people	were	talking	about	epigenetics	and	whether	or	not	trauma	was	heritable.	If
those	studies	were	out	there,	I	 never	read	them.	If	 those	classes	were	offered,	 I
never	took	them.	There	 was	little	interest	 in	these	ideas	back	then	because	there
was,	there	is,	little	interest	in	the	lives	of	black	people.
        What	I’m	 saying	is	I	didn’t	grow	 up	with	a	language	for,	a	way	to	explain,	to
parse	out,	my	self-loathing.	I	grew	up	only	with	 my	part,	my	little	 throbbing	 stone
of	self-hate	that	I	 carried	around	with	 me	to	church,	to	school,	to	all	 those	places
in	 my	 life	 that	 worked,	 it	 seemed	to	 me	 then,	 to	 affirm	  the	idea	 that	 I	 was
irreparably,	fatally,	wrong.	I	 was	a	child	who	liked	to	be	right.
        We	 were	the	only	black	 people	at	the	First	Assemblies	of	 God	Church;	my
mother	didn’t	 know	 any	 better.	She	thought	 the	 God	of	  America	 must	be	 the
same	as	the	 God	 of	 Ghana,	that	 the	 Jehovah	of	 the	 white	 church	 could	 not
possibly	be	different	 from	 the	 one	of	 the	black	church.	 That	day	when	 she	saw
the	marquee	outside	asking,	“Do	 you	feel	 lost?,”	that	day	when	 she	first	walked
into	the	 sanctuary,	she	began	to	lose	her	children,	 who	would	 learn	well	 before
she	did	that	not	all	churches	in	America	are	created	equal,	not	in	practice	and	not
in	politics.	And,	 for	me,	the	damage	of	going	to	a	church	where	people	whispered
disparaging	words	about	“my	kind”	 was	itself	 a	spiritual	 wound—so	deep	and	so
hidden	that	it	 has	taken	 me	years	to	find	  and	address	it.	I	 didn’t	 know	what	 to
make	of	 the	world	  that	I	 was	in	 back	then.	 I	 didn’t	 know	 how	to	 reconcile	 it.
When	my	 mother	 and	I	 made	 prayer	requests	for	  Nana,	did	 the	 congregation
really	pray?	Did	they	really	 care?	When	I	heard	the	gossip	of	those	two	women,	I
saw	the	veil	lift	 and	the	shadow	world	of	my	 religion	came	into	view.	 Where	was
God	in	all	of	 this?	Where	was	God	if	 he	was	not	in	the	hushed	quiet	of	a	Sunday
school	room?	Where	was	God	if	he	was	not	in	me?	If	my	blackness	was	a	kind	of
indictment,	 if	 Nana	would	 never	be	healed	and	if	 my	 congregation	could	never
truly	believe	in	the	possibility	 of	his	healing,	then	where	was	God?
        My	  journal	 entry	  from	 the	 night	 I	  heard	Mrs.	  Morton	 and	 Mrs.	  Cline
talking:

141
        Dear	God,
        Please	hurry	up	and	make	Buzz	better.	I	want	the	whole	church	to	see.


        I	 knew,	even	as	I	was	writing	that	 entry,	that	God	didn’t	 work	 that	way,	but
then	I	wondered,	how	exactly	did	he	work?	I	 doubted	him,	and	I	hated	myself	for
doubting	him.	 I	 thought	 that	Nana	 was	proving	 everyone	right	 about	us,	and	 I
wanted	him	to	get	better,	be	better,	because	I	thought	that	being	good	was	what	it
would	take	to	 prove	everyone	wrong.	 I	 walked	around	those	places,	pious	child
that	I	was,	thinking	that	my	 goodness	was	proof	negative.	“Look	at	me!”	I	wanted
to	shout.	I	wanted	to	be	a	living	 theorem,	a	Logos.	Science	and	math	had	already
taught	me	that	if	  there	were	many	exceptions	to	 a	rule,	 then	the	rule	 was	not	a
rule.	Look	at	me.
        This	 was	all	so	wrongheaded,	so	backward,	but	I	 didn’t	know	 how	to	 think
any	differently.	 The	rule	 was	never	a	rule,	but	I	 had	mistaken	it	 for	 one.	It	 took
me	years	of	questioning	 and	seeking	to	see	more	than	my	 little	 piece,	and	even
now	I	don’t	always	see	it.


                                                              —

My	mother	 went	insane	when	Nana	relapsed,	and	I	went	quiet.	I	burrowed	inside
my	own	mind,	hiding	 there,	feverishly	writing	 in	 my	journal,	 hoping	for	Rapture.
These	were	in	fact	the	end	times,	not	of	the	world	but	of	my	 belief.	I	 just	couldn’t
see	it	yet.
        I	 was	quiet,	and	I	was	angry	at	just	 how	easily	and	quickly	 everyone	in	our
lives	had	turned	on	Nana.	Even	 sports	could	no	longer	protect	 him.	 When	Nana
was	king,	Pastor	John	would	 sometimes	call	him	 up	onto	 the	stage	on	Sundays,
and	the	 congregation	would	 stretch	 out	our	 hands	and	 pray	for	  his	 upcoming
week,	for	 victory	 in	 all	the	games	that	he	was	about	to	 play.	Up	 there,	with	 his
head	bowed,	our	hands	outstretched	in	coronation,	Nana	received	every	blessing.
And	when	game	time	came	and	his	team	won,	all	of	us	were	gratified.	“How	great
is	our	God?”	we	would	sing	during	praise	and	worship,	and	we	would	believe	it.
        On	the	days,	rare	though	they	were,	when	Nana’s	team	lost,	I	would	listen	to
that	spark	of	rage	rush	through	the	crowd.
        “C’mon.”
        “Get	 your	head	in	the	game.”
        This	 was	basketball	in	 Alabama,	not	 football.	 People	didn’t	 care	as	much,

142
and	yet	still,	this	 was	the	nature	of	their	 caring.	Before	 Nana	had	made	his	team
important	in	our	 state,	the	stands	had	been	nearly	empty	at	every	game,	but	when
his	team	got	good,	every	spectator	became	an	expert.
        Nana	 played	exactly	 two	games	during	 his	 addiction.	 He	was	a	 mess	out
there,	sloppy	and	unfocused.	He	missed	shot	after	 shot;	he	dropped	the	ball	 and
sent	it	careening	toward	the	bleachers.
        “Where’d	 this	fucking	coon	learn	how	to	play?”	one	angry	fan	shouted,	and	I
couldn’t	believe	how	fast	the	fall,	how	quick	 the	turn.
        When	 Nana	was	down,	Pastor	John	 stopped	calling	him	 up	 to	the	altar	 to
receive	our	prayers,	our	outstretched	hands.	He	played	those	two	games	as	though
he	had	just	recently	heard	what	basketball	was.	On	the	night	 of	 the	last	game	he
ever	played,	he	was	booed	by	everyone	in	the	stands.	Both	sides,	both	sets	of	fans,
joined	their	 voices	in	chorus.	Nana	threw	the	ball	 as	hard	as	he	could	against	the
wall	when	the	 referee	made	a	call	he	 didn’t	like.	 The	 ref	kicked	 him	 out	of	 the
game	and	everyone	cheered	as	Nana	looked	around,	raising	his	middle	fingers	at
all	of	 us	and	storming	off	 the	court.	 In	the	stands	that	night,	booing,	 I	saw	Ryan
Green.	I	saw	Mrs.	Cline.	I	saw	my	church,	and	I	couldn’t	unsee.


                                                              —

Love	the	Lord	 your	God	 with	all	 your	 heart	and	 with	all	 your	 soul	and	with	 all
your	mind	and	with	all	 your	strength…Love	your	neighbor	as	yourself.	There	is	no
commandment	greater	than	these.	I	thought	about	that	verse	a	lot	 in	 those	days.
Three	pages	of	my	childhood	journals	 are	filled	 with	 that	verse,	copied	over	and
over	again	until	my	 handwriting	 gets	sloppy,	lazy.	I	was	trying	 to	remind	 myself
to	love	God,	to	love	my	neighbor.
        But	 the	instruction	is	 not	simply	 to	love	your	 neighbor.	It	 is	to	do	so	in	 the
same	way	as	you	love	yourself,	and	herein	was	the	challenge.	I	didn’t	love	myself,
and	even	if	 I	had,	 I	couldn’t	 love	my	 neighbor.	I	 had	begun	to	hate	my	 church,
hate	my	school,	my	town,	my	state.
        Try	 though	she	might,	my	mother	couldn’t	convince	Nana	to	come	to	church
with	us	again	after	 our	Sunday	in	the	 last	pew.	I	 was	relieved,	but	I	 didn’t	 share
that	with	 her.	 I	didn’t	 want	 everybody	staring	 at	us,	making	 their	 judgments.	 I
didn’t	want	further	 proof	 of	God’s	failure	 to	heal	my	 brother,	a	failure	 that	I	saw
as	unbelievably	cruel,	despite	a	lifetime	 of	hearing	that	God	works	 in	mysterious
ways.	I	 wasn’t	 interested	 in	 mystery.	 I	 wanted	 reason,	and	 it	  was	becoming

143
increasingly	clear	to	me	that	I	would	get	none	of	it	in	that	place	where	I	had	spent
so	much	of	 my	 life.	 If	 I	 could	 have	stopped	going	to	the	First	 Assemblies
altogether,	I	would	have.	Every	time	I	thought	I	might,	I	would	picture	my	mother
up	there	at	the	altar,	twirling	and	falling,	singing	with	praise,	and	I	knew	that	if	I
didn’t	go	to	 our	church	with	her	 she	would	simply	go	alone.	That	she	would
simply	be	alone,	the	last	person	on	Earth	who	still	believed	that	God	might	heal
her	son,	and	I	couldn’t	imagine	anything	lonelier	than	that.

144
                                                        37





Now	I	want	to	write	about	Nana’s	addiction	from	inside	it.	That’s	how	I	want	to
know	it,	as	though	it	were	my	own.	I	took	meticulous	notes	of	his	final	years	in
my	journal.	I	wrote	like	an	anthropologist	with	Nana	as	my	sole	subject.	I	can	tell
you	what	his	skin	looked	like	 (sallow),	what	his	hair	 looked	like	(uncombed,
uncut).	I	can	tell	you	that	he,	always	too	skinny,	had	lost	so	much	weight	that	his
eyes	started	to	bulge	against	the	sunkeness	of	his	orbital	sockets.	But	all	of	this
information	is	useless.	The	ethnography	of	my	journal	is	painful	to	 read	and
unhelpful	besides,	because	I	can	never	know	the	inside	of	my	brother’s	mind,
what	it	felt	 like	 to	move	through	the	world	in	his	body,	in	 his	final	days.	My
journal	entries	were	me	trying	to	find	a	way	into	a	place	that	has	no	entrances,	no
exits.
        Nana	started	stealing	from	our	mother.	Small	things	at	first,	her	wallet,	her
checkbook,	but	soon	the	car	was	gone	and	so	was	the	dining	room	table.	Soon
Nana	was	gone	too.	For	days	and	weeks	at	a	time	he	went	missing,	and	my
mother	went	after	him.	It	got	to	be	so	that	she	and	I	knew	the	names	of	every
receptionist	and	every	cleaning	lady	of	every	motel	in	Huntsville.
        “You	can	give	up	if	you	want	to,”	my	mother	would	sometimes	hiss	at	the
Chin	Chin	Man	over	the	phone,	“but	I	will	never	give	up.	I	will	never	give	up.”
        The	Chin	Chin	Man	called	regularly	in	those	days.	I’d	talk	to	him	on	the
phone	for	a	few	minutes,	answering	his	boring	questions	and	listening	to	the	way
time	and	guilt	had	changed	his	voice,	and	then	I	would	hand	the	phone	over	to	my
mother	and	wait	for	the	two	of	them	to	finish	fighting.
        “Where	were	you?”	my	mother	once	said	to	him	over	the	phone.	“Where
have	you	been?”	It	was	the	same	thing	she	said	to	Nana	on	the	nights	when	he
would	slink	in	through	the	back	door,	coming	down	from	a	high,	reeking	to	high
Heaven,	not	expecting	to	find	our	mother	holding	vigil	in	the	living	room.
        Those	were	the	days	of	the	broken	things.	Nana	punched	a	hole	through	the
wall.	He	smashed	the	television	down	onto	the	floor,	and	shattered	every	picture

145
frame	and	lightbulb	in	 the	house.	He	called	me	a	nosy	cunt	the	night	I	caught	him
raving	downstairs,	and	my	 mother	ran	up	 so	that	the	two	 of	us	could	 hide	from
him.
        We	blocked	the	door	to	my	 bedroom	with	a	chair,	but	soon	he	was	pounding
against	it.	“Fuck	you	 both,”	he	said,	and	we	could	hear	the	sound	of	 his	shoulder
smashing	against	the	door,	 and	we	could	 see	the	way	 the	door	 wanted	to	 give
from	 its	hinges,	wanted	to	let	 him	in.	 And	 my	mother	answered,	loud	in	 prayer,
“Lord,	 protect	my	son.	Lord,	protect	 my	son.”	I	 was	afraid	and	I	was	angry.	Who
would	protect	us?
        It	 was	almost	better	when	he	was	high.	When	he	was	high,	he	wasn’t	sick;	he
wasn’t	angry.	He	was	subdued,	quiet,	gone.	I	saw	him	shoot	up	only	once.	On	the
couch,	in	the	living	 room	of	 our	house,	he	plunged	a	needle	into	the	crook	of	his
elbow,	and	then	he	slipped	 away	somewhere,	oblivious	to	 me	and	to	 everything
else	around	him.	I	have	never	seen	a	needle	since	without	thinking	of	him.	I	 have
preferred	the	flesh	of	mice	to	that	of	 humans	because	I	never	want	to	put	a	needle
into	an	elbow.	I	cannot	see	a	median	cubital	vein	and	not	see	my	brother	nodding
off	and	away	on	our	couch.
        How	 do	I	 talk	 about	the	day	he	died?	I	 don’t	 remember	that	morning,	 and
my	journal	entry	 from	 the	night	before	says	only:	Buzz	looked	tired	but	good!	I’ve
read	that	line	 so	many	 times	in	 the	years	since,	and	 the	exclamation	point	 still
mocks	me.	I	 must	have	gone	to	school	that	 day.	I	must	 have	come	home,	made
myself	a	 snack,	and	waited	 for	 my	 mother	to	 get	home.	 I	 didn’t	expect	 to	see
Nana,	but	I	had	seen	him	the	night	before	and	I	wasn’t	worried.
        I	 do	remember	that	my	mother	didn’t	come	home	on	time.	 She	was	with	the
Foster	family,	new	to	her	since	Mrs.	 Palmer’s	passing.	She	was	back	on	day	shift,
so	she	usually	got	in	by	seven	o’clock.	Instead,	that	night,	she	shuffled	in	at	eight,
apologizing	while	 unloading	the	car.	 Mr.	 Foster’s	daughter	was	in	town	 and	the
woman	had	talked	her	ear	off.
        I’d	 made	myself	dinner	and	I	offered	 some	to	my	mother.	We	both	stared	at
the	clock,	and	then	the	door,	the	clock	 and	then	the	door.	He	didn’t	 come	in.	We
had	developed	a	routine,	an	unspoken	rule.	Nana	got	two	days	before	we	hopped
in	the	car	and	searched	for	him.	He	got	four	days	before	we	called	the	police,	but
it	had	only	come	to	that	once,	and	that	night	was	day	one.	We	weren’t	there	yet.
        We	didn’t	 know	to	 worry,	so	when	the	police	 knocked	on	our	door	at	about
nine	o’clock	to	tell	 us	that	Nana	had	overdosed	on	heroin	and	died	in	the	parking
lot	of	 a	Starbucks,	we	were	blindsided.	We’d	 thought	our	routine	 would	save	us,

146
save	him.
        I	didn’t	 write	anything	in	 my	journal	that	night	or	 for	many	years	thereafter.

147
                                                        38





I	ran	into	Katherine	at	the	sandwich	shop	about	a	week	after	I’d	bumbled	through
our	lunch.	I	saw	her	bent	over	before	a	wire	rack	of	 chips,	trying	to	pick	 out
which	ones	she	wanted,	and	I	turned	on	my	heels	to	escape.
        “Gifty!”	 she	shouted.	I’d	almost	made	it	to	the	door.	She	jogged	over	toward
me,	a	bag	of	sour	cream	and	onion	in	hand.	“How	are	you	doing?”	she	asked.
        “Oh	hi,	Katherine.	I’m	doing	great,	thanks,”	I	said.
        “Why	don’t	you	join	me	for	lunch?”
        “I’ve	got	a	lot	of	work	to	do.”
        “It’ll	still	be	there	after	you	eat,”	she	said,	reaching	for	my	hand.	“I	insist.”
        She	paid	for	the	chips	and	my	sandwich	as	well,	and	we	headed	over	to	the
high-tops	at	the	far	end	of	the	shop.	It	was	almost	empty	save	a	few	undergrads
who	had	made	their	way	over	to	this	graduate	student	part	of	campus,	probably
for	the	quiet,	the	 decreased	chance	of	recognition.	I’d	once	been	like	that,	so
lonely	that	I	 craved	further	loneliness.	Even	after	I’d	 made	a	few	friends	 in
college,	I	would	still	go	out	of	my	way	to	create	whatever	conditions	I	needed	that
might	allow	me	to	be	alone.	If	I’d	done	it	right	that	day,	I	wouldn’t	be	stuck	eating
with	Katherine.
        “Are	you	still	having	trouble	writing?”	Katherine	asked.
        “It’s	been	a	lot	better,”	 I	said.	I	 picked	at	my	 sandwich	while	Katherine
popped	open	her	bag	of	chips	and	started	eating	them	slowly,	one	chip	at	a	time.
        We	sat	there	quietly	for	 some	time.	I	 wanted	to	escape	the	intensity	of
Katherine’s	gaze,	and	so	I	stared	down	at	my	food	as	though	the	key	to	life	was
stuffed	between	sourdough	slices.	Finally,	Katherine	broke	the	silence.
        “You	know,	Steve	is	from	the	East	Coast	and	he	really	wants	to	move	back
after	I	 finish	 here,	but	 why	 would	anyone	want	to	 live	 anywhere	that	isn’t
California?	I	spent	a	summer	in	LA	and	now	even	the	Bay	Area	is	too	cold	for
me.	Seasons	are	overrated.”

148
        “Did	 you	decide	about	the	baby	thing?”
        She	looked	surprised.	Clearly	 she	didn’t	remember	telling	 me	about	Steve’s
surreptitious	ovulation	 calendar.	“We	 haven’t	 figured	 that	out	 yet.	He	 wants	to
start	trying,	but	 I	want	to	 wait	until	 after	my	 postdoc	at	least.	I’m	thirty-six,	 so	it
might	be	an	uphill	battle	maybe,	but	that’s	true	of	my	 work	too.	I	 just	don’t	know.
What	about	you?	Do	you	ever	think	about	having	kids?”
        I	 shook	 my	 head	quickly,	 too	 quickly.	 “I	  don’t	 think	 I’d	 be	a	 very	 good
mother,”	 I	 said.	 “Besides,	I	 haven’t	 had	 sex	in	 like	  a	year.”	 Suddenly,	 I	 felt
embarrassed	by	my	revelation,	but	Katherine	didn’t	seem	even	the	least	bit	fazed.
I	felt	 like	 I’d	shrugged	the	shoulder	of	my	dress	off,	 revealing	skin.	I’d	 lost	some
of	my	timidity	  around	the	subject	of	sex,	but	not	all	 of	it.	 For	years	I	hadn’t	been
able	to	reconcile	 wanting	to	 feel	good	 with	wanting	 to	 be	good,	two	things	 that
often	seemed	at	odds	during	 sex,	especially	sex	the	 way	I	 liked	 it.	 Every	 time,
afterward,	I	would	 lie	there	staring	at	the	ceiling,	picturing	 my	promises	like	little
balloons	floating	up	and	away,	ready	to	be	popped.
        I	 met	Justin,	the	guy	I	officially	 lost	my	 virginity	 to,	at	a	mixer	in	New	York
called	POC	x	 Ivy	League	the	summer	after	 I’d	 graduated	college.	The	first	 time
we	had	sex,	my	body	had	been	so	rigid,	my	vagina	so	tense,	that	he	looked	at	me
uncertainly	and	said,	“I	don’t	think	 I	 can	do	this.	Like	 literally,	 I	don’t	think	 I	can
get	it	in.”
        “What	 should	we	 do?”	I	 asked,	mortified	 but	determined.	 I	was	taking	 the
train	back	to	 Boston	in	 a	few	hours,	 and	I	wanted	this,	 wanted	him.	 He	left	 the
room	and	 came	back	with	 a	 jar	 of	 coconut	oil,	 and	after	 some	massaging	and
encouraging,	he	was	inside	me.	It	 hurt	then,	but	 by	the	 end	of	that	 summer,	we
had	found	 a	delicious	 rhythm,	 visiting	 each	 other	every	 few	 weekends	just	 to
spend	a	night	 or	 two	 together.	I	 started	 to	want	 more,	 more	scratching,	 more
talking.
        “Are	 you	 a	bad	girl?”	 Justin	would	ask	in	 bed.	I	 was	heading	to	California
soon	for	graduate	school,	and	we	both	knew,	had	always	known,	that	the	end	was
near.	“Are	you	a	bad,	bad	girl?”
        “Yes,”	 I	said	through	gritted	 teeth,	enjoying	the	pleasure	he	gave	me,	but	in
my	head,	I	thought,	No,	no,	no.	Why	can’t	I	be	good?
        Katherine	 finished	  eating	 her	 chips	 and	wiped	  her	 hands	on	 a	 napkin.
“You’re	 still	 in	 your	twenties,	 right?”	 she	said.	“Jesus,	you’re	so	 young,	and	so
damn	brilliant.	 I	honestly	 can’t	wait	to	 see	what	you	do	in	like	 five	 years,	and	if
kids	aren’t	a	part	of	that	equation,	who	cares?	Your	work	 is	going	to	be	big.	I	can

149
feel	it.	What	got	you	into	 this	field	anyway?”
        The	question	threw	 me	off	 guard,	which	was	probably	what	she’d	intended.
I	looked	 at	Katherine.	 Powder	from	  the	chips	had	 collected	on	 her	lips,	 giving
them	a	pale	white	shimmer.
        “My	  mom’s	depressed.	She’s	staying	with	 me	at	 the	moment.	 In	 my	bed.
She’s	suffered	 from	  depression	 in	 the	 past	 and	 had	 a	bad	 experience	 with
psychiatric	care,	so	she’s	really	resistant	to	getting	help.	So,	yeah,	she’s	been	here
with	 me	for	 about	two	 weeks	now.”	 The	words	 rushed	out	of	 me	and	I	 was	so
happy,	so	relieved,	once	they	were	said.
        Katherine	stretched	out	her	hand,	placed	it	over	my	own.	“I’m	 so	sorry.	This
must	be	really	hard	for	you,”	she	said.	“How	can	I	help?”
        Gye	Nyame,	I	wanted	to	say.	Only	God	can	help	me.


                                                              —

My	mother	 took	a	week	off	 of	 work	after	 Nana	died.	She	wanted	to	throw	a	big,
Ghanaian-style	funeral	 complete	 with	 food	  and	music	 and	 dancing.	 She	sent
money	and	 measurements	to	 the	 Chin	 Chin	 Man	 so	 that	 he	 could	 have	our
mourning	clothes	made.	When	they	 arrived,	I	 took	mine	 out	of	 the	package	and
held	it.	 It	 was	bloodred	 and	waxy	 to	the	 touch,	and	 I	didn’t	 want	 to	 wear	it.	 I
couldn’t	remember	the	last	time	I	had	been	required	to	wear	traditional	dress,	and
I	thought	it	 would	seem	like	 a	lie.	I	 felt	about	as	Ghanaian	as	apple	pie,	but	how
could	I	tell	that	to	my	mother?
        What	   weeping,	  what	   gnashing	  of	   teeth.	  My	   mother	   was	  nearly
unrecognizable	to	me.	 When	the	 policemen	 left	 our	house	the	 night	 of	 Nana’s
overdose,	she	fell	to	the	 ground,	rocking,	 clawing	at	her	 arms	and	legs	until	she
drew	blood,	crying	out	the	Lord’s	 name,	“Awurade,	Awurade,	Awurade.”	She	had
not	stopped	crying	since.	How	 could	I	 tell	her	that	 I	found	 my	mourning	 clothes
garish?	That	I	didn’t	want	the	attention	this	funeral	 would	draw?	I	didn’t	want	any
attention	at	all,	and	in	 those	first	 few	weeks	I	 was	safe	from	 it.	Nothing	 teaches
you	the	true	 nature	of	 your	friendships	 like	 a	sudden	death,	worse	still,	 a	death
that’s	shrouded	in	shame.	No	one	knew	how	to	talk	to	us,	and	so	they	didn’t	even
try.	I	 should	never	have	been	left	alone	with	my	mother	 in	those	days	after	Nana
died,	and	my	mother	 should	never	have	been	left	alone	with	 herself.	Where	 was
our	church?	Where	 were	the	few	 Ghanaians,	scattered	through	Alabama,	whom
my	mother	 had	 built	 friendships	 with?	  Where	was	 my	 father?	 My	 mother,	 a

150
woman	who	 hardly	ever	 cried,	cried	 so	much	 that	first	  week	she	fainted	 from
dehydration.	I	stood	over	her	body,	fanning	her	with	 the	closest	thing	I	could	find
—her	 Bible.	  When	 she	 came	 to	 and	 figured	  out	  what	 had	 happened,	she
apologized.	She	promised	me	that	she	wouldn’t	cry	anymore,	a	promise	she	wasn’t
yet	capable	of	keeping.
        Where	 was	Pastor	John	in	all	 of	 this?	He	and	his	 wife	 sent	flowers	to	 our
house	that	first	 week.	He	came	by	after	 church	the	 third	 Sunday,	the	only	three
Sundays	since	joining	the	First	Assemblies	that	my	 mother	had	missed	a	service.
I	answered	the	door,	and	the	first	 thing	 he	did	was	put	 his	hand	on	my	 shoulder
and	start	praying.
        “Lord,	  I	ask	that	 you	cover	this	 young	lady	 with	 your	blessings.	I	ask	that
you	remind	her	that	you	are	near,	that	you	walk	with	her	as	she	walks	through	her
grief.”
        I	 wanted	to	shrug	his	arm	away,	but	I	was	so	grateful	to	see	him,	so	grateful
for	his,	for	 anyone’s,	touch	that	I	stood	there	and	I	received.
        He	came	into	the	house.	My	mother	was	in	the	living	 room,	and	Pastor	John
went	to	her,	sat	down	beside	her	on	our	couch.	He	put	his	hands	on	her	shoulders,
and	she	crumpled.	 It	 looked	as	intimate	 to	 me	 as	nakedness,	and	so	I	 left	 the
room,	giving	them	space	to	be	with	 each	other	and	with	the	Lord.	 Though	I	have
not	always	loved	Pastor	John,	I	 loved	him	 dearly	the	day	that	 he	finally	 showed
up.	He	has	stayed	in	my	life	and	my	mother’s	life	ever	since.


                                                              —

I	never	told	my	mother	that	I	hated	the	funeral	cloth.	 I	wore	mine,	and	my	mother
wore	hers,	and	the	two	 of	 us	welcomed	the	 guests	to	the	clubhouse	my	 mother
had	rented	for	 Nana’s	funeral.	 Ghanaians	came—from	Alabama	 and	Tennessee
and	Ohio	 and	Illinois.	  And	 in	 Ghana,	 at	the	 funeral	 that	 the	Chin	 Chin	 Man
threw,	 Ghanaians	 came—from	  Cape	 Coast	 and	  Mampong	 and	 Accra	  and
Takoradi.
        My	 mother	paced	up	and	down	the	room,	singing:


Ohunu	mu	nni	me	dua	bi	na	masɔ	mu
Nsuo	ayiri	me	oo,	na	otwafoɔ	ne	hwan?


There	is	no	branch	which	I	could	grasp
I	am	in	swamped	waters,	where	is	my	savior?

151
I	am	in	swamped	waters,	where	is	my	savior?


        I	 didn’t	know	 the	song,	and	even	if	I	 had,	I’m	 not	sure	I	would	 have	joined
in.	 I	 sat	in	 the	 front	 row	 with	 the	 handful	 of	 other	 Ghanaians	worthy	 of	 the
receiving	line	 and	 shook	hands	with	 all	 the	mourners	 who	 passed	through.	As
their	hands	gripped	mine,	all	I	could	think	 about	was	how	desperate	I	was	to	wash
away	each	touch,	to	turn	the	faucet	to	scalding	heat,	to	get	clean,	get	rid.
        We	 were	 at	 the	 Elks	 Lodge,	 the	only	 facility	   large	enough	 to	 hold	 the
extravagant	funeral	 my	 mother	 wanted	to	 throw.	 But	 the	 Elks	 Lodge	 was	no
Kumasi	funeral	tent,	and	though	we	had	invited	 everyone	from	Nana’s	basketball
team,	his	old	 soccer	teams,	everyone	from	 the	church,	 the	entirety	 of	 the	little
world	my	 mother	had	managed	to	build	 in	fifteen	 years,	the	space	was	still	only
half	full.
        My	 mother	kept	pacing	and	singing	her	song:


Prayԑe,	mene	womma	oo
Ena	e,	akamenkoa	oo
Agya	e,	ahia	me	oo


What	will	 become	of	us
I	am	left	alone
I	am	impoverished


        The	Ghanaians	wept	and	paced,	threw	 up	their	 hands	and	questioned	God.
The	Americans	stood,	baffled.
        Before	 long,	Pastor	John	took	the	microphone	and	went	up	to	the	makeshift
pulpit	at	the	front	of	 the	room	in	order	to	say	a	word.
        “We	 know	 that	Nana	was	a	 talented	young	man.	Many	 of	 us	in	 this	room
saw	him	 on	 the	basketball	 court,	 shooting	that	 basketball	toward	 the	 Heavens
themselves.	It	brought	us	joy	to	watch	him	and	to	recognize	in	this	young	man	the
glory	of	 the	Lord.	 Now	 whenever	a	young	person	dies,	it’s	 easy	for	 those	of	us
who	were	left	 behind	to	get	angry.	We	think,	 why	 would	God	do	 this?	Nana	had
so	much	to	give,	God,	 why?	It’s	normal	 to	feel	that	 way,	but	let	 me	remind	you,
God	doesn’t	make	mistakes.	I	 said,	God	doesn’t	make	mistakes.	Amen?	 God	in
his	infinite	 wisdom	 saw	fit	 to	 bring	Nana	home	 to	him,	 and	we	have	to	 believe
that	the	Heaven	where	Nana	is	now	is	so	much	more	wonderful	than	anything	this

152
world	had	to	offer	  him.	Nana	is	in	 a	better	place,	with	 our	Heavenly	Father,	and
one	day	we	will	have	the	great	joy,	the	great,	great	joy,	of	meeting	him	there.”
        I	 sat	 there	 listening	 to	 Pastor	John’s	 words,	 listening	 to	 the	 amens	and
hallelujahs	that	rose	up	in	chorus	around	those	words,	thinking,	Nana	would	have
hated	all	of	 this.	And	that	 knowledge,	and	that	roomful	 of	 people	who	knew	my
brother	but	didn’t	 know	him,	 who	skirted	 around	the	circumstances	of	his	death,
talking	 about	him	 as	 though	only	 the	 portion	 of	 his	 life	 that	 had	 taken	place
before	his	addiction	was	worthy	of	examination	and	compassion,	wrecked	me	and
felled	the	 long-growing	tree	of	 my	 belief.	 I	sat	there	in	 that	lodge,	reduced	to	 a
stump,	wondering	what	would	become	of	me.

153
                                                        39





The	Chin	Chin	Man	had	sent	us	pictures	of	Nana’s	Ghanaian	funeral.	There	were
hundreds	of	people	gathered	in	a	tent	in	Kumasi,	wearing	clothes	similar	to	the
ones	my	mother	and	I	had	worn.	My	father	was	in	only	one	of	the	photos.	He
looked	stately	in	his	black-and-red	wrapper.	His	face	was	an	old,	faded	memory.	I
had	never	looked	like	him,	but,	staring	at	the	photo,	I	could	see	myself	in	his	bent
head,	his	sad	eyes.
        “They	had	a	good	turnout,”	 my	mother	said	as	she	flipped	 through	the
photos.	“Your	father	did	well.”
        I	didn’t	know	any	of	the	other	people	pictured.	Most	of	them	hadn’t	known
Nana,	but	a	few	said	that	they	could	remember	the	baby	he	once	was.
        When	the	Chin	Chin	Man	called	to	ask	if	 we	had	received	the	photos,	I
talked	to	him	for	a	few	minutes.
        “What	did	you	tell	everyone?”	I	asked	him.
        “What	do	you	mean?”
        “About	how	Nana	died.	What	did	you	tell	 them?	What	did	you	tell	your
wife?”
        He	paused	and	I	looked	at	the	photo	of	him,	waiting	for	an	answer.	“I	said
he	was	sick.	I	said	he	was	sick.	Is	that	not	true?”
        I	didn’t	even	hand	the	phone	to	my	mother.	I	just	hung	up.	I	knew	she	would
call	him	back	and	that	the	two	of	them	would	whisper	about	me	before	they	went
over	every	detail	about	the	funeral.	What	was	eaten,	what	songs	were	played,
what	dances	danced.
        “I	don’t	like	 how	you	disrespected	your	father,”	my	mother	said	later	that
day.	She	hadn’t	gone	to	work	in	two	weeks,	and	it	was	strange	for	me	to	see	her	in
the	house	at	every	hour,	doing	everyday	things,	coming	to	my	room	to	dispense	a
parenting	reproach	an	American	child	might	get	on	television.	In	those	first	few
weeks	after	Nana	died,	before	my	mother’s	crash,	I’d	felt	as	though	I	was	living

154
the	same	life,	but	upside	down,	backward.	Things	looked	normal	to	 the	untrained
eye,	but	when	had	my	mother	 ever	been	home,	awake,	talking	 to	me	at	three	 in
the	afternoon?
        “Sorry,”	 I	said.
        “They	 had	a	good	turnout	at	the	funeral,”	she	said.
        “You	 already	said	that.”
        She	glared	at	me	in	warning	and	I	remembered	myself.	Things	hadn’t	gotten
so	backward	that	I	 could	become	a	regular	American	 preteen	girl,	 mouthing	off
to	her	mother.
        “Do	 you	wish	you	could	have	been	there?”	I	asked,	changing	course.
        “In	 Ghana?	No.	Nana	would	not	have	wanted	that.”
        She	stood	there	 leaning	against	my	doorframe	 for	 a	 little	 while	 longer.	In
those	days,	and	still,	I	 was	always	wondering	how	to	 be	with	 her.	Should	I	 have
gotten	up	 and	forced	  her	into	 a	 hug?	She	 told	 me	she	 was	going	 to	 take	an
Ambien.	 She	left	 the	room,	 and	I	 could	hear	 her	rustling	 around	the	bathroom
searching	for	the	sleeping	pills	she’d	come	to	rely	on	to	survive	her	many	years	of
working	the	night	shift.	 I	could	hear	her	get	into	bed.	Little	 did	I	know.


                                                              —

The	Ambien	  made	my	 mother	 loopy	 and	mean.	She	would	 take	 one,	but	 she
wouldn’t	 fall	 asleep	right	  away.	Instead	 she	would	 wander	 around	the	 house,
looking	for	 trouble.	 Once,	she	found	me	 in	the	kitchen	 making	 myself	a	peanut
butter	sandwich	and	she	said,	“You	know	I	didn’t	 want	another	child	after	 Nana.”
On	Ambien,	her	words	were	always	slow,	slurred,	like	each	one	was	dipped	in	the
shocked	sleep	of	that	drug	before	it	escaped	her	lips.
        “I	 only	wanted	Nana,”	she	said,	“and	now	I	only	have	you.”
        I	 know	  how	 this	 makes	her	 sound.	She	 said	 those	words	 and	then	 she
ambled	back	upstairs	to	her	bedroom.	Within	 minutes,	I	could	hear	her	snoring.	I
was	hurt	by	what	 she	said,	but	I	understood	what	 she	meant.	I	understood	and	I
forgave.	I	only	wanted	Nana,	too,	but	I	only	had	my	mother.
        Whenever	 she	woke	 up	from	  the	drug-induced	 sleep,	she	looked	 frantic,
like	 a	woman	who	 had	been	dropped	down	 onto	some	deserted	island	and	told
that	she	had	only	 an	hour	to	 find	 water.	Her	 eyes	were	wild.	 The	pupils	 darted
around,	searching,	searching.	Watching	her,	 I	would	 feel	 like	 a	lion	 tamer	or	 a

155
snake	charmer.	Whoa	there,	I’d	think	as	she	slipped	slowly	back	into	reality.
        “Where	 am	I?”	she	asked	one	day.
        “You’re	 at	home.	At	your	house	in	Huntsville,”	 I	said.
        She	shook	her	head,	and	her	eyes	stopped	searching.	Instead	they	found	me
out,	found	me	wanting.	“No,”	 she	said,	and	then	louder	still,	“No.”	 She	went	back
upstairs,	got	back	in	bed.	That	was	the	beginning.

156
                                                        40





My	mother	in	bed	at	fifty-two.	My	mother	in	bed	at	sixty-eight.	When	I	lay	the
two	images	of	her	side	by	side,	looking	for	the	differences,	at	first	there	seem	to
be	few.	She	was	older,	thinner,	more	wrinkled.	Her	hair,	late	to	gray,	was	now
sprouting	a	few	silver	strands	here	and	there.	These	differences	were	subtle	but
present.	Harder	to	spot:	me	at	eleven—out	of	my	depth;	me	at	twenty-eight—still
so.


                                                          —

Ambien	is	a	drug	meant	only	for	the	short	term.	It’s	a	drug	for	 shift	workers,
people	who’ve	long	lost	their	circadian	rhythm,	but	it’s	also	used	by	people	who
just	want	to	fall	asleep	a	little	easier.	The	drug	is	in	a	class	known	as	hypnotics,
and	it	seemed	to	me,	that	first	day	when	I	couldn’t	get	my	mother	out	of	bed,	that
the	hypnosis	had	simply	worked	too	well.
        I	had	been	skipping	church	ever	since	Nana’s	funeral,	and	that	first	day	of
my	mother’s	slumber	I	considered	skipping	school	too.	It	was	the	only	time	in	my
life	that	I	 can	remember	not	wanting	to	go	to	school,	because	while	I	hated	the
social	aspects	of	my	middle	school,	I	loved	school	itself.	I	loved	the	classrooms,
and	I	especially	loved	the	library	with	its	old,	damp	smell.
        I	couldn’t	get	my	mother	up,	so	I	decided	to	put	off	thinking	about	what	to
do	and	walk	to	school.
        “Are	you	all	right,	Gifty?”	Mrs.	Greer,	the	librarian,	asked	when	she	saw	me
in	the	stacks.	I	was	letting	the	sweat	from	my	walk	cool	under	the	frigid	blast	of
the	air	conditioner.	I	hadn’t	expected	anyone	to	be	in	the	library	at	that	early	hour.
Even	Mrs.	Greer	tended	to	show	up	a	bit	late,	supersized	Diet	Coke	in	hand	and	a
sheepish	grin	on	the	days	I	was	there	first,	browsing	while	she	booted	up	the
computers	for	the	checkout	system.	She	was	a	librarian	who	was	always	thinking
about	ways	to	make	reading	hip	and	cool	for	young	people.	The	problem	was	she

157
said	things	like	“Let’s	make	reading	hip	 and	cool	for	all	 you	young	people”	to	the
students	themselves,	which	meant	her	plans	would	never	work.
        I	 didn’t	 mind	 that	the	library	 was	neither	 cool	nor	 hip.	 I	liked	 Mrs.	 Greer
with	her	 soda	addiction	and	her	dedication	to	 the	eighties	perm.	In	 fact,	if	 there
was	anyone	 at	 school	 that	 year	  who	 would	 have	 honestly	 cared	 about	 my
problems	at	home,	who	 would	 have	listened	to	my	 worries	 and	found	 a	way	to
help,	it	would	have	been	Mrs.	Greer.
        “I’m	 fine,”	  I	told	 her,	and	as	soon	as	the	lie	 left	 my	lips	 I	knew	 that	I	 was
going	to	take	care	of	 my	mother	 myself.	I	 was	going	to	nurse	her	back	to	health
through	the	sheer	force	of	my	eleven-year-old	will.	I	 would	not	lose	her.


                                                              —

My	mother	 at	sixty-eight	 and	me	at	twenty-eight.	 Katherine	 started	dropping	by
my	office.	 She	brought	baked	goods:	cookies	and	pies,	fresh	bread,	a	pound	cake.
She	would	sit	in	the	corner	 of	my	 office	 and	insist	that	we	tuck	 in	to	whatever	it
was	she	had	brought	right	away,	even	if	I	was	in	the	middle	of	writing,	 which	was
my	usual	excuse	and	almost	never	really	true.	“I’ve	never	tried	this	recipe	before,”
Katherine	would	say,	brushing	off	my	faint	 protests.	“Let’s	see	if	it’s	any	good.”
        It	 was	always	good.	I	knew	she	was	not	exactly	lying,	 but	skirting	 the	truth
about	the	reason	for	her	visits.	 These	home-baked	treats	were	her	way	of	saying
that	she	was	there	if	I	needed	her.	I	wasn’t	ready	to	need	her,	but	I	ate	everything
she	made.	I	brought	the	baked	goods	home	to	my	mother,	and,	to	my	delight,	she
ate	some	of	the	things	too.	When	Katherine	 came	back,	I	would	say,	“I	 think	 my
mom	really	liked	the	lemon	pound	cake,”	and	the	next	day,	there	would	be	a	fresh
lemon	pound	cake	in	 my	mailbox,	 wrapped	in	cellophane	and	tied	 with	 ribbons,
and	so	professional	 looking	 that	 I	 started	calling	 them	“Kathy’s	  Cakes”	in	 my
head,	capital	letters	 and	everything,	 like	 she	was	a	one-woman	 bakery.	I	 don’t
know	how	she	found	the	time.


                                                              —

I	rushed	home	from	  school	early	the	first	  week	of	 my	mother’s	 bedroom	exile.
Every	afternoon	 was	the	 same.	I	 would	 push	her	 arm	and	 she	would	 murmur
softly,	loudly	 enough	to	 convince	me	that	she	was	still	 alive.	 I	made	her	 peanut
butter	and	 jelly	 sandwiches,	and	when,	hours	 later,	I	 found	 them	 untouched,	I
threw	them	out	and	washed	the	plates.	I	cleaned	everything	I	could	think	to	 clean

158
—the	bathroom,	 the	 garage,	her	bedroom	 and	mine.	 I	 never	went	 into	 Nana’s
room.	Instead,	I	 dragged	the	 steam	cleaner	out	from	  the	nether	reaches	of	 the
closet	and	steamed	the	living	 room	 carpet,	emptying	 the	grayish	water	 into	 the
bathtub	over	and	over	again.	It	soothed	me	to	 see	all	of	the	filth	  travel	down	the
drain,	leaving	nothing	but	cleaner	and	cleaner	water	in	its	stead.	I	wanted	my	life
to	look	like	 that	process.	I	wanted	my	mother	and	me	to	come	out	of	this	difficult
period	clear,	free.
        I	 was	accustomed	to	being	alone	at	home	but	this,	this	false	 aloneness,	was
so	much	 worse	than	 any	 loneliness	I	 had	 ever	felt	  before.	 Knowing	 that	 my
mother	was	in	the	house,	knowing	that	 she	couldn’t,	wouldn’t,	get	out	 of	the	bed
to	be	near	me,	to	help	me	in	my	sadness,	made	me	angry	and	then	my	anger	made
me	feel	guilty,	 and	so	on	 and	so	on,	in	 a	terrible	 loop.	To	 combat	it,	 I	 kept	the
television	on	from	the	time	 I	came	home	in	the	afternoons	to	the	time	I	left	 in	the
mornings.	I	wanted	my	mother	to	 hear	it,	to	come	out	of	 her	bedroom	and	yell	at
me	about	how	much	energy	I	was	wasting.	I	 wanted	to	hear	her	tell	me,	 down	to
the	cent,	how	much	she	paid	in	electricity	every	month,	how	much	money	my	life
was	costing	her—me,	the	child	she	had	never	wanted.
        “Don’t	 let	the	cold	 air	out,”	she	used	to	say	when	she	caught	me	staring	into
the	vortex	of	our	refrigerator	 for	 too	long,	hoping	the	yet	unknown	thing	I	wanted
to	 eat	 would	 magically	  reveal	 itself.	  “Do	  you	 know	  how	 much	  I	 pay	 for
electricity?”
        So,	as	she	lay	in	bed,	I	kept	the	TV	on.	I	let	the	cold	air	out.


                                                              —

Han	knocked	on	the	door	of	my	office.
        “Come	 in,”	I	 said.	Kathy	had	dropped	off	one	of	 her	cakes	earlier,	and	it	sat
there	on	my	desk,	beautifully	wrapped,	taunting	me.
        “I’m	 headed	to	Philz	for	a	coffee.	Can	I	get	you	anything?”
        “Aw,	 thanks,	Han,”	I	said.	“I’m	 actually	going	to	go	home	soon.”
        “Wow,	 Gifty	 taking	the	rest	of	the	day	off?”	 he	said.	“What’s	the	occasion?”
        I	swallowed	hard.	“My	 mom’s	in	town,”	 I	said.	“I	 was	thinking	we’d	split	this
strawberry	cake	Katherine	made.”
        I	 knew	 it	 was	magical	 thinking,	  but	it	  made	me	feel	 better	 to	 say	it,	 to
imagine	my	mother	and	me	sitting	 on	my	small	 balcony	with	two	 forks	 and	a	fat
slice	of	cake.

159
        Han	said,	 “See	you	tomorrow,	 then,”	and	 I	packed	up	 the	rest	of	 my	stuff
and	drove	home.	When	 I	 got	there,	 I	set	Kathy’s	 Cake	down	 on	the	 nightstand
next	to	my	mother	and	picked	up	the	Bible.	I	started	reading	to	her	from	 the	book
of	John.	It	was	her	favorite	Gospel,	and,	though	it	seemed	like	forever	 ago,	it	had
been	mine	as	well.	I	wanted	to	read	to	her	 about	Lazarus,	the	man	from	Bethany
whom	Jesus	had	raised	from	the	dead.
        Even	when	I	 was	a	child,	 this	miracle	had	seemed	like	 a	stretch	to	me,	too
miraculous	an	event	in	a	book	 filled	 with	 miraculous	events.	David	and	Goliath,
Daniel	and	the	 lion’s	den,	even	Jonah	and	the	whale,	 had	seemed	plausible,	but
Lazarus,	four	days	dead,	then	beckoned	back	to	life	with	 one	“Come	forth”	 from
Jesus,	seemed	like	a	step	too	far.
        The	problem	for	 me	then	wasn’t	that	I	didn’t	believe	that	Jesus	could	do	it.	It
was	that	I	didn’t	understand	why	he	would.	I’d	spent	every	Easter	of	my	childhood
in	a	pastel-colored	dress	and	white	patent-leather	shoes,	scream-singing	“He	is	ri-
i-i-sen,	HE	IS	RI-I-I-SEN,	  AND	 HE	LIVES	 FOREVERMORE,”	  celebrating	with
relish	the	resurrection	of	 a	man	whom	 death	could	not	conquer.	And	 so	what	to
make	of	Lazarus’s	coming	forth?	 Why	 would	Jesus	steal	his	own	thunder	in	that
way,	and	 why	 did	 we	not	 sing	 songs	for	 Lazarus,	the	 man	 who	God	 thought
deserved	to	live	again?
        “Our	friend	 Lazarus	sleeps,	but	I	go	that	I	may	wake	him	up,”	I	read,	but	my
mother	didn’t	stir.	I	 put	the	Bible	away	and	went	back	into	the	kitchen	to	put	a	pot
of	tea	on.	Thinking	about	Lazarus	has	always	led	me	to	think	about	what	it	means
to	be	alive,	what	it	 means	to	participate	in	the	world,	 to	be	awake.	When	I	 was	a
child,	I	 wondered	how	 long	Lazarus	lived	 after	 he	died.	 Was	he	still	 among	us
now?	An	ancient,	a	vampire,	the	last	remaining	miracle?	 I	wanted	an	entire	book
of	the	Bible	to	 be	devoted	to	him	and	to	how	he	must	have	felt	to	be	the	recipient
of	God’s	strange	and	amazing	grace.	I	wondered	if	 he	was	the	same	man	he	was
before	he	cheated	death	or	if	 he	was	forever	changed,	and	I	wondered	how	long
forever	was	to	a	man	who	had	once	been	asleep.
        Looking	 back,	I	could	see	that	I	was	so	easily	psychoanalyzable.	I	stirred	my
tea,	thought	 about	 Katherine,	 thought	 about	 Lazarus,	and	 played	therapist	 to
myself,	recognizing	the	cliché	 of	 picking	 the	book	of	 John,	picking	 Lazarus,	for
that	particular	moment	in	my	life.
        “Do	 you	 believe	 in	 the	Gospel	of	 Jesus	Christ	 as	evidenced	by	 the	Holy
Spirit?”	I	 asked	myself,	laughing	alone	in	my	kitchen.	I	didn’t	bother	answering.


                                                              —

160
                                                              —

In	Philosophical	Foundations	of	Neuroscience,	Bennett	and	Hacker	write:


        What	 [neuroscience]	cannot	do	is	 replace	the	wide	 range	of	ordinary
        psychological	 explanations	of	  human	activities	 in	 terms	 of	 reasons,
        intentions,	   purposes,	  goals,	  values,	  rules	  and	  conventions	  by
        neurological	 explanations…For	  it	 makes	 no	 sense	to	 ascribe	 such
        psychological	attributes	to	 anything	less	than	the	animal	as	a	whole.	It
        is	 the	animal	 that	 perceives,	not	 parts	of	 its	 brain,	 and	it	 is	 human
        beings	 who	 think	  and	 reason,	not	 their	  brains.	 The	 brain	 and	 its
        activities	 make	it	possible	for	us—not	for	 it—to	 perceive	and	think,	to
        feel	emotions,	and	to	form	 and	pursue	projects.


        While	  there	 were	many	 “philosophy	  and	the	 mind”	  or	 “philosophy	  and
psychology”	courses	offered	when	I	was	an	undergrad,	there	were	few	philosophy
and	 neuroscience	 courses	 to	  be	  found.	  Bennett	  and	 Hacker’s	  book	  was
recommended	to	me	my	 junior	 year	by	 a	TA	 named	Fred	who	 had	once	called
me	“unnerving	and	untraditional,”	  which	I	 took	 to	mean	that	he	thought	 I	asked
too	many	of	the	wrong	kinds	 of	questions.	I’m	fairly	 certain	he	gave	me	the	book
to	get	me	 out	of	 his	office	  hours,	if	 not	 forever,	then	 at	least	for	 the	length	 of
time	it	 would	take	 me	to	read	it.	 I	had	never	thought	 of	my	 scientific	 questions,
my	religious	questions,	as	philosophical	questions,	but	nonetheless,	I	went	back	to
my	dorm’s	common	room,	opened	the	book,	and	read	until	I	 was	bleary-eyed	and
exhausted.	I	was	back	in	Fred’s	office	the	next	week.
        “I	 know	 that	 psychology	and	neuroscience	have	to	 work	 in	 concert	if	  we
want	to	address	the	full	range	of	human	behavior,	and	I	really	do	 love	the	idea	of
the	whole	animal,	 but	I	 guess	my	question	is	 that	if	 the	 brain	can’t	 account	for
things	like	reason	and	emotion,	then	what	can?	If	 the	brain	makes	it	 possible	for
‘us’	to	feel	and	think,	then	what	is	‘us’?	Do	you	believe	in	souls?”	I	was	breathless.
Fred’s	office	was	a	long	walk	 from	my	 last	class,	and	I	had	jogged	there	to	try	to
catch	him	before	he	left	for	 lunch.
        “Gifty,	  I	actually	haven’t	read	the	book.	I	just	thought	you	might	like	 it.”
        “Oh,”	 I	said.
        “I’ll	 give	it	 a	read	if	you	want	to	talk	about	it	with	 me,	though,”	he	said.
        “That’s	 all	 right,”	  I	 said,	inching	  away.	“Do	 you	 want	 the	 door	 open	or
closed?”

161
        I	 took	the	long	way	home	from	 Fred’s	office,	 wondering	if	 it	was	too	late	to
change	my	mind	and	become	a	doctor.	At	least	then	I	could	look	 at	the	body	and
see	a	body,	look	at	a	brain	and	see	a	brain,	not	a	mystery	that	can	never	be	solved,
not	an	 “us”	 that	 can	 never	be	 explained.	All	  of	  my	 years	of	 Christianity,	  of
considering	the	heart,	the	soul,	and	the	mind	with	which	 Scripture	tells	us	to	love
the	Lord,	had	primed	me	to	 believe	in	the	great	mystery	of	 our	existence,	but	the
closer	I	tried	to	get	to	uncovering	it,	the	further	 away	the	objects	moved.	The	fact
that	I	 can	 locate	the	 part	 of	 the	 brain	 where	 memory	 is	stored	 only	 answers
questions	of	where	and	perhaps	even	how.	It	does	little	to	 answer	the	why.	I	was
always,	I	am	ever,	unnerved.


                                                              —

This	is	something	I	would	 never	say	in	a	lecture	or	a	presentation	or,	God	forbid,
a	paper,	but,	at	a	certain	point,	 science	fails.	 Questions	become	guesses	become
philosophical	ideas	about	how	something	should	probably,	 maybe,	be.	I	grew	up
around	people	who	 were	distrustful	 of	 science,	who	 thought	of	 it	 as	a	cunning
trick	 to	rob	 them	of	 their	 faith,	 and	I	 have	been	educated	around	scientists	and
laypeople	alike	who	 talk	 about	religion	 as	though	it	 were	a	comfort	 blanket	 for
the	dumb	and	the	weak,	a	way	to	extol	the	virtues	of	a	God	more	improbable	than
our	own	 human	existence.	But	 this	tension,	 this	idea	 that	one	 must	necessarily
choose	between	science	and	religion,	is	false.	 I	used	to	see	the	world	 through	 a
God	lens,	and	when	that	lens	clouded,	I	turned	to	 science.	Both	became,	for	me,
valuable	ways	of	 seeing,	but	ultimately	 both	have	failed	 to	 fully	 satisfy	 in	their
aim:	to	make	clear,	to	make	meaning.
        “You’re	  not	 serious,”	 Anne	 said	 that	 day	 in	 Integrated	 Science	when	 I
revealed	my	former	 Jesus	freak.	She’d	spent	our	entire	 friendship	 performing	 a
kind	of	 evangelism	of	 her	own,	trying	 to	disabuse	me	of	 my	faith.	 I	 didn’t	 need
her	help;	I’d	been	doing	that	work	on	my	own	for	years.
        “Do	 you	 believe	 in	evolution?”	  she	asked	one	sunny	spring	 day.	We	 had
dragged	a	couple	of	picnic	 blankets	out	 onto	the	lawn	so	that	 we	could	study	 in
the	sunshine.	It	was	among	the	happiest	times	of	my	life.	 And	 though	we	argued
all	the	time	 and	though	we	wouldn’t	 stay	friends	 for	 much	longer,	she	knew	me
better	than	anyone	had	ever	known	me.	Even	my	mother,	 flesh	of	 my	flesh,	 had
never	really	seen	me	the	way	Anne	saw	me.	Only	Nana	had	known	me	better.
        “Of	 course	I	believe	in	evolution,”	 I	said.

162
        “Okay,	  but	 how	 can	you	 believe	 in	 evolution	 and	 also	believe	 in	 God?
Creationism	and	evolution	are	diametrically	opposed.”
        I	 plucked	 a	weed	from	 the	grass	at	the	 edge	of	the	 blanket	and	started	to
crush	its	 petals	 in	 my	 hand,	smearing	 my	 fingers	 with	  yellow	 pigment,	 then
presenting	that	color	to	Anne	as	though	it	 were	a	gift.	“I	 think	 we’re	made	out	of
stardust	and	God	made	the	stars,”	I	said.	I	blew	and	yellow	dust	flew	 into	the	air,
into	Anne’s	hair,	and	she	looked	at	me	like	I	was	crazy,	and	she	saw	me.


                                                              —

I	don’t	know	 why	Jesus	would	raise	Lazarus	from	the	dead,	but	I	also	don’t	know
why	some	mice	stop	pressing	the	lever	and	other	mice	don’t.	This	may	 be	a	false
equivalence,	but	they	are	two	questions	that	have	emerged	from	 my	one,	unique
mind	at	one	point	 in	my	 life	 or	another,	and	so	they	are	two	 questions	that	have
value	to	me.
        I	 wasn’t	thinking	  about	Lazarus	much	 in	 the	days	after	 Nana	 died.	I	 had
already	stopped	believing	 in	 the	 possibility	 of	 extravagant	miracles.	 But	 small
miracles,	everyday	 miracles,	 like	 my	  mother	 rising	 from	  her	 bed,	those	 still
seemed	worth	hoping	for.
        “Please	get	up,”	 I	 said	to	her	 each	day	before	I	 left	 for	 school,	vigorously
shaking	her	arm,	her	torso,	 her	legs,	until	 she	made	some	kind	of	 noncommittal
noise	at	me,	some	gesture	that	eased	my	mind,	allowed	me	to	believe	that	maybe,
maybe,	that	day	would	be	the	day.
        She’d	already	lost	her	job,	but	I	 didn’t	know	that.	The	home	health	company
called	a	 hundred	 times	or	 more,	 but	 I	 had	 long	 since	stopped	 answering	the
phone.	I	 kept	 to	 my	 routine	  like	 my	 routine	 would	 save	 me,	and	 then	 on	 a
Thursday,	a	week	and	a	half	in,	 I	went	 into	my	 mother’s	room	and	she	wasn’t	in
her	bed.
        My	 heart	soared.	I	 had	done	it.	Like	 Jesus,	I	had	willed	 a	woman	 to	come
forth.	 I	 went	to	 look	 for	 her	 in	the	 living	 room,	 the	kitchen.	 Her	 car	 was	still
parked	in	 the	 garage,	and	it	 wasn’t	until	  I	 saw	that	 little	 tan	 Camry	 there,	its
headlights	like	eyes	peering	into	my	soul,	that	I	 knew	what	a	grave	mistake	I	had
made.	I	ran	back	to	my	mother’s	bedroom,	opened	the	door	to	the	bathroom,	and
found	 her	 there,	submerged	 in	 the	 bathtub	with	  an	 empty	 bottle	 of	 Ambien
resting	on	the	counter.
        I	never	wanted	to	see	a	policeman	again,	and	so	I	called	Pastor	John.

163
        “Slow	 down,	honey,”	 he	said,	and	then	 panicked.	“My	 God,	 my	 God.	Just
wait	there.”
        The	ambulance	arrived	before	Pastor	John	did.	The	EMTs	lifted	 my	 mother
onto	the	stretcher.	She	couldn’t	look	 at	me;	she	just	kept	 saying	“I’m	sorry,”	 and
“I	should	have	let	him	take	him.”
        “What?”	 I	asked.	“Who?”
        “He	 wanted	to	take	Nana	to	 Ghana	and	I	said	no.	Oh,	 Awurade,	why,	 why
didn’t	I	let	him	 take	him?”
        Pastor	John	came	in	as	they	took	my	mother.	We	followed	 the	stretcher	out
of	the	house,	and	I	 barely	listened	as	Pastor	John	received	instructions	from	 the
EMTs.	I	 shut	my	 eyes	tightly,	 so	tightly	 that	I	 started	to	 feel	the	 tension	in	 my
forehead.	I	cried	and	I	prayed.

164
                                                            41





Pastor	John	lived	in	a	bright	yellow	 house	about	three	blocks	away	from	the	First
Assemblies	of	God.	The	house	had	two	empty	bedrooms	because	their	oldest	sons
had	moved	away,	gone	on	to	other	churches	in	Alabama	 to	be	youth	pastors	and
worship	leaders	themselves.	I	stayed	in	the	oldest	boy’s	room,	 while	 Mary,	their
daughter,	stayed	with	an	aunt.	I’m	still	not	sure	why	they	 sent	Mary	away.	Maybe
they	thought	my	family’s	misfortune	 was	catching.
        My	 mother	had	been	taken	to	the	UAB	 psychiatric	hospital	in	 Birmingham.
It	was	about	an	hour	 and	a	half’s	 drive	away,	but	 she	didn’t	want	 me	to	see	her
there,	and	so,	though	I	 had	begged,	Pastor	John	and	his	wife,	 Lisa,	never	 made
the	drive	out.	Instead,	I	stayed	in	Billy’s	room.	I	 walked	to	school.	I	spoke	as	little
as	possible	and	I	refused	to	go	to	church	on	Sundays.
        “I’m	 sure	 your	mama	would	 like	 it	 if	 you	 would	say	a	 prayer	for	 her	 this
Sunday,”	Lisa	said.	The	night	I’d	 arrived,	she’d	asked	me	what	my	favorite	 thing
to	eat	was.	I	couldn’t	 think	 fast	enough	so	I’d	told	 her	spaghetti	and	meatballs,	a
dish	I’d	 had	only	 a	handful	 of	 times.	My	  family	 rarely	 ate	out	and	 my	mother
cooked	only	Ghanaian	dishes.	That	night,	Lisa	made	a	big	batch	of	 spaghetti	and
meatballs	and	the	three	of	us	ate	in	near	silence.
        “I’m	 not	going	to	church,”	I	 said.
        “I	 know	 you’re	going	 through	a	lot,	 Gifty,	  but	remember	that	 God	doesn’t
give	us	more	than	 we	can	handle.	You	 and	your	 mama	are	warriors	 for	 Christ.
You’ll	get	through	this.”
        I	 shoved	an	 entire	 meatball	into	 my	 mouth	 and	 chewed	slowly	 so	that	 I
wouldn’t	have	to	respond.
        My	 mother	was	at	UAB	 for	 two	weeks,	so	for	 two	weeks	I	stayed	at	Pastor
John’s	house,	avoiding	him	 and	his	 wife	 as	best	I	 could.	Eating	 cold	 meatballs
from	the	fridge	 whenever	I	got	a	moment	alone	in	their	kitchen.	At	 the	end	of	the
two	weeks,	 my	 mother	 showed	up.	 I’d	 expected	her	 to	 look	 different,	  wilder
somehow,	more	alive,	but	instead	she	looked	the	same.	Just	as	tired,	just	 as	sad.

165
She	thanked	Pastor	John	and	Lisa	but	didn’t	say	a	word	to	me.	We	drove	back	to
our	house	 in	 silence,	and	 when	we	 pulled	 into	 the	 garage	we	sat	 there	for	  a
second,	car	idling.
        “I’m	 sorry,”	 my	mother	said.	I	was	not	accustomed	to	hearing	her	apologize,
and	now	she	was	doing	it	for	 the	second	time	that	month.	 I	felt	 like	 I	was	in	 the
car	with	 a	stranger,	an	alien	 from	 a	planet	that	 I	didn’t	 care	to	 visit.	 I	 kept	my
head	down.	I	stared	at	my	lap	as	though	all	the	mysteries	of	 the	world	 were	held
there.	My	 mother	 took	 my	chin	 in	 her	hand	and	 pulled	until	  I	was	facing	 her.
“Never	again,”	she	said.


                                                              —

When	my	 mother	 brought	 me	home	 from	 Pastor	 John’s	house,	I	 watched	her
carefully.	She	didn’t	 go	straight	up	to	 her	bedroom.	Instead	she	sat	at	our	dining
table,	her	elbows	resting	there,	her	 head	in	her	hands.	I	 stood	in	the	doorframe,
suspicious.	The	last	couple	of	years	had	taught	me	that	no	state	of	calm	ever	lasts.
Nana’s	brief	periods	of	sobriety	in	 the	wasteland	of	his	addiction	had	been	a	kind
of	 trick,	  lulling	  me	into	  believing	 sobriety	 would	 be	 a	 permanent	state.	 My
mother	was	out	of	bed,	but	I	 wasn’t	falling	 for	it.	 I	 knew	a	wasteland	when	I	saw
one.
        “Gifty,	  I’m	sick.	I	 need	your	prayers	now,”	she	said.
        I	 didn’t	answer.	I	stayed	in	the	doorframe,	 watching	her.	She	wasn’t	looking
at	me	as	she	spoke.	I	knew	that	she	was	ashamed,	in	pain,	and	I	wanted	her	to	be.
        “I	 bought	you	a	plane	ticket	 to	Ghana.	You’ll	 go	there	when	school	lets	out,
so	that	I	can	focus	on	my	healing.”
        “No,”	 I	 said,	and	her	head	snapped	toward	me	sharply.
        Her	 eyes	met	mine,	and	she	spoke	in	 Twi.	 “Not	 you	too,”	 she	said.	“Don’t
you	start	speaking	back	to	me.	Don’t	you	start	acting	up.”
        “I	 don’t	want	to	go,”	 I	whispered.	“I	 can	help	you	get	better.	I’ll	 be	good.	I’ll
pray.	I’ll	go	to	church	again.”
        She	wiped	 her	 hand	over	 her	 face	and	 shook	her	 head.	“You	  can	go	 to
church	in	Ghana.	I	need	spiritual	warfare.	You’ll	be	my	warrior,	 won’t	you?”
        And	 it	 was	this	last	thing	 she	said,	“You’ll	 be	my	warrior,	 won’t	 you?”	and
the	saccharine-sweet	tone	with	which	she	said	it,	that	finally	made	me	realize	that
she	was	not	the	same	woman	I	 had	once	called	mother.	That	 woman	was	never
coming	back.

166
                                                              —

The	summer	I	 went	to	 Ghana	was	the	summer	I	 discovered	that	 I	 had	an	aunt.
While	 the	Chin	 Chin	Man	 had	spoken	freely	 about	every	 person	and	thing	that
he’d	left	  behind	 in	  Ghana,	my	  mother	 rarely	 talked	  about	 the	 past.	In	  my
memories	she	is	always	rushing	out	 the	door,	 too	busy,	too	 tired,	to	 answer	my
endless	questions.
        “What’s	your	 mother’s	name?”
        “How	 many	siblings	do	you	have?”
        “Where	 were	you	born?”
        Every	question	I	 asked	was	answered	with	silence.	And	then	Nana	died	and
I	found	 myself	on	a	plane,	headed	to	a	country	I’d	 never	been	to	before.	When	I
arrived,	I	 was	met	not	by	my	 father,	but	 by	a	buxom,	 chatty	woman	whose	face
was	the	same	as	my	mother’s.
        The	 first	 thing	 my	aunt	Joyce	did	 when	she	saw	me	 was	inspect	my	 arm,
lifting	 it	 up	and	flopping	 it	 back	down	against	my	 side.	I	would	 later	see	her	do
this	with	a	chicken	at	the	market,	evaluating	how	much	she	was	willing	to	 pay	for
the	meat	by	the	sturdiness	of	its	wing,	the	heft	of	its	leg.
        “You’re	 too	 skinny,”	 she	said.	“You	  get	the	skinniness	from	  your	father’s
side,	as	you	can	tell.”	To	demonstrate,	she	lifted	her	shirt,	grabbed	a	chunk	of	her
stomach,	and	shook	it	 at	me.	I	 was	mortified	 to	 see	her	perform	 this	act	 in	the
middle	 of	 that	 busy	 terminal.	 She	had	 an	outie,	 something	 I	 had	 never	seen
before,	and	I	felt	as	though	I	was	being	shown	a	vestigial	tail.	I	wanted	my	mother
to	get	up	from	 her	bed,	to	see	that	outie	flashing	in	her	mind’s	eye	like	 a	glowing
target,	and	come	 get	me.	 I	 wanted	my	 skinny	arms	 to	 go	unremarked	upon.	 I
wanted	my	brother.
        Outside	 the	  airport,	 Aunt	  Joyce	 flagged	 down	 a	 man	 selling	  koko	 in
pouches.	She	bought	two	for	me	and	one	for	herself.
        “Eat,”	 she	said,	ready	to	commence	the	fattening-up	process	right	there	and
then.	I	sucked	the	porridge	 from	 the	plastic,	 urging	myself	 not	to	cry,	 while	 my
aunt,	the	stranger,	watched	me.	 She	didn’t	look	 away,	nor	 did	 she	stop	talking,
until	I	had	finished	every	drop	in	 both	bags.
        “Your	 mother	always	thought	she	was	better	than	us,	but	you	see,”	she	said,
raising	her	eyebrows	at	me.	 What	was	I	 supposed	to	see?	My	too-skinny	 body?
My	presence	in	Ghana?	Or	maybe	I	was	to	see	my	mother,	whom	I	could	not	 see

167
clearly	that	summer.	No	 matter	how	hard	I	 tried,	 I	couldn’t	 picture	her	face.	My
aunt	Joyce	and	I	sat	outside	the	airport	for	 an	hour	while	 she	told	me	story	 after
story	after	story	about	my	mother,	but	all	 I	could	picture	 was	the	sloping	curve	of
a	woman’s	back.

168
                                                        42





“No	weapon	formed	against	me	shall	prosper.	I	said	NO	WEAPON.	FORMED
AGAINST	ME.	SHALL	PROSPER.”
        The	pastor	of	the	largest	Pentecostal	church	in	Kumasi	was	stomping	back
and	forth	onstage,	using	his	feet	as	exclamation	marks.	As	he	shouted,	a	chorus	of
Amens	and	Hallelujahs	filled	the	sanctuary.	A	woman	fell	out	in	the	Spirit	and
another	rushed	 to	 fan	  her,	 shouting,	“Thank	  you,	 Jesus,”	as	 her	 white
handkerchief	fluttered	birdlike	over	the	woman’s	body.	I	sat	in	the	first	pew	with
Aunt	Joyce,	who	periodically	nodded	her	head,	pointed	to	the	pastor,	and	said,
“Enh-hnh.	That’s	right,”	as	though	she	and	he	were	in	private	conversation	with
each	other,	not	in	the	swelteringly	hot	sanctuary	of	a	 charismatic	evangelical
church	in	Kumasi	with	hundreds	of	other	congregants	all	around	them.
        We	were	engaged	in	spiritual	warfare.	Or,	at	least,	everyone	else	was.	I	was
swooning	in	the	Sunday	sun,	watching	the	sweat	bead	on	my	arms.	Every	time	the
pastor	stomped,	his	own	sweat	would	fling	from	his	hair	and	baptize	those	of	us
who	were	sitting	in	the	front	row.	I	was	disgusted	every	time	a	droplet	landed	on
me,	but	then	I	 would	remember	my	wish	of	 only	a	 few	years	before—to	be
baptized	in	water—and	I	would	have	to	stifle	a	laugh.
        My	laughter	didn’t	 fit	 with	 the	pastor’s	message.	“There	are	demons	all
around	us,”	he	said.	“There	are	demons	who	have	tried	to	take	our	children.	We
cast	them	out	in	Jesus’s	name.”
        To	my	left,	the	woman	beside	me	put	her	hands	to	her	chest,	her	stomach,
her	legs,	before	flinging	them	back	into	the	air.	Her	 face,	almost	angry	in	its
intensity,	told	me	everything	I	needed	to	know:	she	had	demons	in	need	of	casting
off.
        This	was	not	the	First	 Assemblies	of	God	in	 Huntsville,	Alabama.	This
wasn’t	evangelicalism	as	I	knew	it.	The	noise	of	this	worship	service	alone	made
the	worship	of	my	childhood	church	sound	like	the	muffled,	timid	singing	of	a
kindergarten	choir.	I	had	never	heard	Pastor	John	talk	about	demons	and	witches

169
as	though	they	were	living,	breathing	 beings,	but	this	pastor	spoke	as	if	he	could
see	them	seated	among	us.	My	mother	had	grown	up	in	a	church	like	this,	but	she
had	not	come	back	 to	Ghana	to	 engage	in	spiritual	 warfare.	She’d	sent	me	as	a
kind	of	 emissary.	Sitting	there,	 melting	into	 a	puddle	at	my	 own	feet,	 I	pictured
my	mother	 as	I’d	left	 her,	 and	I	 knew	that	 if	 her	 own	faith,	 a	living,	  breathing
thing,	could	not	save	her,	then	my	small	portion	would	do	nothing.
        Aunt	 Joyce	and	I	took	a	taxi	from	 the	service	back	to	her	house.	I	rolled	the
windows	down	and	tried	to	let	my	body	air	out.
        “That	 was	a	powerful	service,”	Aunt	Joyce	said.	“Powerful.”
        I	 looked	out	of	 the	window	 and	thought	about	how	much	Nana	would	 have
liked	to	be	here.	To	 see	this	country	of	ours	and	to	help	me	to	navigate	all	of	 my
own	complicated	feelings	about	it.	“Very	 powerful,”	 I	told	my	aunt.
        She	smiled	 and	took	 my	hand.	“Don’t	 worry.	 Your	 mother	 will	 be	feeling
well	again	very	soon.”


                                                              —

That	summer	in	Ghana,	I	learned	to	pound	fufu.	I	learned	to	haggle	at	the	market,
to	get	used	to	cold-water	bucket	baths,	to	shake	coconuts	down	from	their	trees.	I
developed	an	Encyclopedia	 of	 Knowledge	 I	 Didn’t	 Want,	 waiting	  for	 the	 day
when	my	mother	would	 call	me	back	to	 America	and	I	 could	forget	 everything	I
had	learned.	One	week	became	two	became	three.	As	time	dragged	on,	I	thought
that	maybe	I	was	going	the	way	of	the	Chin	Chin	Man,	 lost	to	this	country,	lost	to
my	family.
        “Where’s	my	father?”	 I	asked	Aunt	Joyce	one	day.
        I	 was	already	a	month	into	 my	stay,	and	I	 hadn’t	said	a	word	about	him.	 If
Aunt	 Joyce	had	been	waiting	 for	 this	moment,	 she	didn’t	 show	it.	 “He	 lives	 in
town.	I’ve	seen	him	a	few	 times	in	 Kejetia,	 but	he	doesn’t	come	to	my	 stall	very
often	anymore.	I	don’t	 think	 he	even	goes	to	church.”	She	said	this	last	part	with
her	nose	scrunched,	as	though	she	had	smelled	 something	rotten.	But	 the	 Chin
Chin	Man’s	 derelict	 church	attendance	smelled	of	 roses	when	compared	 to	the
stench	of	all	of	his	other	misdeeds.
        “Can	I	 see	him?”	I	asked,	and,	minutes	later,	we	were	climbing	into	a	taxi.


                                                              —

170
The	Chin	Chin	 Man	lived	 in	Tanoso,	off	 of	 Sunyani	Road,	not	far	 from	the	 Yaa
Asantewaa	Secondary	School.	His	house	was	of	a	modest	size,	brick	red	in	color,
with	a	tall,	 imposing	steel	fence.	 He	must	have	had	at	least	five	 dogs,	and	all	of
them	rushed	to	the	 fence	in	 barking	menace	as	Aunt	 Joyce	and	I	approached.	I
stood	there	peering	through	the	 cracks,	avoiding	the	 gnashing	jaws	of	 the	dogs,
while	Aunt	 Joyce	pushed	the	button	 at	the	gate.	She	pushed	twice,	 three	times,
and	we	could	 hear	the	 high-pitched	 squeak	it	 made	all	 the	 way	out	 where	we
stood.
        “Where	 is	he?”	my	aunt	said,	pushing	again.
        Finally,	 a	woman	came	out	 to	silence	the	dogs	and	open	the	 gate.	She	and
Aunt	Joyce	spent	the	next	minute	speaking	Twi,	too	fast	for	me	to	understand.
        “Gifty,	  this	is	your	father’s	wife,”	 Aunt	Joyce	said.
        The	woman	turned	to	 me	and	smiled.	“Come	in,	come	in,”	 she	said,	and	we
all	wandered	inside	the	house.
        The	Chin	 Chin	Man	was	waiting	for	 us	in	the	living	 room.	He	stood	as	soon
as	we	entered,	and	stepped	toward	me,	arms	open.	“Eh,	Gifty,	 look	how	 big	you
are,”	he	said.
        And	 I	couldn’t	hug	him.	I	 couldn’t	stand	to	hear	his	voice,	which	for	most	of
my	life	  I	 had	only	 ever	heard	 in	 disembodied	form,	 through	 electric	 currents.
Now	here	it	 was,	coming	out	 of	a	mouth	 affixed	 on	a	head	that	rested	atop	that
long,	lean,	muscular	body.	Nana’s	body.
        “Did	 you	know	I	 was	here?”	I	asked.
        He	 lowered	 his	arms	 and	his	 eyes.	He	cleared	 his	throat	 to	 speak,	but	 I
wasn’t	finished.
        “She	tried	 to	kill	  herself,	did	you	 know	that?	She	almost	died	and	then	she
made	me	come	here	and	you	knew	I	was	here	this	whole	time,	didn’t	you?”
        His	 wife	 stepped	in,	offering	 drinks	 and	food.	Though	I	 had	been	taught	it
was	rude	to	refuse	Ghanaian	hospitality,	I	did	so	anyway,	and	for	an	hour,	I	sat	in
complete	silence,	scowling	while	the	Chin	Chin	Man	talked.
        In	 person,	he	wouldn’t	 shut	up.	 Nervous,	loud,	 bumbling	 stories	about	his
work,	his	 friends,	his	life	  without	us.	He	 never	said	a	word	about	my	 mother	or
Nana.	He	 never	said	sorry,	 and	I	 was	 old	enough	 then	to	 know	 that	he	 never
would.
        On	 the	car	 ride	 home,	I	 asked	my	 aunt	if	  my	 father	 had	ever	asked	her
about	me	or	my	mother	on	his	visits	to	her	stall.

171
        “Oh,	 Gifty,”	 my	aunt	said.
        “What?”
        “Ofɛre.”
        “What	 does	that	mean?”	I	asked.	I	had	already	reached	the	limits	of	my	Twi
understanding,	but	Aunt	 Joyce	either	could	 not	 or	refused	to	 speak	English	for
longer	 than	 a	 couple	 of	  sentences	a	day.	 Whenever	  I	 asked	 her	 to	 repeat
something	in	 English,	 she	would	  tell	 me	 that	 I	 wasn’t	trying	  hard	enough	 to
understand	or	she	would	 point	out,	 yet	again,	 all	the	 ways	that	she	thought	 my
mother	had	done	a	poor	job	of	parenting	me.
        “I	 don’t	 know	in	 English.	Your	 mother	 should	teach	you	these	things,”	she
said.
        So,	it	would	 be	option	two.
        Later	 that	 day	 I	 called	 my	  mother,	 something	I	  did	 once	 a	week.	 She
answered	the	phone	with	 false	cheer	in	 her	 voice,	and	I	 tried	 to	 picture	 which
room	in	our	 house	she	might	be	in.	Was	she	wearing	pajamas	or	proper	clothes?
Had	she	gotten	her	job	back?
        “She	means	he’s	shy.	He’s	ashamed,”	my	mother	said.
        “Oh,”	  I	 said.	Nana	might	 have	cared	 how	the	 Chin	 Chin	 Man	 felt,	 but	 I
didn’t.	He	was	as	foreign	 to	me	as	the	language,	as	foreign	as	every	person	who
passed	me	by	in	Kejetia.	I’d	felt	closer	to	the	dreadlocked	man.
        “When	 can	I	come	home?”	I	asked.
        “Soon,”	 she	said,	but	that	 word	had	lost	 all	meaning.	I’d	 heard	it	 from	 my
father	and	understood	it	to	be	an	empty	word,	a	lie	that	parents	told	their	children
to	soothe	them.


                                                              —

“Anhedonia”	 is	 the	 psychiatric	 term	 for	 the	 inability	  to	 derive	 pleasure	from
things	that	 are	normally	 pleasurable.	It’s	 the	 characterizing	symptom	 in	 major
depressive	 disorder,	 but	  it	   can	 also	  be	 a	  symptom	  of	  substance	 abuse,
schizophrenia,	Parkinson’s	disease.	I	learned	the	term	in	a	university	 lecture	hall
and	immediately	  felt	  a	shock	 of	  recognition.	 Anhedonia	 was	 the	 feeling	 of
“nothing,”	the	thing	that	kept	 my	mother	in	her	bed.
        Professionally,	 I	 am	 interested	 in	 anhedonia	because	I	 am	 interested	 in
reward-seeking	behavior,	but	personally	I	have	never	experienced	it	to	the	degree

172
of	magnitude	 of	 the	subjects	in	 the	cases	I	 study.	It	 is	only	 a	symptom,	 which
means,	of	course,	that	something	else	is	the	cause.	I’m	interested	in	the	cause	as	it
relates	to	psychiatric	illness,	but	I	research	only	one	piece,	one	part	of	the	story.
        I	 know	 what	my	 family	 looks	like	 on	 paper.	I	know	 what	Nana	looks	 like
when	you	take	 the	bird’s-eye	view:	 black	 male	immigrant	 from	 a	single-parent,
lower-middle-class	household.	The	stressors	of	any	one	of	those	factors	could	be
enough	to	influence	anhedonia.	If	 Nana	were	alive,	if	 I	entered	him	 into	a	study,
it	would	 be	hard	to	isolate	his	 drug	use	as	the	cause	of	this	particular	 portion	of
his	pain.	It	would	be	hard	even	to	isolate	the	cause	of	the	drug	use.
        And	 that’s	what	so	many	people	want	to	get	at:	the	cause	of	the	drug	use,	the
reason	people	pick	up	substances	in	the	first	place.	Anytime	I	talk	about	my	work
informally,	  I	 inevitably	  encounter	someone	 who	 wants	to	 know	  why	 addicts
become	addicts.	They	use	words	like	“will”	 and	“choice,”	 and	they	end	by	saying,
“Don’t	 you	think	  there’s	more	to	 it	 than	 the	brain?”	 They	 are	skeptical	 of	 the
rhetoric	 of	  addiction	  as	disease,	something	 akin	  to	 high	  blood	 pressure	or
diabetes,	and	I	get	that.	What	they’re	really	saying	is	that	they	may	have	partied	in
high	school	and	college	but	look	 at	them	now.	 Look	 how	strong-willed	 they	are,
how	many	 good	choices	 they’ve	made.	They	 want	 reassurances.	They	want	to
believe	that	 they	 have	been	loved	 enough	and	 have	raised	their	  children	 well
enough	that	the	things	that	I	research	will	never,	ever	touch	their	own	lives.
        I	 understand	this	impulse.	I,	too,	have	spent	years	creating	my	little	moat	of
good	deeds	in	 an	 attempt	to	 protect	 the	 castle	of	  myself.	 I	 don’t	 want	 to	be
dismissed	the	way	that	 Nana	was	once	dismissed.	I	 know	 that	it’s	 easier	to	say
Their	kind	does	seem	to	have	a	taste	for	drugs,	easier	to	write	all	addicts	off	as	bad
and	weak-willed	people,	than	it	is	to	look	closely	at	the	nature	of	their	 suffering.	I
do	it	 too,	sometimes.	I	 judge.	I	 walk	 around	with	 my	 chest	puffed	 out,	making
sure	that	everyone	knows	 about	my	 Harvard	 and	Stanford	 degrees,	as	if	 those
things	encapsulate	me,	 and	 when	I	  do	so,	 I	 give	 in	 to	 the	 same	facile,	  lazy
thinking	that	 characterizes	those	who	think	of	addicts	as	horrible	 people.	It’s	just
that	I’m	standing	on	the	other	side	of	 the	moat.	What	I	 can	say	for	certain	is	that
there	is	no	 case	study	in	 the	world	 that	 could	capture	the	 whole	animal	 of	 my
brother,	that	could	show	how	smart	and	kind	 and	generous	he	was,	how	much	he
wanted	to	get	better,	how	much	 he	wanted	to	live.	Forget	 for	a	moment	 what	he
looked	like	on	paper,	and	instead	see	him	as	he	was	in	all	of	his	glory,	in	all	of	his
beauty.	It’s	true	that	for	 years	before	he	died,	I	 would	look	 at	his	face	and	think,
What	a	 pity,	 what	a	 waste.	But	 the	waste	was	 my	 own,	the	 waste	was	what	 I
missed	out	on	whenever	I	looked	at	him	and	saw	just	his	addiction.

173
                                                    43




Dear	God,
The	Black	Mamba	had	to	work	today	so	Buzz	made	us	dinner.	He	asked
me	how	school	was	and	when	I	told	him	that	Lauren	made	fun	of	me
for	wearing	clothes	from	Walmart,	he	said,	“Don’t	worry.	She’s	got	a
place	in	Hell	with	her	name	on	it,”	and	I	know	it	wasn’t	nice	but	it	made
me	feel	better.


Dear	God,
Merry	Christmas!	We	put	on	a	nativity	play	at	church	last	night	and	I
played	the	part	of	a	lost	lamb.	It	wasn’t	a	big	part	or	anything.	I	only
had	one	line:	“Behold,	the	lamb	of	God.”	The	rest	of	the	time	I	was	just
sitting	onstage,	saying	nothing.	It	wasn’t	special	at	all,	but	when	it	was
time	for	me	to	take	my	bow,	Buzz	gave	me	a	standing	ovation.

174
                                                        44





While	I	 was	in	Ghana,	my	mother	healed	at	home	in	Alabama.	Her	anhedonia
was	as	severe	as	ever,	but	her	time	in	the	UAB	 psych	ward	seemed	to	have
alleviated	some	of	her	symptoms.	She	had	stopped	going	to	therapy,	but	she	was
at	least	going	to	church	again.	I	used	to	call	Pastor	John	on	Sundays,	begging	for
progress	reports,	but	he	could	tell	me	little	beyond	how	she’d	looked	that	day,
what	she’d	worn.
        That	 summer,	I	 knew	 that	 my	  mother	needed	healing,	but	  I	 didn’t
understand	what	she	needed	healing	from.	The	only	time	I	heard	people	talk
about	depression	was	when	they	were	using	it	as	a	synonym	for	sadness,	and	so	I
never	thought	of	it	as	a	disease.	“Gifty,	I’m	sick,”	my	mother	had	said,	and	I	knew
it	was	true,	but	the	how	of	her	sickness,	the	why	of	it,	I	didn’t	understand.
        When	I	learned	about	major	depression	and	anhedonia	in	college,	I	started
to	get	a	clearer	picture	of	my	mother.	A	few	years	after	my	return	from	Ghana,	I
asked	her	to	tell	me	about	her	time	at	UAB	and	about	the	summer	she’d	spent
alone.
        “Why	do	you	want	to	know	about	that?”	she	asked.
        “It’s	for	a	class,”	I	lied.
        She	made	a	noise	that	sounded	like	it	was	halfway	between	a	growl	and	a
sigh.	We	had	been	trying	something	new	in	our	 relationship.	It	involved	 my
mother	not	evading	my	questions;	it	involved	telling	me	the	truth.	She	hated	it,
but	I	held	more	cards	than	I	had	in	childhood,	and	so	she	shared	things	with	me
that	she	never	would	have	back	then.
        “They	wanted	me	to	talk	to	the	doctor,	and	they	gave	me	some	medication
to	take.”
        “Did	you	take	it?”
        “Yes,	I	took	them	while	I	was	in	the	hospital	and	then	I	kept	taking	them	for
a	while	when	you	were	in	Ghana,	but	they	didn’t	help	so	then	I	stopped.”

175
        “Did	  you	 tell	 them	the	 medicine	 wasn’t	helping?	 You’re	supposed	to	 tell
them	when	the	medication	doesn’t	work	so	that	they	can	adjust	it.	The	medication
doesn’t	always	work	in	the	beginning.	It’s	about	finding	 the	right	combinations	 of
things	in	the	right	doses.	Didn’t	they	tell	you	that?”
        “I	 didn’t	want	to	keep	talking	to	 them.	I	didn’t	want	to	tell	 them	that	it	wasn’t
working	because	I	didn’t	want	them	to	shock	me.”
        It	 was	my	turn	to	growl-sigh.
        “I	 got	better,	didn’t	I?”	 she	said,	and	I	couldn’t	argue	with	that,	not	yet.
        Psychiatric	 care	has	come	a	long	 way	since	 the	days	of	 lobotomies.	Back
then,	in	the	wild,	 wild	 west	of	neurology	and	psychosurgery,	human	frontal	lobes
were	excised	with	little	 more	gravity	 than	one	might	exhibit	 when	performing	 an
appendectomy.	 These	 were	  the	  days	  of	  lax	  trial	   periods,	  when	  people
experimented	directly	 on	human	patients,	 forgoing	 the	many	years	of	 repeating
the	same	experiment	on	mice	and	rats.	When	I	think	 about	how	slow	and	tedious
my	research	can	be,	I	am	sometimes	nostalgic	for	that	bygone	era.	I	think,	if	only
I	could	inject	 this	virus-packaged	opsin	directly	 into	human	patients,	I	could	 turn
on	that	 blue	 light,	 see	what	this	 research	can	 really	 do.	But	 the	 thing	 is,	 you
cannot	deliver	  the	 light	 without	  also	delivering	  the	 virus.	 And	  so	while	  the
thousands	upon	thousands	of	lobotomized	patients	sometimes	improved	in	 ways
that	related	to	the	symptoms	they	once	exhibited,	they	also,	just	as	often,	became
little	 more	than	 shadows	of	their	 former	 selves,	abandoned	to	the	wasteland	of
bad,	hasty	science,	left	 sitting	 in	 pools	of	 their	 own	drool.	 Remembering	them
makes	me	thankful	for	my	work,	 how	long	it	takes,	how	slow	it	is.
        The	 “shocks”	that	 my	mother	 described	have	come	a	 long	way	 since	they
were	first	used	in	the	1940s	and	’50s.	We	all	remember	that	scene	from	One	Flew
Over	 the	Cuckoo’s	 Nest,	when	 electroconvulsive	 therapy	  was	used	 not	 as	 a
treatment	for	mental	illness,	but	as	a	kind	of	mind	 control.	Back	then,	the	therapy
was	performed	on	 anyone	from	the	 schizophrenics	and	depressives	who	needed
mental	 health	care	 to	 the	 homosexuals	 and	“hysterical”	  women	 who	 neither
needed	nor	asked	for	 treatment,	 who	 simply	 lived	 outside	the	bounds	 of	 what
society	deemed	“normal.”	It’s	hard	 to	shake	that	image	of	people	being	forced	 to
correct	 something	 that	  was	 never	 wrong.	 It’s	  hard	 to	  forget	 the	  primitive
beginnings	of	this	therapy,	to	stand	by	it.	 For	many,	like	 my	mother,	 the	“shock”
of	this	 treatment,	the	way	it	 induces	a	seizure	in	order	 to	treat	something	that	is
impossible	to	see,	and	often	difficult	 to	accept,	feels	like	a	bridge	too	far.	 But	the
truth	is	that	 electroconvulsive	therapy	can	work,	does	work.	 It	is	 often	presented

176
as	a	last	 resort,	 and	it	 is	 just	 as	often	  performed	 because	the	patient	 herself
requests	it	in	one	final	attempt	to	crawl	out	of	the	deep,	dark	tunnel.
        The	 work	 that	 Katherine	 and	 those	of	  us	who	 are	 interested	in	 finding
bioengineering	and	neuroscientific	 interventions	to	 treat	psychiatric	 illness	do	is
in	many	ways	about	moving	 beyond	the	last	resort,	 the	final	 attempt.	When	 she
returned	 to	 her	 practice,	  Katherine	 would	  become	 a	 psychiatrist	 who	  only
accepted	patients	who	had	no	 other	options	 left,	 patients	for	 whom	 everything,
even	death,	had	failed.	In	 addition	to	 optogenetics,	Katherine’s	work	at	Stanford
involved	improving	  vagus-nerve	stimulation,	a	 treatment	for	 treatment-resistant
depression	and	epilepsy	whereby	a	tiny	device	is	implanted	beneath	the	skin	near
a	patient’s	collarbone,	 delivering	 electrical	 impulses	to	 the	vagus	nerve.	 It	 is	a
charger	for	 the	 depleted	battery	 of	 a	depressed	patient’s	body.	The	 frustrating
thing	about	the	technology	is	that,	like	 with	 DBS	for	 Parkinson’s	disease,	no	one
knows	exactly	why	it	 works,	only	 that	it	 works	imperfectly,	 using	electricity	 that
cannot	differentiate	 one	cell	 from	 another.	 If	 we	could	 better	understand	these
treatments,	if	  we	 could	 come	 up	 with	 interventions	 that	 affected	  only	 those
specific	 neurons	that	 are	 involved	 in	  each	particular	 psychiatric	  illness,	then
perhaps	we	could	provide	something	better.


                                                              —

My	mother	 crawled	out	of	her	 deep,	dark	tunnel,	but	perhaps	this	phrasing	is	too
imprecise,	the	 image	of	 crawling	 too	 forceful	 to	 encapsulate	the	relentless	but
quiet	work	  of	 fighting	  depression.	Perhaps	it	 is	 more	 correct	 to	 say	that	 her
darkness	lifted,	the	tunnel	shallowed,	so	that	 it	felt	 as	though	her	problems	were
on	the	surface	of	the	Earth	again,	not	down	in	its	molten	core.
        My	 aunt	took	me	to	church	one	last	time.	The	 pastor	didn’t	like	me.	He	 was
resentful	of	my	many	refusals	to	get	up	on	the	stage,	receive	my	healing.	That	day
he	preached	about	 how	 stubbornness	is	little	 more	 than	 pride	 in	 disguise.	He
looked	right	 at	me	when	he	said	that	the	pride	of	 the	West	was	in	 its	inability	 to
truly	believe.
        “Yesterday,	 I	 heard	about	 a	miracle,	 a	 miracle	 that	 reminded	 me	of	 the
miracles	we	read	about	 in	this	 holy	 book.	Our	 sister	in	 America	 could	 not	rise
from	her	bed,	and	she	has	now	risen.	Glory	to	God,”	he	said,	and	the	church	said,
“Amen.”
        “Our	 sister	in	America	 needed	the	God	of	miracles	and	the	God	of	miracles

177
showed	up,	amen?”
        “Amen!”
        “Those	in	 the	West	might	look	 at	her	and	say	that	it	is	simply	a	coincidence
that	she	rose	from	her	bed,	but	we	who	believe	know	the	truth,	amen?”
        “Amen!”
        “When	 God	says	rise,	we	rise.”	He	looked	around	at	the	congregation,	many
of	whom	 were	clapping	and	nodding	 and	lifting	 their	 hands	with	praise,	but	 our
reaction	did	not	satisfy	him.
        “I	  said	 when	God	 says	 rise,	WE	  RISE!”	  He	 stomped	his	 foot	  and	the
congregation	took	the	hint.	 All	 around	 me	believers	rose	to	their	 feet,	stomping
and	jumping	and	shouting.
        I	 sat	in	my	seat	and	stared	at	the	pastor,	who	was	watching	me	in	accusation.
I	couldn’t,	wouldn’t	 move.	Had	my	mother	really	 risen?	Like	 Lazarus,	like	Jesus?
I	dared	not	believe.
        The	next	day,	Aunt	 Joyce	and	I	took	a	tro-tro	 to	Kotoka.	 Several	men	came
up	to	 ask	if	 they	 might	 take	 my	bags	in	 for	 me.	 Aunt	 Joyce	chided	 them	all,
“Leave	us	be.	Can’t	you	see	we	don’t	want	your	interruptions?”
        When	 they	 left,	 she	scooped	me	 up	into	 her	 arms	and	 lifted	 me	 up	and
down,	as	if	 weighing	me.	She	put	me	down	 and	smiled,	satisfied.	Her	 smile	was
radiant,	assured,	proud.	She	was	so	very	different	  from	 my	 mother,	but	 in	 that
moment,	her	 arms	 around	me,	 holding	 me	 as	my	 own	 mother	 so	 rarely	 did,
smiling	brightly	 as	my	mother	 rarely	smiled,	 I	knew	 that	the	woman	I	 had	spent
the	summer	with	 reflected	 the	woman	my	 mother	could	 have	been.	My	 mother
deserved	to	be	this	happy,	this	at	ease	in	her	body	and	in	the	world.
        “You	 are	a	very	 wonderful	 child,”	 Aunt	 Joyce	said.	“You	keep	praying	 for
your	mother	and	making	all	of	us	proud.”
        Only	 weeks	before,	 I	hadn’t	 even	known	of	 my	 aunt’s	existence,	and	here
she	was,	proud	of	me.
        I	  boarded	 the	 plane	  and	 slept	 most	 of	  my	  first	  flight	   away,	 before
transferring	half-asleep	in	 New	York,	 then	in	 Atlanta.	My	 mother	 picked	me	 up
in	Huntsville.	She	offered	 me	a	smile,	and	I	took	it	hungrily.	 I	wanted	whatever	it
was	she	was	ready	to	give.

178
                                                            45





When	Mrs.	Palmer,	the	 woman	my	mother	had	spent	years	caring	for,	 died	after
a	long	illness,	I	 was	in	 the	fifth	  grade.	She	was	ninety-five	 years	old,	and	I	 can
still	remember	the	sight	of	her	in	 her	open	casket.	The	hundreds	of	deep	wrinkles
on	her	 face,	her	 hands,	made	it	 look	 as	though	countless	rivers	 had	once	 run,
crisscrossing	and	zigzagging,	from	her	 forehead	to	her	 toes.	But	the	 waters	had
dried	up	 some	time	 before,	 leaving	only	 these	empty	 basins	and	beds,	rivulets
drained	of	 their	 rivers.	I	 watched	my	 mother	pay	her	 respects	to	Mrs.	 Palmer’s
family,	 a	 group	of	  people	who	 were	a	 far	 cry	 from	  the	acrimonious	 Thomas
family.	 They	 hugged	my	mother	 close	as	though	 she	were	one	 of	 them,	and	 I
understood	for	the	first	time	 that,	to	them,	she	was.
        Who	 was	she	then,	I	wondered,	as	Mrs.	Palmer’s	children	and	grandchildren
folded	my	 mother	into	 their	 arms.	My	mother—who	 had	never	hugged	us,	even
when	we	 were	little	  children	 presenting	her	 with	 our	 scrapes	and	bruises,	our
wails—accepted	the	touch	of	 these	strangers,	who,	of	course,	weren’t	 strange	to
her.	She	spent	more	of	 her	days	with	Mrs.	 Palmer	than	 she	had	ever	spent	with
us.	And	so	I	recognized,	for	perhaps	the	first	time,	that	my	mother	wasn’t	mine.


                                                              —

Most	days	I	woke	 up,	folded	 the	bed	back	into	 the	couch,	and	peeked	in	 on	my
mother	before	rushing	off	 to	 the	lab.	I	had	stopped	trying	 to	get	her	up,	to	 make
her	the	meals	she	might	like,	make	a	fuss.	But	then	one	day	I	poked	my	head	into
the	room	and	there	she	was,	pulling	her	pants	on.
        “Ma?”
        “You	 said	you	would	show	me	your	lab,”	she	said	plainly,	as	though	we	were
living	 in	 a	world	 of	 logic,	 where	time	 moved	in	 orderly,	 straightforward	 ways,
instead	of	 here,	in	 the	zigzagged	upside-down	 world.	 I	 had	asked	my	 mom	 to
come	to	 the	lab	 with	 me	 a	week	 and	a	half	 before	 only	 to	 be	greeted	with	  a

179
“maybe,”	followed	 by	eleven	days	of	utter	silence;	why	now?
        I	decided	to	live	 in	her	world.
        Though	 the	day	was	overcast,	my	mother	 kept	squinting	 and	shielding	 her
eyes	as	we	drove	 to	 campus.	I	 made	a	 mental	note	 to	 open	the	 blinds	 in	 the
bedroom	more	often	even	if	 she	objected,	adding	“not	 enough	vitamin	D”	 to	my
growing	list	of	 worries.	The	lab	was	empty,	and	I	felt	guilty	 by	how	relieved	I	was
to	not	have	to	 explain	my	 mother,	her	 slightly	disheveled	appearance,	her	slow-
moving	shuffle,	 to	 my	colleagues.	Aside	 from	 Katherine	and	Han,	 no	one	even
knew	that	she	was	staying	with	me,	let	alone	that	she	had	hardly	moved	from	my
bed	in	weeks.	I	knew	that	my	reluctancy	to	tell	 them	went	deeper	than	my	natural
inclination	   toward	  reticence,	  deeper	  than	  the	  typical	   embarrassment	 of
introducing	 family	  members	to	 friends.	 It	 was	 that	I	 worked	  in	 a	lab	 full	  of
people	who	would	see	my	mother,	see	her	illness,	and	understand	things	about	her
that	the	general	public	 never	could.	 I	didn’t	 want	them	 to	look	 at	her	 and	see	a
problem	to	be	solved.	I	 wanted	them	to	see	her	at	her	best,	but	that	 meant	that	I
was	doing	what	everyone	else	did,	trying	to	dress	up	depression,	trying	to	hide	it.
For	what?	For	whom?
        Had	I	 known	she	was	coming,	I	would	have	adjusted	my	schedule	so	that	I’d
have	something	 cool	 to	 show	her,	 a	 surgery	 or	 a	training	  session.	Instead,	I
showed	her	 the	behavioral	 testing	 chamber,	now	 empty,	 the	 tools	 in	 my	 lab,
unused.
        “Where	 are	the	mice?”	she	asked.
        I	 pulled	out	 Han’s	because	they	were	closest	to	me.	They	were	 sleeping	in
their	box,	eyes	closed,	curled	up,	cute.
        “Can	I	 hold	one?”
        “They	 can	get	kind	of	jumpy,	 so	you	have	to	be	careful,	okay?”
        She	nodded,	and	I	caught	one	and	handed	it	to	her.
        She	held	the	mouse	in	both	hands,	brushed	her	thumb	over	its	head,	and	one
of	its	eyes	opened,	rolled	back	as	if	to	 find	 her,	before	closing	again.	My	 mother
laughed	and	my	heart	leapt	at	the	sound.
        “Do	 you	hurt	them?”
        I	 had	never	fully	 explained	my	work	 to	my	mother.	Whenever	I	 did	tell	 her
about	it,	I	used	only	the	most	scientific,	 most	technical	of	 terms.	I	never	used	the
words	“addiction”	  or	“relapse,”	 I	 said	“reward	 seeking”	and	“restraint.”	  I	 didn’t
want	her	to	think	about	Nana,	to	think	about	pain.

180
        “We	 try	to	 be	as	humane	as	possible	and	we	don’t	use	animals	if	we	can	do
things	another	way.	But	sometimes	we	do	cause	them	some	discomfort.”
        She	nodded	and	carefully	placed	the	mouse	back	in	its	box,	and	I	 wondered
what	she	was	thinking.	The	day	my	mother	had	come	home	to	find	 me	and	Nana
tending	to	the	baby	bird,	she	told	us	that	it	 wouldn’t	live	 because	we	had	touched
it.	She	took	it	 up	in	 her	hands	as	the	two	of	us	begged	her	not	to	hurt	it.	 Finally,
she	just	shrugged	and	gave	it	 back	 to	us.	 In	Twi,	  she	said,	“There	 is	no	 living
thing	on	God’s	Earth	that	doesn’t	come	to	know	pain	sometime.”


                                                              —

In	  the	  final	   stage	 of	   Mahler’s	  separation-individuation	   theory	  of	   child
development,	babies	begin	to	become	aware	of	their	own	 selves,	and	in	so	doing
start	to	understand	their	 mothers	as	individuals.	 My	 mother	walking	 around	my
lab,	 observing	 things,	 showing	 tenderness	toward	 a	 mouse	 when	 she	 rarely
showed	tenderness	toward	 any	living	  creature,	all	 while	  in	 the	 depths	of	 her
depression,	deepened	this	lesson	for	me.	Of	course,	my	mother	is	her	own	person.
Of	course,	she	contains	multitudes.	 She	reacts	in	ways	that	surprise	me,	in	 part,
simply	because	she	isn’t	me.	I	forget	this	and	relearn	it	anew	because	it’s	a	lesson
that	doesn’t,	that	can’t,	stick.	I	know	 her	only	as	she	is	defined	against	me,	in	her
role	as	my	mother,	 so	when	I	see	her	as	herself,	like	 when	she	gets	catcalled	on
the	street,	there’s	dissonance.	When	she	wants	for	me	things	that	I	don’t	want	for
myself—Christ,	 marriage,	children—I	 am	 angry	that	she	doesn’t	understand	me,
doesn’t	see	me	as	my	own,	 separate	person,	but	that	anger	stems	from	 the	fact
that	I	don’t	see	her	that	way	either.	I	want	her	to	know	what	I	want	the	same	way	I
know	it,	 intimately,	immediately.	 I	 want	her	to	get	well	because	I	want	her	to	get
well,	and	isn’t	 that	enough?	My	 first	 thought,	 the	year	my	 brother	died	 and	my
mother	took	  to	 bed,	was	 that	I	  needed	her	 to	 be	mine	 again,	 a	mother	 as	 I
understood	it.	And	when	she	didn’t	get	up,	when	she	lay	there	day	in	and	day	out,
wasting	away,	I	was	reminded	that	I	didn’t	know	her,	not	wholly	and	completely.	I
would	never	know	her.

181
                                                        46





And	yet	sometimes	I	would	look	at	her	and	I	would	see	it,	that	which	is	alive	and
shivering	in	all	of	us,	in	everything.	She	would	hold	a	mouse,	hold	my	hand	or	my
gaze,	and	I	would	catch	a	glimpse	of	the	very	essence	of	her.	Please	don’t	go,	I
thought	when	I	drove	her	home	from	the	lab	and	she	got	back	into	bed.	Don’t
leave	me,	not	yet.
        I	took	to	working	at	the	desk	in	the	living	room,	leaving	my	bedroom	door
open	so	that	I	could	hear	her	if	she	called	for	me.	She	never	called	for	me,	and	I
never	worked.	I	had	become	a	master	at	thinking	about	working	without	actually
doing	it.	Here’s	what	I	would	write	if	I	were	writing	my	paper,	I’d	think,	but	then
my	wandering	mind,	that	old	prayer	habit,	would	kick	in	and	before	long	I’d	be
thinking	about	other	things—the	beach,	mostly.	I’d	never	really	liked	 it,	 that
activity	of	roasting	oneself	in	the	sun,	turning	on	an	invisible	spit.	I	associated	it
with	white	people,	and	I	was	a	poor	swimmer	besides.
        But	my	mother’s	people	were	from	a	beach	town.	I	started	writing	my	own
fairy	tale,	wherein	my	mother,	the	beauty	of	Abandze,	who	grew	sleepier	and
sleepier	each	year	that	she	was	away	until	finally	she	became	unrousable,	is
carried	on	her	golden	bed	by	four	gorgeous,	strong	men.	She	is	carried	all	the	way
from	my	apartment	in	California	to	the	coast	of	Ghana,	where	she	is	laid	on	the
sand.	And	as	the	tide	comes	in,	licking	first	the	soles	of	her	feet,	then	her	ankles,
to	calf,	then	knee,	she	slowly	starts	to	wake.	By	the	time	the	water	swallows	the
golden	bed,	stealing	her	out	to	sea,	she	has	come	alive	again.	The	sea	creatures
take	bits	of	her	bed,	and	with	it,	they	fashion	a	mermaid’s	tail.	They	slip	it	onto
her.	They	teach	her	how	to	swim	with	it.	They	live	with	her	there	forever.	The
Sleeping	Beauty,	the	Mermaid	of	Abandze.


                                                          —

“Inscape,”	the	professor	of	my	Gerard	Manley	Hopkins	class	once	said,	“is	that

182
ineffable	 thing	that	makes	each	person	and	object	 unique.	It	 is	the	sanctity	 of	a
thing.	As	a	Jesuit	priest,	Hopkins	believed—”
        “Do	 you	think	 it’s	possible	to	read	Hopkins	 without	bringing	 up	his	religion
or	his	sexuality?”	a	classmate	interrupted.
        My	 professor	shook	her	 hair	out	of	 her	face	 and	trained	her	sharp	eyes	on
him.	“Do	 you?”
        “I	 mean,	the	dude	was	so	repressed	by	the	church	that	he	burned	his	poems.
It’s	bizarre	 to	 extol	 his	religious	 ideals	when	 they	 so	clearly	 caused	him	 great
suffering.”
        “Church	 doesn’t	always	have	 to	be	 repressive,”	another	classmate	said.	“I
mean,	it	was	a	nice	way	to	learn	about	morals	and	how	to	be	a	responsible	citizen
and	stuff.	 That’s	really	 the	only	 reason	I	would	 take	my	 kids	to	 church,	so	that
they	could	learn	about	right	and	wrong.”
        “Yeah,	but	 it’s	the	way	you	learn	about	right	and	wrong	that’s	so	messed	up,”
the	first	 man	said.	“I	 felt	 so	guilty	 all	the	 time	because	no	one	ever	actually	sits
you	down	and	says,	‘This	task,	of	being	blameless	in	the	eyes	of	God	or	whatever,
is	impossible.	You	 will	 want	 to	have	sex,	you	 will	 want	to	 lie,	you	 will	 want	 to
cheat,	even	when	you	know	it’s	wrong,’	and	just	 that	desire	to	do	something	bad,
for	me,	was	crushing.”
        Our	 professor	nodded,	the	 curtain	 of	her	 blond	 hair	that	 so	often	 hid	her
eyes	parting	 and	 closing	 in	 time	  with	  her	 movements.	I	  looked	 at	 her	 and
wondered	if	she’d	ever	heard	it,	that	heart-knocking	sound.


                                                              —

We	know	right	 from	 wrong	because	we	learn	it,	one	way	or	 another,	we	learn	it.
Sometimes	from	our	parents,	who	spend	most	of	our	early	years	teaching	us	how
to	survive,	snatching	our	hands	away	from	burners	and	electrical	outlets,	keeping
us	away	from	 the	bleach.	Other	 times,	we	 have	to	learn	for	 ourselves,	to	 touch
our	hands	to	the	burner,	 to	burn,	before	 we	know	 why	there	are	things	 we	can’t
touch.	These	lessons	that	we	learn	by	doing	 are	pivotal	to	 our	development,	but
not	everything	can	be	learned	that	way.
        Plenty	of	 people	drink	without	 becoming	alcoholics,	but	some	people	take	a
single	sip	and	a	 switch	trips	 and	who	 knows	why?	The	 only	 guaranteed	way	to
avoid	 addiction	 is	  to	 never	 try	  drugs.	 This	 sounds	 simple	 enough	 and	 the
politicians	and	zealots	who	preach	abstinence	in	all	manner	of	things	will	 have	us

183
believe	that	it	is	simple	enough.	Perhaps	it	would	be	simple	if	 we	weren’t	human,
the	only	 animal	in	 the	 known	 world	 that	is	 willing	  to	try	 something	 new,	fun,
pointless,	dangerous,	thrilling,	stupid,	even	if	we	might	 die	in	the	trying.	 The	fact
that	I	was	doing	addiction	 research	at	a	university	in	the	great	state	of	California
was	the	result	of	 the	thousands	of	 pioneers	who	had	 climbed	into	 their	 wagons
facing	disease	and	injury	and	starvation	and	the	great,	brutal	expanse	of	land	that
ranged	from	mountain	to	 river	to	valley,	 all	for	 the	sake	of	getting	from	 one	side
of	this	 enormous	country	 to	the	other.	 They	knew	 that	there	 was	risk	involved,
but	the	potential	 for	 triumph,	 for	 pleasure,	for	 something	just	a	little	  bit	better,
was	enough	to	outweigh	the	cost.	All	you	have	to	do	is	watch	a	child	ride	her	bike
directly	 into	a	brick	 wall	 or	 jump	 from	 the	tallest	branch	 of	a	 sycamore	tree	to
know	that	we	humans	are	reckless	with	our	bodies,	reckless	with	our	lives,	for	 no
other	reason	than	that	we	 want	to	know	 what	would	 happen,	what	it	 might	 feel
like	to	brush	up	against	death,	to	run	right	up	to	the	edge	of	our	lives,	which	 is,	in
some	ways,	to	live	fully.
        In	 my	  work	 I	 am	 trying	  to	 ask	questions	 that	 anticipate	 our	 inevitable
recklessness	and	to	find	a	way	out,	but	to	do	 that	I	need	to	use	mice.	Mice	 don’t
seek	danger,	not	the	 way	we	 do.	They,	 like	 everything	 else	on	this	 planet,	are
subject	to	 the	 whims	 of	 humans.	My	  whims	 involved	 tests	that	 could	greatly
advance	our	understanding	of	 the	brain,	 and	my	 desire	to	understand	the	 brain
superseded	every	other	desire	I	had.	I	understood	that	 the	same	thing	that	made
humans	great—our	recklessness	and	creativity	and	curiosity—was	also	the	thing
that	hampered	the	 lives	of	  everything	around	 us.	Because	we	were	the	 animal
daring	enough	to	take	boats	out	to	sea,	even	when	we	thought	the	world	was	flat
and	that	our	 boats	would	 fall	  off	 the	 edge,	we	discovered	 new	land,	 different
people,	roundness.	The	cost	 of	 this	 discovery	was	the	 destruction	 of	 that	new
land,	those	different	people.	Without	 us	oceans	wouldn’t	be	turning	to	acid,	frogs
and	bats	and	bees	and	reefs	wouldn’t	be	heading	for	extinction.	 Without	 me,	the
limping	 mouse	wouldn’t	 limp;	 he	 would	never	 have	succumbed	to	 addiction.	 I
grew	up	being	taught	that	 God	gave	us	dominion	over	 the	animals,	without	 ever
being	taught	that	I	myself	was	an	animal.
        When	 the	mouse	with	the	 limp	was	finally	  ready	for	 optogenetics,	I	pulled
him	out	of	 the	box	and	anesthetized	him.	Soon	I	would	shave	his	head	and	inject
the	virus	that	contained	the	 opsins.	Eventually,	if	 all	went	 according	to	plan,	 the
mouse	would	never	press	the	lever	again,	would	lose	that	recklessness	I’d	trained
him	to	exhibit.

184
                                                    47




Dear	God,
Today,	Ashley	and	I	were	trying	to	see	who	could	hold	their	breath	the
longest	underwater.	I	took	a	deep	breath	and	sat	down	at	the	shallow
end	of	Ashley’s	pool	while	she	timed	me.	I	held	my	breath	for	so	long
my	chest	started	to	hurt,	but	I	didn’t	want	to	lose	cuz	Ashley	wins
everything,	but	then	I	got	lightheaded	and	dizzy	and	I	thought	maybe	I
could	just	walk	into	the	deep	end,	just	for	a	second.	I	must	have	passed
out	because	Ashley’s	mom	pulled	me	out	of	the	pool	and	started	slapping
my	back	until	water	came	out	of	my	mouth,	and	she	just	kept	saying,
“Are	you	crazy?	You	could	have	killed	yourself!”	But	you	wouldn’t	let
me	die,	would	you,	God?

185
                                                        48





I	have	always	been	slow	to	recklessness,	afraid	of	danger	and	of	death.	I	spent
years	avoiding	the	red	Solo	cups	and	punch	bowls	at	the	rare	high	school	parties
that	I	was	invited	to.	It	wasn’t	until	my	sophomore	year	at	college	that	I	took	my
first	drink.	Not	 out	of	curiosity,	but	out	of	 desperation.	I	was	so	tired	of	being
lonely.	I	just	wanted	to	make	friends,	something	I	had	never	been	particularly
good	at.	Ashley,	my	childhood	best	friend,	had	become	my	friend	through	the
sheer	force	of	will	and	directness	that	only	young	children	display.	She	asked,
tapping	me	on	the	shoulder	the	day	she	found	me	playing	in	our	neighborhood
playground	by	myself,	“Will	you	be	my	friend?”	I	said	yes.	It	never	happened	that
easily	again.
        For	Nana,	friendships	had	been	different,	easier.	The	sports	teams	helped,
the	way	they	sealed	those	packs	of	boys	together,	giving	them	names	with	which
to	define	their	togetherness—the	Tornadoes,	the	Grizzlies,	the	Vipers.	A	herd	of
predators,	prowling.	Our	house	used	to	be	overrun	with	basketball	players.	On
those	days	when	my	mother	worked	the	night	shift,	I	would	sometimes	find	them
dozing	off	their	boozy	parties	in	our	living	room,	a	forest	of	sleeping	giants.
        Nana	had	always	been	well	liked,	but	after	he	became	the	best	basketball
player	in	the	city,	his	coolness	turned	boundless.	At	Publix,	where	the	two	of	us
went	to	buy	groceries	for	our	slapdash	dinners,	the	cashiers	would	say,	“We’ll	be
at	the	game	on	Saturday,	Nana.”	It	was	strange	to	hear	my	brother’s	name	come
out	of	the	lips	 of	so	many	Alabamians,	their	diphthong-heavy	accents	slowing
down	the	vowels	until	it	sounded	like	another	name	entirely.	When	I	heard	his
name	through	their	mouths,	looked	at	him	through	their	eyes,	he	didn’t	feel	like
my	brother	at	all.	This	Nana,	Naaw-naaw	the	hometown	hero,	was	not	the	same	as
the	one	who	lived	in	my	house,	the	one	who	heated	up	his	milk	before	adding
cereal	to	it,	the	one	who	was	scared	of	spiders,	who	had	peed	the	bed	until	age
twelve.
        He	was	quiet	but	he	was	good	with	people,	good	at	parties.	I	was	never	old

186
enough	to	go	out	with	 him,	and	on	the	nights	 when	he	brought	the	parties	to	our
house	I	was	bribed	twenty	 dollars	to	stay	in	 my	room.	 I	didn’t	 mind.	 Pious	little
girl	that	 I	was,	I	 would	 sit	on	my	 bed,	read	my	 Bible,	and	 pray	that	God	 would
save	their	souls	from	 the	eternal	damnation	that	 seemed	inevitable.	When	I	 was
sure	they’d	gone	to	sleep,	I	 would	tiptoe	 through	 the	forest,	 scared	of	waking	 a
giant.	If	Nana	was	up,	sometimes	he’d	demand	his	twenty	back,	but	sometimes	he
would	fix	 me	 a	peanut	butter	and	jelly	 sandwich	before	 sending	me	away.	He’d
shoo	everyone	 out	  and	 then	 spend	the	  rest	 of	  the	 early	 morning	  cleaning
frantically	until	 our	mother	returned.
        “Nana,	 what’s	this?”	she	would	 ask,	always,	always,	spotting	the	bottle	 cap
that	had	fallen	behind	the	window	frame,	the	beer	stain	on	the	dishrag.
        “Brent	 came	over,”	he’d	say	before	sending	me	a	look	that	said,	Tell	her	and
die.
        I	 never	told	 her,	but	there	were	 times	I	 wish	I	 had.	Like	 the	time	 not	long
after	his	accident,	when	his	party	had	included	faces	I	didn’t	normally	see	and	had
lasted	longer	than	these	events	normally	lasted.	The	OxyContin	bottle	had	started
to	dwindle,	 and	 soon	Nana	would	 tell	 my	 mother	 that	his	 pain	was	worsening
instead	of	 getting	better.	 Soon	the	 doctor	would	 refill	  the	 prescription	 and	we
would	watch	 that	bottle,	and	 half	of	 the	 next	one,	disappear	before	cutting	 him
off.	 My	mother	 would	find	 pills	in	 his	light	fixture.	 But	 that	night,	before	 I	knew
to	be	afraid,	 I	 snuck	down	to	 the	staircase	and	watched	my	brother	 standing	on
the	coffee	table,	putting	 more	weight	on	his	 bum	ankle	than	he	was	supposed	to,
and	I	 watched	 his	friends,	  circled	 around	him,	  cheering	for	  something	that	 I
couldn’t	see,	and	I	so	desperately	wished	to	have	whatever	it	was	that	he	had	that
made	people	want	to	gather	around,	that	made	them	want	to	cheer.


                                                              —

When	I	 had	my	first	 drink	  at	that	party	 in	the	 middle	of	 my	 sophomore	year,	I
thought,	Maybe	this	is	 it,	maybe	I’ve	unlocked	the	secret.	I	spent	the	 rest	of	 that
night	talking	 and	laughing	 and	dancing,	waiting	 for	 the	 cheers.	I	 could	see	my
dormmates	looking	 at	 me	with	 eyebrows	 raised,	amazed	that	I	  had	come	out,
surprised	that	I	 was	fun.	 I	 was	surprised	 too.	I	 was	drinking	 but	 I	 hadn’t	been
turned	into	a	pillar	of	 salt.
        “You	 came,”	 Anne	said,	 pulling	 me	into	 a	hug	when	 she	got	to	the	 party.
She	glanced	down	quickly	at	the	cup	in	my	hand	but	didn’t	comment.

187
        “I’ve	 been	here	for	a	while	now,	actually,”	I	said.
        “I	 can	see	that.”
        She	had	a	couple	of	 her	friends	with	 her	but	before	 long	we	had	lost	them.
More	and	more	people	filed	 in.	The	room	 got	darker,	danker,	the	music	louder.	I
had	been	nursing	my	drink	 for	an	hour	 or	more,	and	finally,	 Anne	 took	it	 out	of
my	hands	and	set	it	down.
        “Dance	 with	 me,”	she	said.	And	 before	 I	could	 say	anything	she	was	on	a
table,	her	hand	outstretched.	She	pulled	me	up,	pulled	me	closer.	“Are	you	having
a	good	time?”	she	whisper-shouted	in	my	ear.
        “This	 isn’t	really	my	thing,”	 I	said.	“It’s	too	loud;	there	are	too	many	people.”
        She	nodded.	“Okay.	 Quiet,	 uncrowded,	got	it.	 I’m	 storing	all	 of	this	 in	my
‘How	to	Win	 Gifty	 Over’	file.”
        “There’s	a	file?”
        “Oh	 yes.	A	whole	spreadsheet.	You’d	love	it.”
        I	 rolled	 my	 eyes	at	 her	 as	the	song	 changed	to	 something	slower.	 Anne
wrapped	her	arms	around	my	waist	and	my	breath	quickened.	On	the	floor	beside
us,	a	group	of	men	dog-whistled.
        “Do	 you	like	 me	better	when	I’ve	been	drinking?”	 I	asked	Anne,	nervous	to
hear	the	answer.
        “I	 like	 you	best	when	you’re	waxing	rhapsodic	about	Jesus,”	she	said.	“I	like
you	best	when	you’re	feeling	holy.	You	make	me	feel	holy	too.”
        I	threw	 my	head	back	and	laughed.


                                                              —

A	week	later,	the	two	of	us	borrowed	one	of	Anne’s	friends’	cars,	so	that	we	could
drive	to	Harvard	 Forest	in	Petersham.	The	drive	 should	have	only	taken	an	hour
and	fifteen	 minutes,	but	there	was	an	accident	on	the	highway	 and	we’d	crawled
along	in	the	car	for	two	hours,	just	 waiting	for	 it	to	clear.	When	we	finally	 passed
by	the	wreckage,	 a	hunk	of	 metal	 that	hardly	 even	resembled	a	car	anymore,	 I
started	having	second	thoughts	about	the	mushrooms	I’d	agreed	to	do.
        “The	 thing	about	it	 is,	you	just	 have	to	do	it,”	 Anne	said.	“Like	 who	 knows
what	euphoria	actually	means	until	they	feel	it?	It’s	just	a	word.”
        I	mumbled	 noncommittedly.
        “It’ll	  be	 beautiful,”	 Anne	 said.	 “Honestly,	 it’s	like	  a	religious	 experience.

188
You’ll	like	 it,	I	 promise.”
        Anne	 had	taken	a	freshman	seminar	that	spent	two	weekends	exploring	the
forest,	and	so	she	knew	it	better	than	most.	She	guided	me	off	trail	until	we	found
a	clearing,	encircled	by	trees	that	seemed	to	me	to	be	improbably	tall.	Years	later,
when	I	 got	 to	 California	  and	set	my	 eyes	on	 a	 redwood	for	  the	first	  time,	 I
thought	 back	 to	 the	 trees	 in	 Harvard	  Forest,	 their	 height	 a	 toddling	  infant
compared	with	the	giants	that	lived	on	the	other	side	of	the	country.
        But	 that	day,	I	was	impressed.	Anne	spread	out	a	picnic	 blanket	and	lay	on
top	of	 it	 for	 a	moment,	just	 staring	up.	She	pulled	 a	crumpled	plastic	 bag	from
her	back	pocket	and	shook	the	mushrooms	into	her	palm.
        “Ready?”	 she	asked,	handing	me	mine.	 I	 nodded,	popped	a	gram	into	 my
mouth,	and	waited	for	it	to	hit	 me.
        I	 don’t	know	how	long	it	took.	 Time	stretched	out	before	me	so	slowly	that	I
felt	 like	 an	hour	was	passing	between	each	of	 my	blinks.	 It	 was	like	 my	 entire
body	was	made	 of	 thread	wound	 tightly	 around	 a	spool,	 and	as	I	 sat	there,	 it
unspooled,	centimeter	by	centimeter,	until	 I	 was	a	puddle	on	the	blanket.	Beside
me,	Anne	 looked	at	 me	with	 such	beautiful	 benevolence.	I	 took	 her	hand.	We
were	on	our	 backs,	looking	 at	 each	other,	 looking	 at	the	 trees,	while	 the	trees
looked	 back	 at	  us.	“Living-man	   trees,”	 I	  said,	 and	 Anne	  nodded	 like	 she
understood,	and	maybe	she	did.
        When	 I	came	down,	Anne	 was	already	there	to	meet	me.	 “So?”	she	asked,
watching	me	expectantly.
        “I	  remembered	this	 story	 my	 father	 used	to	 tell	  my	 brother,”	 I	 said.	 “I
haven’t	thought	about	that	in	years.”
        “What’s	 the	 story?”	Anne	 asked,	but	 I	 just	 shook	my	 head.	I	 didn’t	 have
anything	else	to	give.	I	didn’t	want	to	 tell	her	my	stories.	I	 couldn’t	imagine	living
the	way	she	lived,	free,	like	 an	exposed	wire	ready	and	willing	to	 touch	whatever
it	 touched.	I	  couldn’t	 imagine	 being	willing,	  and	 even	after	 those	 few	 stolen
moments	 of	   psychedelic	 transcendence,	 nonaddictive,	  harmless,	 and,	  yes,
euphoric,	I	still	couldn’t	 imagine	being	free.


                                                              —

By	the	 end	of	  that	semester	Anne	 and	I	 were	 in	 the	thick	  of	 a	friendship	  so
intimate	it	 felt	 romantic;	it	 was	romantic.	 We	had	kissed	and	a	little	 more,	but	 I
couldn’t	define	it	 and	Anne	didn’t	care	to.	As	her	graduation	loomed	closer,	Anne

189
spent	most	of	 her	time	 in	 my	room	 or	at	 the	library,	 hunched	over	 her	MCAT
practice	books,	her	hair,	still	awkwardly	 growing	out	its	old	 perm,	in	a	disheveled
topknot.
        Samurai	 Anne	 I	 called	her	 when	 I	 wanted	to	 annoy	her,	 or	 when	 I	 just
wanted	her	to	look	up	from	her	work	 and	pay	attention	to	me.
        “Tell	  me	something	I	 don’t	 know	about	 you,”	 she	said.	She	took	 her	hair
down	and	twisted	strands	of	it	around	her	finger.
        “Something	you	don’t	know?”
        “Yes.	 Please,	save	 me	from	  the	 boredom	 of	 this	 practice	  test.	I	 might
actually	die	if	  I	have	to	 do	another	one.	Can	you	 imagine?	Death	by	 MCAT	 as
you	strive	to	become	a	doctor.”
        “I	 don’t	have	any	good	stories,”	I	said.
        “So	tell	 me	a	bad	story,”	she	said.
        I	 knew	what	she	was	doing.	She	was	trying	to	get	me	to	tell	her	about	Nana,
because	while	I	knew	all	of	 Anne’s	stories,	she	knew	only	a	handful	of	mine,	 and
I	had	always	been	careful	to	select	the	happy	ones.	She	would	at	times	try	 to	get
me	to	 talk	 about	him,	 but	 never	directly,	 only	 in	 these	foxy	 ways	that	 I	 could
always	see	right	through.	She	would	tell	me	stories	about	her	sister	and	then	look
at	me	expectantly	as	though	 I	were	 meant	to	trade.	 A	 sister	story	for	 a	brother
story,	but	I	wouldn’t	 do	it.	Anne’s	stories	about	her	sister,	about	the	parties	they’d
gone	to,	the	people	they’d	 slept	with,	 they	didn’t	 feel	 like	 an	even	trade	for	 the
stories	I	had	about	Nana.	My	Nana	stories	didn’t	have	happy	endings.	His	years	of
partying,	of	  sleeping	around,	they	 didn’t	 end	with	  him	 holding	 down	a	 job	 in
finance	in	New	York,	 as	Anne’s	sister’s	did.	And	it	wasn’t	fair.	 That	was	the	thing
that	was	at	the	heart	of	 my	reluctance	and	my	resentment.	Some	people	make	it
out	of	their	stories	unscathed,	thriving.	Some	people	don’t.
        I	said,	“I	 painted	my	brother’s	nails	once	while	he	was	sleeping,	and	when	he
woke	up,	 he	tried	 to	 wash	the	nail	 polish	 off	 in	 the	 sink.	He	 didn’t	 know	 you
needed	nail	polish	remover,	so	he	kept	scrubbing	his	hands	harder	and	harder	and
harder,	and	 I	  was	watching	 him,	  laughing.	 And	 then	 he	 turned	 around	 and
punched	me	and	I	had	a	black	eye	for	 a	week.	Is	that	the	kind	 of	story	 you	want
to	hear?”
        Anne	 took	her	glasses	off	and	put	 them	in	 her	hair.	She	closed	the	MCAT
book.	“I	want	to	hear	whatever	story	you	want	to	tell,”	she	said.
        “You’re	 not	a	doctor.	You’re	not	my	fucking	 therapist,	Anne,”	I	 said.

190
        “Well,	 maybe	you	should	see	a	therapist.”
        I	 started	laughing,	 a	mean	laugh,	 a	laugh	I’d	 never	 heard	before.	 I	 didn’t
know	where	it	had	come	from,	 and	when	it	escaped	my	lips,	I	 thought,	What	else
is	inside	of	me?	How	dark	is	this	darkness,	how	deep	does	it	go?
        “He	 died,”	I	 said.	“He	 died.	He	died.	He	 died.	That’s	it.	What	 more	do	you
want	to	know?”

191
                                                        49





For	a	week	in	high	school,	I	had	nightmares	that	woke	me	up	in	a	cold	sweat.	I
couldn’t	remember	what	happened	in	them,	but	every	time	I	woke	from	one,
soaked	in	my	own	fear,	I	would	grab	a	notebook	and	try	to	coax	the	dream	out
onto	the	page.	When	that	didn’t	work,	I	started	avoiding	sleep.
        I	 couldn’t	tell	my	 mother	what	was	happening	because	I	knew	that	she
would	worry	and	hover	and	pray,	and	I	didn’t	want	any	of	those	things,	so	instead
I	would	say	goodnight	to	her	and	head	to	my	bedroom.	I	would	listen	for	the
sound	of	her	shuffling	feet	to	stop,	and	then,	once	I	was	certain	that	she’d	fallen
asleep,	I	would	sneak	back	downstairs	and	watch	television	with	the	volume
turned	low.
        It	was	hard	to	fight	 sleep,	and	the	television,	at	that	volume,	did	little	to
help.	I’d	doze	off	 in	 the	recliner	and	the	nightmare	would	shoot	me	upright,
awake	with	panic.	I	 started	praying	feverishly.	I	 would	ask	God	 to	stop	the
dreams,	and	if	he	wouldn’t	stop	the	dreams,	I	would	ask	that	he’d	at	least	allow
me	to	remember	them.	I	couldn’t	stand	not	knowing	what	I	was	afraid	of.
        After	a	week	of	unanswered	prayers,	I	did	something	I	hadn’t	done	in	years.
I	talked	to	Nana.
        “I	miss	you,”	I	whispered	into	the	dark	of	my	living	room,	the	sound	of	my
mother’s	snoring	the	only	sound	that	could	be	heard.
        “It’s	been	hard	here,”	I	told	him.
        I	asked	him	all	kinds	of	things,	like	“What	should	we	watch	on	TV	tonight?”
or	“What	should	I	eat?”	My	only	rule	for	myself	was	that	I	could	never	say	his
name,	because	I	felt	certain	that	saying	his	name	would	make	what	I	was	doing
real,	would	make	me	crazy.	I	knew	it	was	Nana	that	I	was	talking	to,	but	also,	I
knew	that	it	wasn’t	him	at	all,	and	to	acknowledge	that,	to	say	his	name	and	not
have	him	appear	before	me,	my	fully	embodied,	fully	alive	brother,	would	ruin
the	spell.	And	so,	I	left	his	name	out	of	it.
        One	night,	my	mother	found	me	resting	in	that	recliner.	I	looked	up	from

192
the	television	and	she	was	standing	there.	It	was	a	wonder	to	me	how	sometimes
she	could	move	so	quietly	it	was	like	she	was	incorporeal.
        “What	 are	you	doing	down	here?”	she	asked.
        Nana	had	been	dead	four	years.	It	had	been	three	and	a	half	years	since	my
summer	in	Ghana,	a	month	of	bad	dreams.	In	that	 time,	I	 had	promised	myself	I
wouldn’t	ever	burden	her,	that	all	 she	would	ever	get	from	 me	was	goodness	and
peace,	calm	and	respect,	but	still,	I	 said,	“Sometimes	I	talk	 to	Nana	when	I	 can’t
sleep.”
        She	sat	down	on	the	couch,	and	I	watched	her	face	intently,	worried	 that	I’d
said	too	much,	that	I’d	broken	our	little	code,	my	private	promise.
        “Oh,	 I	talk	to	Nana	too,”	she	said.	“All	 the	time.	All	 the	time.”
        I	 could	 feel	 the	tears	start	 to	well	 up	 in	 my	eyes.	I	 asked,	“Does	 he	talk
back?”
        My	  mother	 closed	her	 eyes	and	 leaned	back	 into	 the	 couch,	letting	  the
cushions	absorb	her.	“Yes,	I	think	so.”


                                                              —

The	night	before	 she	was	to	take	the	 MCAT,	 I	 finally	 told	 Anne	 that	Nana	had
died	of	an	overdose.
        “Oh	 God,	Gifty,”	  she	said.	“Oh	shit,	I’m	so	sorry.	All	 that	 shit	I	said,	I’m	 so
sorry.”
        We	 spent	the	rest	of	the	night	 huddled	together	in	 my	twin	 extra-long	bed.
As	the	evening	grew	 quiet	and	dark,	 I	listened	to	 Anne	cry.	 Her	 body-wracking
sobs	seemed	overly	dramatic	to	me	that	night,	and	I	waited	for	 her	to	quiet	down
and	fall	 asleep.	When	she	finally	 did,	I	 lay	there	fuming,	 wondering,	 What	does
she	know?	What	does	she	know	about	pain,	the	dark	and	endless	tunnel	of	it?	And
I	felt	 my	body	stiffen,	 and	I	felt	 my	heart	harden,	and	I	never	spoke	to	her	again.
She	sent	me	text	messages	the	next	day,	after	she	came	out	of	the	exam.
        “Can	I	 come	over	and	see	you?	I’ll	bring	a	pint	of	 ice	cream	and	we	can	veg
out.”
        “I’m	 still	 so	sorry	 about	last	night.	 I	shouldn’t	 have	made	you	talk	 about	it
before	you	were	ready.”
        “Hello?	 Gifty?	 I	get	it	if	 you’re	mad	at	me,	but	can	we	talk?”
        The	 texts	came	steadily	for	 two	 weeks,	and	then	silence.	 Anne	graduated,

193
summer	came,	I	 went	home	 to	Alabama	 to	 wait	tables	so	 that	I	 could	 save	up
some	money	before	I	had	to	go	back	to	school.	The	next	year	I	started	over	again,
down	a	friend.	 I	 threw	myself	 into	my	 work.	 I	interviewed	 at	labs	all	 across	the
country.	 I	 hadn’t	prayed	 in	 years,	but	 sometimes,	before	 bed,	 when	 I	 missed
Anne,	I	talked	to	Nana.

194
                                                        50





My	mother	was	awake	and	sitting	up	in	bed	the	day	after	I	prepped	the	limping
mouse	for	optogenetics.
        “Hey,”	 I	 said.	“Do	  you	want	 to	 go	out	 today?	We	 can	get	 breakfast
somewhere.	Would	you	like	that?”
        She	smiled	at	me	a	little	bit.	“Just	water,”	she	said,	“and	a	granola	bar,	if	you
have	it.”
        “Sure,	I	have	a	bunch.	Let	me	see.”	I	rushed	over	to	the	kitchen	pantry	and
pulled	out	a	big	selection.	“Pick	one,”	I	said.
        She	took	the	 peanut-butter-chocolate-chip	one	and	nodded	at	me.	She
sipped	the	water.
        “I	can	stay	home	with	you	today,	if	you’d	like.	I	don’t	have	to	go	in,	really.”
This	was	a	lie.	If	I	didn’t	go	in	I	would	ruin	a	week	or	more	of	work	and	have	to
start	all	over,	but	I	didn’t	want	to	miss	my	chance.	I	felt	like	my	mother	was	my
own	personal	groundhog.	Would	she	see	her	shadow?	Had	winter	ended?
        “You	go,”	she	said.	“Go.”
        She	slipped	back	down	under	the	covers,	and	I	closed	the	door,	rushed	out
to	my	car,	simultaneously	saddened	and	relieved.


                                                          —

At	 the	lab,	 there	was	cause	for	celebration.	Han	had	 gotten	his	first	 paper
published	in	Nature.	He	was	first	author	on	that	paper	and	I	knew	that	his	postdoc
would	be	coming	to	an	end	before	long.	I	was	already	starting	to	miss	him.	I
bought	a	cupcake	from	the	shop	on	campus	and	brought	it	to	Han	at	his	desk,
lighting	the	single	candle	in	the	middle	and	singing	an	odd-patchwork	version	of
“Happy	Birthday”	with	the	words	changed	to	“Congratulations,	Han.”
        “You	didn’t	have	to	do	this,”	he	said,	blowing	out	the	candle.	His	ears	were

195
red	again,	and	I	was	pleased	to	see	that	familiar	hue,	wistful	that	it	had	gone	away
in	the	first	 place.	The	 cost	of	 getting	closer	to	Han	 had	been	fewer	instances	of
this	strange	and	delightful	trait.
        “Are	 you	kidding?	I	 might	need	you	to	hire	me	soon.”
        “Says	the	woman	with	 two	papers	in	Nature	and	one	in	 Cell.	I’m	just	 trying
to	catch	up.”
        I	 laughed	him	off	 and	got	to	work.	I	 had	wanted	to	be	in	this	lab	because	of
its	meticulousness,	because	of	the	fact	that	every	result	had	to	be	tested	and	then
tested	again.	But	there	 was	a	point	 when	confirmation	  became	procrastination,
and	I	knew	that	I	 was	nearing	that	point;	maybe	I	 had	passed	it.	Han	was	right.	I
was	good	at	my	work.	Good	at	my	work	 and	hungry	to	be	better,	to	be	the	best.	I
wanted	my	own	lab	at	 an	elite	university.	 I	wanted	a	profile	  in	The	New	Yorker,
invitations	to	speak	at	conferences,	and	money.	Though	academia	wasn’t	the	right
route	for	making	loads	of	 money,	I	still	dreamed	of	it.	 I	wanted	to	dive	into	 a	pile
of	it	 every	morning	like	 Scrooge	from	 DuckTales,	the	TV	show	Nana	and	I	 used
to	watch	when	we	were	young	and	money	was	scarce.	And	so,	I	tested	and	tested
again.
        Anne	 used	to	call	 me	a	control	 freak.	 She	said	it	 teasingly,	lovingly,	 but	I
knew	that	she	meant	it	and	I	knew	it	was	true.	I	wanted	things	just	so.	I	wanted	to
tell	my	stories	the	way	I	 wanted	to	tell	them,	in	my	 own	time,	imposing	 a	kind	of
order	that	didn’t	actually	 exist	in	the	moment.	The	 last	text	Anne	ever	sent	to	me
said,	“I	 love	 you.	 You	 know	 that	 right?”	 and	 it	 took	 everything	 I	 had	 not	 to
respond,	but	I	 gave	it	 everything	 I	 had.	I	 took	 pleasure	in	 my	restraint,	 a	sick
pleasure	that	felt	 like	 a	hangover,	like	 surviving	 an	avalanche	only	to	 lose	your
limbs	to	 frostbite.	That	 restraint,	that	control	 at	any	cost,	made	me	 horrible	 at	a
lot	of	things,	but	it	 made	me	brilliant	at	my	work.
        I	  returned	 to	 my	 lever-press	 experiment.	 I	  was	using	 both	 opsins	 and
fluorescent	proteins	that	 allowed	me	to	 record	brain	 activity	 so	that	 I	could	 see
which	specific	 prefrontal	cortex	 neurons	were	active	during	the	foot-shocks.	The
fluorescent	proteins	were	something	of	a	marvel.	Whenever	I	 shone	blue	light	on
the	protein,	it	 would	glow	 green	in	the	neuron	that	expressed	it.	The	intensity	 of
that	green	changed	based	on	whether	or	not	the	 neuron	was	firing	 or	 inactive.	I
never	tired	of	 this	process,	the	holiness	of	it,	 of	shining	 light	and	getting	 light	in
return.	The	 first	  time	 I	 ever	 saw	it	 happen,	I	 wanted	 to	 call	 everyone	in	 the
building	 to	 gather	round.	 In	 my	lab,	 this	 sanctuary,	something	divine.	 Light	 is
sweet	and	it	pleases	the	eye	to	see	the	sun.

196
        Now	 I’ve	seen	it	 so	many	times,	my	 eyes	have	adjusted.	I	can’t	go	back	to
that	initial	state	of	wonder,	so	I	work,	 not	to	recapture	it,	but	to	break	through	it.
        “Hey,	 Gifty,	 do	 you	want	to	 get	dinner	with	 me	 sometime?	I	mean,	it	 was
nice	to	share	that	Ensure	and	all,	but	maybe	we	can	get	a	real	meal	this	time.”
        Han	 had	 gloves	 and	 safety	 goggles	on.	 He	  was	watching	  me	 warmly,
hopefully,	his	ears	glowing	faintly	 red.
        I	 wished	just	 then	that	I	 had	a	glow	of	 my	 own,	a	bright	 green	fluorescent
shimmer	under	 the	 skin	of	  my	 wrist	 that	flashed	 in	 warning.	 “I’m	 horrible	  at
relationships,”	I	said.
        “Okay,	 but	how	are	you	at	eating	dinner?”	he	asked.
        I	 laughed.	“Better,”	  I	 said,	though	that	 wasn’t	quite	 true	 either.	 I	thought
about	the	dinner	parties	with	Raymond	five	 years	before,	the	excuses	I’d	made	to
get	out	of	them,	the	fights	we’d	had.
        “You	 spend	more	time	 with	 lab	mice	 than	you	 do	with	 people.	You	 know
that’s	not	healthy,	right?”	he	said.
        I	 didn’t	know	how	 to	explain	to	him	 that	spending	time	in	my	 lab	was	still	a
way	for	me	to	spend	time	with	 people.	Not	with	them,	exactly,	but	thinking	 about
them,	with	 them	 on	the	level	 of	 the	mind,	 which	 felt	 as	intimate	 to	me	 as	any
dinner	or	 night	 out	 having	 drinks	 had	ever	 felt.	 It	  wasn’t	healthy,	 but,	 in	 the
abstract,	it	was	the	pursuit	of	health,	and	didn’t	that	count	for	something?
        “You	 hide	 behind	your	work.	 You	 don’t	let	people	in.	 When	am	 I	going	to
meet	your	family?”
        The	 cracks	in	 our	relationship	 had	begun	to	 show.	One	crack—that	 I	 was
bad	at	dinners.	Another—that	I	worked	too	much.	The	biggest—my	family.
        I	 had	 told	 Raymond	that	 I	 was	an	only	 child.	 I	 liked	  to	think	  of	 it	 as	a
prolonged	omission	rather	than	an	outright	lie.	He	 had	asked	if	I	had	any	siblings
and	I	had	said	no.	 I’d	continued	 saying	no	for	 months,	and	then	by	 the	time	 we
started	having	the	“When	am	I	going	to	meet	your	family?”	 fight	 I	couldn’t	 figure
out	a	way	to	say	yes	again.
        “My	 mom	doesn’t	like	to	travel,”	 I	said.
        “We’ll	 go	to	her.	Alabama’s	not	that	far	away.”
        “My	 dad	lives	in	Ghana,”	I	said.
        “I’ve	 never	been	to	Ghana,”	he	said.	“Always	wanted	to	visit	the	motherland.
Let’s	do	it.”
        It	 annoyed	me	when	he	called	Africa	 “the	 motherland.”	It	 annoyed	me	that

197
he	felt	close	enough	to	it	 to	do	 so.	It	was	my	 motherland,	my	mother’s	land,	 but
the	only	memories	I	 had	of	 it	 were	unpleasant	ones	of	the	heat,	the	mosquitoes,
the	packed	bodies	in	 Kejetia	 that	summer	when	all	 I	 could	think	 about	was	the
brother	I	had	lost	and	the	mother	I	was	losing.
        I	 didn’t	 lose	my	mother	 that	summer,	but	 something	inside	of	 her	left	 and
never	returned.	I	hadn’t	even	told	her	that	I	was	seeing	someone.	Our	phone	calls,
infrequent	and	short,	were	so	terse	it	was	like	we	 spoke	in	code.	“How	are	you?”
I’d	ask.	“Fine,”	  she’d	say,	which	 meant,	I’m	 alive	and	 isn’t	that	enough?	Was	it
enough?	Raymond	came	from	  a	big	 family,	  three	 older	sisters,	 a	mother	 and
father,	too	many	aunts	and	uncles	and	cousins	to	count.	He	talked	to	 at	least	one
of	them	every	 day.	I’d	met	them	 all	and	smiled	shyly	 as	they	praised	my	beauty,
my	intellect,	as	they	called	me	a	keeper.
        “Don’t	 mess	this	up,”	Raymond’s	eldest	sister	had	whispered,	loudly	enough
for	me	to	hear,	as	we	left	his	parents’	house	one	evening.
        But	 Raymond	wasn’t	an	idiot.	  He	knew	 there	were	things	 I	 wasn’t	saying,
and	in	the	 beginning,	he	was	content	to	 wait	 until	 I	was	ready	 to	say	them,	but
then,	close	to	six	months	in,	I	could	feel	my	grace	period	winding	down.
        “I’ll	  try	harder,	at	the	dinner	 parties.	I’ll	 try	harder,”	 I	said	one	night	after	 a
fight	had	left	 us	both	ragged	and	teetering	on	the	edge	of	our	will	to	stay	together.
        He	wiped	 a	hand	over	his	brow	and	closed	his	eyes.	He	couldn’t	look	at	me.
“It’s	not	about	the	fucking	 parties,	Gifty,”	 he	said	softly.	“Do	 you	even	want	to	be
with	me?	I	mean	really	be	with	me?”
        I	 nodded.	I	moved	to	 stand	behind	him	and	wrapped	my	 arms	around	him.
“Maybe	next	summer	we	can	go	to	Ghana	together,”	I	said.
        He	 turned	to	 face	 me,	his	 eyes	filled	 with	 suspicion,	 but	also	 with	 hope.
“Next	summer?”
        “Yeah,”	 I	said.	“I’ll	 ask	my	mom	if	 she	wants	to	come	too.”
        If	 Raymond	knew	I	was	lying,	he	let	me	lie.


                                                              —

My	 mother	 has	never	been	back	 to	 Ghana.	It’s	 been	more	than	 three	decades
since	she	left	with	baby	Nana	in	tow.	After	 my	fight	 with	Raymond,	I’d	 called	her
and	asked	if	she	ever	thought	about	going	back.	She	had	money	saved;	she	could
live	a	simpler	life	 there,	not	have	to	work	all	the	time.

198
        “Go	 back	 for	 what?”	 she	 said.	“My	  life	 is	 here.”	 And	 I	 knew	 what	 she
meant.	Everything	she	had	built	 for	 us	and	everything	she	had	lost	were	 held	in
this	country.	 Most	of	 her	memories	 of	 Nana	were	in	Alabama,	 in	 our	house	on
the	cul-de-sac	at	 the	top	 of	 that	little	  hill.	 Even	if	  there	was	pain	 in	 America,
there	had	also	been	joy—the	 markings	on	 the	wall	 off	 our	 kitchen	that	 showed
how	Nana	shot	up	two	feet	in	one	year,	the	basketball	hoop,	rusted	out	from	rain,
disuse.	There	was	me	in	California,	 my	own	 separate	branch	on	this	family	tree,
growing	slowly,	 but	growing.	In	 Ghana	there	was	only	my	 father,	the	Chin	 Chin
Man,	whom	neither	of	us	had	spoken	to	in	years.
        I	 don’t	think	 this	place	was	everything	my	 mother	hoped	for	 that	day	when
she	asked	God	where	she	should	go	to	give	her	son	the	world.	Though	she	didn’t
ford	a	river	 or	hike	 across	mountains,	she	still	did	what	so	many	pioneers	before
her	had	done,	 traveled	recklessly,	curiously,	 into	 the	 unknown	in	 the	 hopes	of
finding	 something	just	  a	little	  bit	 better.	And	 like	  them	she	 suffered	 and	she
persevered,	perhaps	in	equal	measure.	Whenever	I	looked	at	her,	 a	castaway	on
the	island	of	my	queen-sized	bed,	it	was	hard	for	me	to	look	 past	the	suffering.	It
was	hard	for	me	not	to	take	inventory	 of	all	that	she	had	lost—her	home	country,
her	husband,	her	son.	The	losses	just	kept	piling	up.	It	was	hard	for	me	to	see	her
there,	hear	her	ragged	breath,	and	think	of	how	 she	had	persevered,	but	she	had.
Just	lying	there	in	my	bed	was	a	testament	to	her	perseverance,	to	the	fact	that	she
survived,	even	when	she	wasn’t	 sure	she	wanted	to.	I	 used	to	 believe	that	 God
never	gives	us	more	than	we	can	handle,	but	then	my	brother	died	and	my	mother
and	I	were	left	with	so	much	more;	it	crushed	us.
        It	 took	 me	many	years	to	realize	that	 it’s	hard	 to	live	 in	this	 world.	 I	don’t
mean	the	mechanics	of	living,	  because	for	most	of	 us,	our	 hearts	will	 beat,	our
lungs	will	 take	 in	oxygen,	 without	 us	doing	anything	 at	all	 to	 tell	 them	to.	 For
most	of	us,	mechanically,	 physically,	it’s	 harder	to	die	 than	it	 is	to	live.	 But	still
we	try	to	 die.	We	drive	 too	fast	down	winding	 roads,	we	have	sex	with	strangers
without	 wearing	protection,	 we	drink,	  we	use	drugs.	We	 try	 to	 squeeze	a	little
more	life	 out	 of	 our	lives.	 It’s	natural	to	 want	to	 do	that.	 But	to	 be	alive	in	 the
world,	 every	day,	 as	we	are	given	 more	 and	more	 and	more,	 as	the	nature	 of
“what	we	can	handle”	changes	and	our	methods	for	how	we	handle	it	change,	too,
that’s	something	of	a	miracle.

199
                                                        51





Katherine	had	been	asking	if	she	could	come	over.
        “You	don’t	have	to	introduce	me	or	anything.	I	could	just	come	have	a	cup
of	coffee	with	you	and	then	go.	What	do	you	think?”
        Whenever	she	asked,	I	demurred.	I	recognized	this	old	pattern	in	myself,
my	need	to	DIY	my	mother’s	mental	health,	as	though	all	it	would	take	for	her	to
get	better	was	me	with	a	glue	gun,	me	with	a	Ghanaian	cookbook	and	a	tall	glass
of	 water,	me	with	 a	slice	 of	 shortcake.	It	hadn’t	worked	then	and	it	 wasn’t
working	now.	At	some	point	I	had	to	ask	for,	to	accept,	help.
        I	cleaned	the	house	before	Katherine	came	over.	It	wasn’t	dirty,	but	old
habits	die	hard.	She	came	carrying	a	bouquet	of	flowers,	and	a	plate	of	chocolate-
chip	cookies.	I	hugged	her,	invited	her	to	sit	at	my	little	dining	room	table,	and
put	a	pot	of	coffee	on.
        “I	can’t	believe	I	haven’t	been	here	before,”	Katherine	said,	looking	around.
I	had	been	living	there	for	nearly	four	years,	but	you	couldn’t	tell	by	the	look	of
things.	I	lived	my	life	like	a	woman	who	was	accustomed	to	having	to	leave	at	a
moment’s	notice.	Raymond	had	called	my	apartment	“The	Witness	Protection
Pad.”	No	pictures	of	family,	no	pictures	at	all.	We’d	always	gone	to	his	place.
        “I	don’t	really	have	people	over	very	often,”	I	said.	I	hunted	down	a	couple
of	mugs	and	filled	them.	I	sat	across	from	Katherine,	cupping	my	mug,	warming
my	hands.
        She	was	watching	me.	Waiting	for	me	to	talk,	waiting	for	me	to	take	the
lead	somehow.	I	wanted	to	remind	her	that	none	of	this	had	been	my	idea.
        “She’s	in	there,”	I	whispered,	pointing	to	my	bedroom.
        “Okay,	we	won’t	bother	her,”	Katherine	said.	“How	are	you	doing?”
        I	wanted	to	cry	but	I	didn’t.	I’d	inherited	that	skill	from	 my	mother.	I	had
become	my	mother	in	so	many	ways	that	it	was	hard	to	think	of	 myself	as	a
person	distinct	from	her,	hard	to	see	my	shut	bedroom	door	and	not	imagine	that,

200
one	day,	it	 would	be	 me	on	the	 other	side.	Me,	 in	bed,	 except	alone,	without	 a
child	to	care	for	 me.	Puberty	had	been	such	a	shock.	Before	it	I’d	 looked	like	 no
one,	which	is	to	say	I’d	looked	like	 myself,	but	after	 it,	I’d	 started	to	look	like	 my
mother,	my	body	growing	 to	fill	 the	mold	 her	shape	had	left.	I	wanted	to	cry,	but
I	couldn’t,	wouldn’t	 cry.	Like	 my	mother,	 I	had	a	locked	box	 where	I	kept	all	 my
tears.	My	mother	had	only	opened	hers	the	day	that	Nana	died	and	she	had	locked
it	again	soon	thereafter.	A	mouse	fight	had	opened	mine,	but	I	was	trying	to	close
it	back	up	again.
        I	 nodded	at	Katherine.	“Doing	okay,”	I	 said,	and	then,	to	change	the	subject,
“Did	 I	 ever	tell	 you	that	 I	used	to	 keep	a	journal	 when	I	 was	young?	I’ve	 been
reading	it	over	since	my	mother	got	here	and	I’ve	been	writing	again	too.”
        “What	 kind	of	 things	are	you	writing?”
        “Observations	 mostly.	  Questions.	 The	 story	  of	  how	 we	 got	  here.	 It’s
embarrassing,	but	I	used	to	address	my	journal	to	God.	 I	grew	up	 evangelical.”	I
made	a	kind	of	jazz-hands	motion	 to	accompany	the	word	“evangelical.”	 When	I
realized	what	I	was	doing,	I	 dropped	my	hands	to	my	lap	as	though	they	were	on
fire,	in	need	of	stubbing	out.
        “I	 didn’t	know	that.”
        “Oh	 yeah.	It’s	embarrassing.	I	spoke	in	tongues.	The	whole	thing.”
        “Why	 is	it	embarrassing?”	Katherine	asked.
        I	 made	a	kind	of	sweeping	gesture	with	my	hands,	as	if	to	say,	Look	at	all	of
this,	by	which	I	 meant,	Look	at	my	world.	 Look	at	 the	order	and	the	emptiness	of
this	apartment.	Look	at	my	work.	Isn’t	it	all	embarrassing?
        Katherine	didn’t	 understand	the	gesture,	or,	if	she	did,	she	didn’t	accept	it.	“I
think	it’s	 beautiful	and	important	 to	believe	in	 something,	anything	at	all.	I	 really
do.”
        She	said	the	last	part	defensively	 because	I	was	rolling	my	 eyes.	I’d	always
been	annoyed	by	  any	whiff	   of	 the	 woo-woo,	 faux	  spirituality	  of	 those	 who
equated	believing	in	God	with	 believing	in,	 say,	a	strange	presence	in	a	room.	In
college,	I’d	once	left	 a	spoken-word	 show	Anne	had	dragged	me	to	 because	the
poet	kept	 referring	 to	 God	 as	“she,”	 and	that	 need	to	 be	provocative	 and	 all-
encompassing	felt	too	trite,	too	easy.	It	also	went	counter	to	 the	very	concerns	of
an	orthodoxy	 and	 a	faith	  that	ask	 that	 you	 submit,	that	 you	 accept,	that	 you
believe,	not	in	a	nebulous	spirit,	not	in	 the	kumbaya	spirit	of	 the	Earth,	but	in	the
specific.	In	 God	as	he	was	written,	 and	as	he	was.	“Anything	at	 all”	didn’t	 mean
anything	at	all.	Since	I	could	no	longer	believe	in	the	specific	 God,	the	one	whose

201
presence	I	had	felt	so	keenly	when	I	was	child,	then	I	could	never	simply	“believe
in	something.”	 I	 didn’t	 know	 how	 to	 articulate	 this	to	 Katherine,	 so	I	 just	  sat
there,	watching	my	bedroom	door.
        “Do	 you	still	write	 to	God?”	Katherine	asked.
        I	  looked	  at	 her,	 wondering	  if	  she	 was	 setting	 some	 kind	  of	  trap.	 I
remembered	my	jazz	hands.	I	was	mocked	so	much	for	my	religion	when	I	was	in
college	that	I	had	taken	to	mocking	myself	first.	 But	Katherine’s	voice	was	absent
of	malice;	her	eyes	were	earnest.
        “I	 don’t	write	‘Dear	God’	anymore,	but	still,	 maybe,	yes.”
        When	it	 came	to	God,	I	could	not	give	a	straight	answer.	I	had	not	been	able
to	give	a	straight	answer	since	the	day	Nana	died.	God	failed	 me	then,	so	utterly
and	completely	that	it	had	shaken	my	capacity	to	believe	in	him.	And	 yet.	How	to
explain	every	 quiver?	 How	 to	explain	 that	 once	sure-footed	 knowledge	 of	 his
presence	in	my	heart?


                                                              —

The	day	Mrs.	Pasternack	had	said,	“I	 think	 we’re	made	out	of	 stardust,	and	God
made	the	stars,”	 I’d	laughed	 aloud.	I	 was	sitting	 in	 the	back	 of	 the	 classroom,
doodling	in	my	spiral	notepad	because	I	was	already	ahead	of	the	rest	of	the	class.
I	was	taking	math	courses	at	the	university	for	college	credit,	and	I	was	dreaming,
dreaming,	about	getting	as	far	away	from	home	as	I	possibly	could.
        “Do	 you	 have	something	 you’d	like	 to	 share	with	 the	 class,	Gifty?”	  Mrs.
Pasternack	asked.
        I	 straightened	up	in	my	seat.	I	was	unaccustomed	to	reprimands,	to	trouble.
I’d	never	gotten	detention,	and	I	believed,	rightly	so	it	 seemed,	that	my	reputation
as	a	bright	and	good	kid	would	protect	me.
        “That	 just	seems	a	bit	convenient	to	me,”	I	said.
        “Convenient?”
        “Yes.”
        She	gave	me	a	funny	look	 and	moved	on.	I	 slumped	back	down	in	 my	seat
and	resumed	my	doodling,	annoyed	because	I’d	wanted	a	fight.	I	attended	a	public
school	that	refused	to	teach	evolution,	in	 a	town	where	many	didn’t	 believe	in	it,
and	Mrs.	Pasternack’s	words,	it	had	seemed	to	me	then,	were	a	cop-out,	a	way	of
saying	without	saying.

202
        What	 to	 make	 of	  the	 time	 before	 humans?	What	 to	 make	 of	  the	 five
previous	extinctions,	including	the	ones	that	had	wiped	out	woolly	mammoths	and
dinosaurs?	What	to	make	of	dinosaurs	and	of	 the	fact	that	 we	share	a	quarter	of
our	DNA	  with	 trees?	When	did	 God	 make	the	stars	and	 how	and	why?	 These
were	questions	that	I	 knew	I	 would	never	find	  the	answers	to	in	Huntsville,	 but
the	truth	is,	they	were	questions	that	I	would	never	find	 answers	to	anywhere,	not
answers	that	would	satisfy	me.


                                                              —

“It’s	good	to	see	you,”	Katherine	said.	She	drained	the	rest	of	her	coffee,	her	third
pour	since	arriving,	and	got	up	to	go.
        I	walked	 her	to	the	door,	and	the	two	of	us	stood	in	the	frame.
        Katherine	 took	my	hand.	“You	 should	keep	writing.	 To	 God,	to	whomever.
If	it	 makes	you	feel	better,	you	should	keep	doing	it.	There’s	no	reason	not	to.”
        I	 nodded	and	said	thank	you.	I	waved	at	her	as	she	got	in	her	car	and	drove
off.

203
                                                        52





Never	again	had	come	back	again.	After	 Katherine	left	 I	 peeked	in	 on	my
mother.	No	change.	A	few	days	before,	I’d	had	a	meeting	with	my	advisor	to
discuss	the	possibility	of	graduating	at	the	end	of	the	quarter	rather	than	waiting
another	year	or	more.
        “What	are	your	goals?	What	do	you	want?”	he	asked.	I	looked	at	him	and
thought,	How	much	time	do	you	have?	I	want	money	and	a	house	with	a	pool	and
a	partner	who	loves	me	and	my	own	lab	filled	with	only	the	most	brilliant	and
strong	women.	I	want	a	dog	and	a	Nobel	Prize	and	to	find	a	cure	to	addiction	and
depression	and	everything	else	that	ails	us.	I	want	everything	and	I	want	to	want
less.
        “I’m	not	sure,”	I	said.
        “I’ll	tell	you	what,	just	finish	the	paper,	submit	it,	and	then	reassess.	There’s
no	hurry.	If	 you	start	the	postdoc	now,	if	you	start	it	next	year,	or	the	next,	it
really	doesn’t	make	a	ton	of	difference.”
        My	lab	was	frigid.	I	shivered,	grabbed	my	coat	from	the	back	of	my	chair,
and	put	it	on.	I	 rolled	up	 my	sleeves	and	started	to	clear	off	my	workstation,
something	I	should	have	done	the	last	time	I	was	there.	The	last	time	I	was	there,
I	had	finally	 finished	my	 experiment,	answered	the	question.	I	had	tested	the
results	enough	times	to	be	as	certain	as	was	possible	that	we	could	get	an	animal,
even	that	limping	mouse,	to	restrain	itself	from	seeking	reward	by	altering	its
brain	activity.	When	I	observed	the	limping	mouse	for	the	final	time,	fitted	as	he
was	with	the	fiber-optic	implant	and	patch	cord,	everything	had	looked	the	same.
There	was	the	lever,	the	little	metal	tube,	the	manna	of	Ensure.	There	was	that
mouse,	that	limp.	I	delivered	the	light	and	like	that,	like	that,	he	stopped	pressing
the	lever.
        I	left	my	 workstation,	went	to	my	office,	and	sat	down	to	write	my	paper,
thinking	about	all	of	my	mice.	I	should	have	been	ecstatic	to	be	finished,	to	be
writing,	with	the	hope	of	a	new	publication	and	graduation	looming	before	me,

204
but	instead	I	felt	bereft.
        The	demands	of	scientific	 writing	are	different	 from	 the	demands	of	writing
in	the	humanities,	different	 from	 writing	 in	 my	journal	 at	night.	My	 papers	were
dry	and	direct.	 They	 captured	the	facts	of	 my	 experiments,	but	 said	nothing	of
what	it	had	felt	 like	 to	hold	 a	mouse	in	my	hands	and	feel	its	entire	 body	thump
against	my	palms	 as	it	 breathed,	as	 its	heart	 beat.	I	 wanted	 to	say	 that	too.	 I
wanted	to	say,	here	it	is,	the	breath	of	life	in	it.	 I	wanted	to	tell	someone	about	the
huge	wave	of	 relief	 I	 felt	  every	time	 I	 watched	an	 addicted	mouse	refuse	 the
lever.	That	gesture,	that	refusal,	that	was	the	point	of	the	work,	 the	triumph	 of	it,
but	there	 was	no	way	 to	 say	any	of	 that.	 Instead,	I	 wrote	 out	the	 step-by-step
process,	the	order.	The	reliability,	 the	 stability	 of	the	work,	 the	 impulse	to	keep
plugging,	keep	trying	until	 I	figured	 a	way	through,	that	was	the	skin	of	it	for	 me,
but	the	heart	of	 it	was	that	wave	of	 relief,	 that	limping	 mouse’s	tiny,	alive	 body,
living	still,	 and	still.
        Pastor	 John	used	 to	 say,	“Stretch	 out	  your	 hand,”	 before	 he	 asked	the
congregation	to	pray	 for	 a	fellow	  congregant.	If	 you	 were	close	enough	to	 the
person	who	 needed	prayer	you	 would	 literally	  touch	them,	 lay	 your	 hands	on
them.	You	 would	 touch	 whatever	 part	of	  their	 body	was	 accessible	to	you,	 a
forehead,	a	shoulder,	a	 back,	and	that	 touch,	that	 precious	touch,	was	both	 the
prayer	and	its	 conduit.	If	  you	were	not	 close	enough	to	reach,	if	  your	arm	 was
simply	 outstretched,	brushing	air,	 it	 was	still	 possible	 to	feel	 that	 thing	 I	 have
often	 heard	called	 “energy,”	 that	 thing	 I	 used	to	 call	the	 Holy	 Spirit,	  moving
through	the	room,	 through	 your	very	 fingers,	toward	 the	body	 of	 the	person	in
need.	The	night	I	 was	saved,	I	was	touched	like	 this.	Pastor	John’s	hand	was	on
my	forehead,	the	 hands	of	the	saints	on	 my	body,	 the	hands	of	the	 congregants
outstretched.	Salvation,	redemption,	it	was	as	intentional	as	skin	touching	skin,	as
holy	as	that.	And	I’ve	never	forgotten	it.
        Being	 saved,	I	was	taught	when	I	was	a	child,	 was	a	way	of	 saying,	Sinner
that	I	 am,	sinner	that	 I	 will	 ever	be,	 I	 relinquish	control	 of	 my	 life	 to	 He	who
knows	more	 than	I,	 He	 who	knows	 everything.	It	 is	 not	 a	magical	 moment	of
becoming	sinless,	blameless,	but	rather	it’s	a	way	of	saying,	Walk	with	me.
        When	 I	 watched	the	 limping	 mouse	refuse	the	 lever,	I	 was	reminded	 yet
again	of	what	it	 means	to	be	reborn,	made	new,	saved,	which	is	just	another	way
of	saying,	of	 needing	those	outstretched	hands	of	your	 fellows	 and	the	grace	of
God.	That	 saving	 grace,	amazing	 grace,	is	 a	hand	 and	 a	touch,	 a	 fiber-optic
implant	and	a	lever	and	a	refusal,	and	how	sweet,	how	sweet	it	is.

205
                                                        53





I	finally	started	writing	my	paper	in	earnest.	I	spent	twelve-hour	stretches	moving
from	 my	lab	 to	 my	office	  to	the	 coffee	 shop	across	the	street	that	served
mediocre	sandwiches	and	salads.	When	I	got	home	at	night,	I	would	collapse	on
the	couch,	fully	dressed,	and	fall	asleep	counting	the	sheep	of	all	the	things	I
needed	to	get	done	the	next	day.	The	next	day,	I	would	do	it	all	over	again.
        My	writing	rhythm,	when	I	was	in	it,	involved	blaring	a	mix	that	Raymond
had	given	me	for	our	six-month	anniversary.	It	was	perhaps	an	act	of	masochism
to	play	the	soundtrack	to	the	final	days	of	a	relationship	that	hadn’t	lasted	very
long,	but	the	songs,	bluesy	and	dramatic,	made	me	feel	like	my	work	was	in
conversation	with	the	artists	who	sang	them.	I	hummed	along	to	the	music,	typing
out	my	notes	or	reading	the	responses	from	my	team,	and	feeling,	for	the	first
time	since	my	mother	had	come	to	stay	with	me,	like	 I	was	doing	something
right.	I	wrote	and	hummed	and	avoided	anyone	who	reminded	me	of	the	world
outside	my	office.	Namely	Katherine.	She	had	been	trying	to	get	me	to	go	to
lunch	with	her	again	since	the	day	she’d	come	over,	and	I	had	finally	run	out	of
excuses.
        We	met	 for	 sushi	on	 the	Friday	 of	 my	 first	 good	week.	 I	 ordered	a
caterpillar	roll,	and	when	it	arrived	I	ate	its	head	first,	wary	of	the	way	it	had	been
staring	at	me.
        “Looks	like	you’ve	been	keeping	busy.	That’s	great,”	Katherine	said.
        “Yeah,	I’m	really	happy	with	all	the	progress	I’ve	been	making.”	I	watched
her	break	her	chopsticks	apart	and	rub	them	together,	tiny	splinters	of	wood
shredding	off	of	them.
        “And	your	mother?”	Katherine	asked.
        I	shrugged.	I	tackled	the	caterpillar’s	torso	and	spent	the	next	few	minutes
trying	to	 steer	 the	conversation	toward	more	 solid	ground:	my	 work,	 how
important	it	was,	how	well	I	was	doing.
        Katherine	praised	me,	though	not	as	effusively	or	as	convincingly	as	I’d

206
hoped.	“Are	you	still	 writing	in	 your	journal	as	well?”	she	asked
        “Yes,”	 I	 said.	After	 Nana	died,	I’d	 hidden	every	journal	 of	 mine	 under	my
mattress	and	did	not	take	them	back	out	again	until	 the	summer	before	I	 left	 for
college.	That	summer,	I	fished	them	out,	the	springs	of	 the	mattress	creaking	and
groaning	as	I	 lifted	 it	 up.	 I	 could	 have	taken	those	groans	as	a	 warning,	but	 I
didn’t.	 Instead,	I	 started	reading	my	 way	 through	 every	entry	 I’d	 ever	written,
reading	my	way	through	what	was	essentially	my	entire	conscious	lifetime.	 I	 was
so	embarrassed	by	the	early	entries	that	I	read	them	all,	cringing	and	squinting	my
eyes	in	an	attempt	to	hide	from	 my	former	 self.	By	 the	time	I	 got	to	the	years	of
Nana’s	addiction,	I	was	undone.	I	couldn’t	proceed.	I	decided	then	and	there	that	I
would	build	a	new	Gifty	 from	 scratch.	She	would	be	the	person	I	took	along	with
me	to	Cambridge—confident,	 poised,	smart.	She	would	be	strong	and	unafraid.	I
opened	up	to	a	blank	page	and	wrote	a	new	entry	 that	began	with	these	words:	I
will	 figure	 out	a	way	 to	be	myself,	 whatever	that	means,	and	I	 won’t	 talk	about
Nana	or	my	mom	all	the	time.	It’s	too	depressing.
        I	 went	off	 to	school	and	kept	writing	 in	my	journal,	 and	by	the	time	I	 got	to
graduate	school	 it	  was	 a	 regular	 habit,	 as	 vital	  and	 unconscious	to	  me	 as
breathing.
        I	 knew	 that	Raymond	 had	been	reading	my	 journal	 for	 weeks	before	 the
truth	came	out.	While	I	 wasn’t	as	clean	as	my	mother,	I	had	inherited	her	uncanny
ability	 to	sense	when	an	item	was	just	 a	little	 out	of	 place.	The	day	 I	found	 my
journal	on	the	 left	side	of	 my	 nightstand’s	drawer	instead	of	the	right,	 I	thought,
So,	here	we	are.
        “You	  want	to	 explain	 this,	 Gifty?”	  Raymond	 asked.	He	 was	waving	 my
journal	around	in	the	air.
        “Explain	 what?”	 I	said,	and	I	 could	hear	the	 schoolgirl	in	 my	voice,	 all	the
other	Giftys	 whom	 I	had	promised	 to	leave	behind,	who	 had	instead	come	with
me.
        Raymond	read,	“ ‘I’ve	 been	letting	Raymond	think	that	I’m	 planning	our	trip
to	Ghana,	but	really,	I	haven’t	done	a	thing.	I	don’t	know	how	to	tell	him.’ ”
        “Well,	  now	 I	 don’t	 have	to	 tell	  you,”	 I	 said,	and	 I	 watched	 as	his	 eyes
narrowed.	I’d	written	 that	 entry	the	day	 I	figured	 out	 that	he’d	been	reading	my
journal.	It	took	 him	two	weeks	to	get	to	it.
        “Why	 would	 you	do	this?”	That	voice	 of	his,	the	voice	 I	loved,	the	voice	 of
a	preacher	without	 a	pulpit,	 so	low	 I	 felt	 like	 it	 came	from	  inside	of	 me,	 now
boomed	with	rage.

207
        I	 started	laughing,	the	same	mean	and	terrible	laugh	that	made	me	afraid	of
myself.	It	 reminded	 me	of	 the	 sound	one	might	 make	at	 the	very	 bottom	 of	 a
cave,	piercing,	desperate.
        The	laugh	scared	Raymond	too.	He	shivered	like	 the	baby	bird.	He	shot	me
a	hurt	look,	and	I	recognized	in	that	look	 my	window,	 my	opportunity	 to	fix	 what
was	broken	between	us	and	climb	back	into	his	good	graces.
        I	 could	have	groveled,	cried,	distracted	him.	 Instead	I	laughed	harder.	“You
really	 read	my	 journal?	  What	 are	 we,	 in	 high	 school?	Did	  you	 think	 I	  was
cheating	on	you?”
        “I	 don’t	 know	 what	to	think.	 Why	 don’t	 you	tell	 me	what	 to	think?	 Better
yet,	tell	me	 what	you’re	thinking	 because	I	sure	as	shit	can’t	read	your	mind.	All
of	this,	all	of	 this…it’s	like	 I	don’t	know	anything	real	about	you.”
        What	  was	I	  thinking?	 I	  was	thinking	  that	 I	  had	done	 it	  again,	ruined
everything.	I	was	thinking	that	I	 could	never	shake	my	ghosts,	never,	never.	There
they	were	in	every	word	I	wrote,	in	every	lab,	in	every	relationship.
        “You’re	 fucked	  up,	you	 know	 that?”	 Raymond	said,	and	 I	 didn’t	 answer.
“You’re	 fucking	 crazy.”	He	 threw	my	 journal	 across	the	room,	and	I	 watched	it
fly	 open.	I	 watched	Raymond	grab	his	 keys	and	his	wallet,	 his	jacket,	 a	heavy,
unnecessary	thing	in	that	Peninsula	sun.	He	collected	every	trace	of	 himself	 and
then	he	left.


                                                              —

“I	 really	appreciate	what	you’re	 doing,	Katherine,	 but	everything’s	fine.	 I’m	 fine
and	my	mom	is	too.”
        Katherine	 was	a	fast	eater.	She	had	cleaned	her	plate	long	before	I	reached
the	last	segments	of	my	roll,	and	we	had	spent	the	last	few	minutes	in	silence	as	I
chewed	slowly,	deliberately.
        “Gifty,	  there’s	no	game	here.	There’s	no	trick.	I’m	 not	trying	to	 treat	you	or
psychoanalyze	you	or	get	you	to	talk	 about	God	or	your	 family	 or	whatever.	I’m
just	here	strictly	as	a	friend.	One	friend	taking	 another	friend	to	lunch.	That’s	it.”
        I	  nodded.	Under	 the	 table,	 I	 pinched	 the	 skin	 between	 my	 thumb	 and
forefinger.	What	 would	it	look	 like,	to	believe	her?	What	would	it	 take?

208
                                                        54





I	left	lunch	and	decided	to	give	myself	the	rest	of	the	day	off.	My	mother	hadn’t
left	the	house	or	the	bed	since	the	day	she	came	to	visit	me	in	the	lab,	but	still,	it
made	me	hopeful	that	she	was	making	progress.	Maybe	I	could	convince	her	to
take	a	trip	to	Half	Moon	Bay	with	me.
        I	drove	back	to	my	apartment	with	the	radio	off	and	the	windows	down.	My
date	with	Han	was	coming	up	that	weekend	and	I	was	nervous	about	it,	playing
over	and	over	again	in	my	head	the	possible	ways	it	could	go.	If	things	went
poorly,	it	might	be	just	the	thing	I	needed	to	convince	me	to	graduate,	leave	the
lab,	if	only	to	avoid	seeing	him	every	day.	If	things	went	well,	well,	who	knew?
        I	turned	into	my	complex.	Someone	had	parked	in	my	designated	spot,	and
so	I	parked	in	someone	else’s,	becoming	a	part	of	the	problem.
        “Ma,”	I	 called	as	I	entered	my	apartment.	“How	would	you	like	to	see	the
Pacific	Ocean?”	I	set	my	bag	down	in	the	entryway.	I	took	my	shoes	off.	I	didn’t
expect	a	response,	so	I	wasn’t	surprised	to	be	greeted	by	silence.	I	poked	my	head
into	the	bedroom,	and	she	wasn’t	there.
        When	I	was	a	child,	I	had	this	sense	of	confidence,	this	assuredness	that	the
things	that	I	felt	were	real	and	important,	that	the	world	made	sense	according	to
divine	logic.	I	loved	God,	my	brother,	and	my	mother,	in	that	order.	When	I	lost
my	brother,	poof	went	the	other	two.	God	was	gone	in	an	instant,	but	my	mother
became	a	mirage,	an	image	formed	by	refracted	light.	I	moved	toward	her	and
toward	her,	but	she	never	moved	toward	me.	She	was	never	there.	The	day	I	came
home	from	school	and	couldn’t	find	her	felt	like	the	thirty-ninth	day	in	the	desert,
the	thirty-ninth	day	without	water.	I	didn’t	think	I’d	be	able	to	survive	another.
        “Never	again,”	my	mother	said,	but	I	didn’t	believe	her.	Without	meaning	to
or	planning	to,	I’d	spent	seventeen	years	waiting	for	the	fortieth	day.	Here	it	was.
        “Ma?”	I	 yelled.	It	 was	a	small	apartment.	From	the	middle	of	the	living
room	you	could	see	almost	everything	there	was	to	see.	You	could	see	she	wasn’t
there.	I	raced	to	the	bathroom,	the	only	room	with	a	closed	door,	but	she	wasn’t

209
there	either.
        “Ma?”	  I	 ran	 outside,	 down	 the	 stairwell,	  across	the	 pristine	 lawns,	 the
parking	 lot	 with	  all	 its	 mis-parked	 cars,	the	 sidewalks	 sparkling	 with	 silicon
carbide.	“Ma!”
        I	 stopped	short	 of	 a	fire	  hydrant	and	scanned	the	 complex.	I	 didn’t	 even
know	where	to	begin	looking.	I	pulled	out	my	 phone	and	called	Katherine.
        She	must	have	known	something	was	up,	because	she	didn’t	even	say	hello,
just	“Gifty,	 are	you	okay?”
        “No,	 I’m	 not	okay,”	 I	 said,	and	I	wondered	when	the	 last	time	I’d	 said	that
was.	Had	I	ever	said	it,	even	to	God?	“I	came	home	and	my	mom	is	missing.	Can
you	help	me?”
        “Hold	 tight,”	 she	said.	“I’ll	be	right	there.”
        When	she	pulled	up,	I	 was	sitting	on	the	hydrant	with	 my	head	between	my
knees,	staring	at	the	striking	 red,	the	 color	somehow	a	 reflection	 of	 what	I	 was
feeling.
        Katherine	rested	her	hand	on	my	shoulder,	squeezing	it	a	little,	and	I	got	up.
“She	couldn’t	have	gotten	very	far	on	foot,”	she	said.
        As	 Katherine	 drove	 us	around,	first	  in	 my	 little	 apartment	 complex,	and
then	out,	off	 onto	the	main	road	that	led	 to	Safeway,	to	campus,	I	pictured	every
bridge,	every	body	of	water.
        “Does	 she	know	anybody	 here?”	Katherine	 asked.	“Anyone	 she	may	have
called?”
        I	  shook	 my	  head.	She	 didn’t	  have	 a	 church	 here;	 she	 didn’t	  have	 a
congregation	to	hold	her	up.	It	 was	just	me.	“Maybe	 we	should	call	the	police,”	 I
said.	“She	wouldn’t	want	that,	but	I	don’t	know	what	else	to	do.	Do	you?”
        And	 then,	 under	a	tree,	 off	 the	 side	of	 the	 road,	there	 she	was.	She	was
swimming	in	 her	pajamas,	no	bra,	her	hair	 a	nest.	She	used	to	scold	me	if	 I	left
the	house	without	earrings	on,	now	this.
        I	didn’t	 even	wait	for	Katherine	to	 pull	over	all	the	way.	I	just	 jumped	out.
        “Where	 did	you	 go?”	I	shouted,	running	to	her	 and	folding	her	 in	my	arms.
She	was	as	stiff	as	a	board.	“Where	were	you?”	I	took	 her	shoulders	in	my	hands
and	shook	her	forcefully,	trying	 to	make	her	look	at	me,	but	she	wouldn’t.
        Katherine	 drove	 us	back	 to	 my	 apartment.	She	said	 a	few	  words	to	 my
mother,	but	 other	than	 that	the	 ride	was	silent.	 When	 we	got	 to	my	 place,	she
asked	my	mother	to	wait	outside	the	car.	She	took	my	hand	in	hers.	“I	 can	stay	if

210
you	want,”	she	said,	but	I	shook	my	head.
        She	paused,	leaned	in	closer	to	me,	and	said,	“Gifty,	 I’ll	 be	back	 first	 thing
in	the	morning,	 and	I	will	 help	 you	figure	 this	all	out,	 okay?	I	promise.	 You	call
me	anytime	today.	Really,	anytime.”
        “Thanks,”	  I	 said.	 I	 got	 out	 of	 the	 car	 and	 led	 my	 mother	 back	 to	 my
apartment.
        Inside,	she	looked	small	and	bewildered,	innocent.	 I	had	been	so	frightened
and	angry	that	I’d	forgotten	 to	 feel	sorry	 for	her,	 but,	now,	I	 pitied	 her.	I	 pulled
her	into	the	bathroom	and	started	running	a	bath.	I	 pulled	her	shirt	 off,	 checking
her	wrists.	I	undid	 the	drawstring	on	her	pajama	bottoms,	and	they	slipped	 down
themselves,	a	silk	puddle	on	the	bathroom	floor.
        “Did	  you	  take	 anything?”	 I	  asked,	ready	 to	 pry	  her	 mouth	 open,	 but
mercifully,	 she	shook	her	head,	quick	as	a	blink.	When	the	bathtub	was	full,	I	had
her	step	in.	I	poured	water	over	her	head	and	watched	her	eyes	close	then	open,	in
shock,	in	pleasure.
        “Mama,	 I	beg	you,”	I	said	in	Twi,	 but	I	didn’t	 know	enough	Twi	to	finish	 the
sentence.	I	wasn’t	sure	how	I	would	have	finished	it,	 anyway:	I	beg	you	to	stop.	I
beg	you	to	wake	up.	I	beg	you	to	live.
        I	 washed	and	combed	her	hair.	I	soaped	down	her	body,	moving	the	sponge
along	every	fold	of	 skin.	When	 I	got	to	her	 hands,	she	grabbed	one	of	mine.	She
pulled	it	to	her	heart	and	held	it	there.	“Ebeyeyie,”	she	said.	It	will	be	all	right.	She
used	to	say	it	to	Nana	when	she	washed	him.	It	was	true	then,	until	it	wasn’t.
        “Look	  at	 me,”	 she	said,	 taking	 my	 chin	 in	 her	 hands,	jerking	  my	 head
toward	her.	“Don’t	 be	afraid.	 God	is	 with	 me;	do	you	hear	me?	God	 is	with	 me
wherever	I	go.”


                                                              —

I	finally	 got	her	into	bed.	I	 sat	outside	her	door	for	an	hour,	listening	to	the	sound
of	her	snoring.	I	knew	 I	wouldn’t	sleep.	I	knew	I	 should	stay	there,	keep	vigil,	but
then	I	started	to	feel	 like	there	wasn’t	enough	air	in	 my	apartment	for	 the	two	of
us,	so	I	sneaked	out,	something	I’d	never	done	when	I	was	a	teen	in	my	mother’s
house.	I	got	on	the	101	and	headed	north	toward	San	Francisco,	driving	 with	the
windows	down,	gulping	 the	air,	 the	wind	 whipping	my	 face	and	leaving	 my	lips
chapped.	I	kept	licking	them.
        “That	 makes	it	worse,”	my	mother	always	said.

211
        She	was	right,	but	that	had	never	stopped	me.
        I	didn’t	 know	where	I	was	going,	only	that	I	didn’t	want	to	be	around	mice	or
humans.	I	didn’t	really	even	want	to	be	around	myself,	and	if	I	 could	have	figured
out	a	way	around	that,	discovered	the	switch	that	could	turn	my	own	thoughts	and
feelings	and	harsh	admonishments	off,	I	would	have	chosen	that	instead.
        Whether	you	turn	to	the	right	or	to	the	left,	your	ears	will	 hear	a	voice	behind
you,	saying,	“This	is	the	way;	walk	in	it.”
        I	 was	waiting	for	 that	 voice,	waiting	 for	 the	way,	driving	 up	 and	down	the
narrow	streets	of	 a	 city	 I	 had	 never	much	 liked.	 I	 could	 almost	hear	 my	 car,
huffing	 through	 its	 exhaustion	 as	it	  climbed	 those	ample	 hills,	 and	 exhaling,
relieved,	as	it	flew	 down	them.	I	found	 myself	in	neighborhoods	with	 houses	like
miniature	 castles,	the	 lawns	vast	and	 vibrant,	 shimmering	 green,	 and	I	 found
myself	 in	  alleyways	 where	 strung-out	  men	 and	 women	 sat	 on	  stoops	 and
convulsed	on	sidewalks,	and	I	felt	saddened	by	it	all.
        When	we	were	children,	 unaccompanied	and	unsupervised,	Nana	and	I	used
to	sneak	into	 the	 gated	pool	 a	few	 blocks	 away	from	 our	 house	at	 night.	Our
swimsuits	were	too	tight,	several	years	old.	They	hadn’t	kept	up	with	 our	growth.
Nana	and	I	were	all	 too	happy	to	take	our	 dips	under	the	cover	of	 darkness.	For
years	we	begged	our	parents	to	let	us	join	the	 pool,	but	for	 years	they	had	made
up	excuses	for	 why	we	 couldn’t.	Nana	 figured	 out	that	 he	was	tall	 enough,	his
arms	long	enough,	to	reach	up	 and	over	the	gate,	and	unlatch	 it	for	 me.	 As	our
mother	worked	the	night	shift,	 we	waded	in	that	pool.
        “Do	 you	think	 God	 knows	we’re	here?”	I	 asked.	Neither	of	 us	really	 knew
how	to	 swim,	and	 while	 we	were	trespassers,	we	weren’t	stupid.	 We	 knew	our
mother	would	kill	 us	if	we	died.	We	stayed	in	the	shallows.
        “Of	 course	God	 knows	we’re	here.	He	knows	 everything.	He	knows	 where
every	person	is	at	every	second	of	every	day.”
        “So	 God	 would	probably	 be	 mad	at	us	 for	 sneaking	into	 the	pool,	 right?
We’re	sinning.”
        I	 already	knew	the	answer	to	this	and	Nana	knew	that	I	 knew.	At	 that	time,
the	two	of	 us	had	never	missed	a	Sunday	at	church.	Even	when	I	was	contagious
with	pink	 eye,	my	mother	had	fitted	me	with	a	pair	of	 sunglasses	and	marched	me
into	 the	 sanctuary	to	 receive	 my	  healing.	Nana	 didn’t	  answer	me	 at	 first.	  I
assumed	he	was	ignoring	me	and	I	 was	accustomed	to	being	ignored,	at	school,
where	I	asked	too	many	questions,	and	at	home,	where	I	did	the	same	thing.
        “It’s	 not	so	bad,”	Nana	finally	said.

212
        “What?”
        “I	 mean,	this	is	a	nice	sin,	isn’t	it?”
        The	moon	 in	gibbous	looked	 off-kilter	  to	me.	 I	was	getting	cold	 and	tired.
“Yeah,	it’s	a	nice	sin.”
        I	 drove	past	coffee	shops	and	secondhand	clothing	stores.	I	saw	kids	playing
in	playgrounds,	their	mothers	or	 nannies	watching	over	them.	I	 drove	until	 it	got
dark,	and	then	I	pulled	into	the	back	parking	lot	 of	an	ice	cream	parlor	and	turned
the	car	off.
        “My	 mom’s	going	to	get	better,”	I	 said	to	the	windshield	or	to	the	wind	 or	to
God,	I	 don’t	know.	 “I’m	 going	 to	finish	 my	 paper	and	graduate	and	years	from
now	all	of	 this	work	 will	 have	been	worth	something,	will	 matter	to	someone	out
there,	and	my	mother	is	going	to	be	alive	to	see	all	of	that,	right?”
        The	lot	 was	empty	and	dark	except	for	 a	couple	of	lazy	streetlamps	shining
their	 dim	 light.	  I	 turned	 the	car	 back	 on	 and	sat	 there	 for	 a	 minute	 longer,
fantasizing	about	what	my	 apartment	would	 look	like	 when	I	 returned	to	 it.	 My
mother	sitting	upright	on	the	couch,	a	pot	of	jollof	  rice	warming	on	the	stove.
        “Please,	please,”	I	 said,	 and	I	 waited	 a	moment	 longer	for	  some	kind	 of
response,	some	sign,	some	bit	of	 wonder,	something,	before	 pulling	 out	of	 that
spot	and	starting	the	long	drive	home.

213
From	our	 house	in	New	 Jersey,	Han	and	I	 can	hear	the	church	 bells	ring	 every
Sunday.
        “Your	 people	are	summoning	you,”	 Han	sometimes	jokes.	I	roll	 my	 eyes	at
him,	but	really,	I	don’t	mind	 the	jokes,	I	don’t	mind	 the	bells.
        Once	every	few	 months	or	whenever	the	mood	 strikes,	I	 take	the	long	way
home	from	 the	lab	I	 run	 at	Princeton,	just	 so	that	 I	can	step	into	 that	church.	 I
don’t	know	the	first	 thing	about	Episcopalianism,	but	no	one	seems	to	mind	when
they	find	 me	sitting	in	 the	back	pew,	staring	ahead	at	the	figure	 of	Christ	 on	the
cross.	Han	has	been	in	here	with	me	a	couple	 of	times,	but	 he	fidgets.	He	 steals
glances	from	Christ	 to	 me,	in	 a	way	that	 lets	me	know	 he’s	counting	 down	the
seconds	until	I’m	 ready	to	go.	 I’ve	told	 him	 many	times	 that	he	doesn’t	have	to
come	here,	but	he	wants	to.	He	knows	everything	there	is	to	 know	about	me,	my
family,	 my	 past.	He	was	with	 me	 when	my	 mother	finally	  passed	away,	in	my
childhood	 home,	in	 her	 own	bed,	 her	own	 caretaker	beside	 her	to	 help	 us	all
through	to	 the	 end.	 Han	 understands	me,	all	 of	 my	  work,	 my	 obsessions,	as
intimately	 as	if	they	 were	his	own,	 but	he	doesn’t	understand	this.	He	has	never
heard	the	knock,	 and	so	he’ll	 never	know	 what	it	 means	to	 miss	that	sound,	to
listen	for	it.
        Usually,	 I’m	the	only	 one	there,	except	for	 Bob,	the	maintenance	man	who
sits	in	the	 office,	 waiting	 either	for	 the	 evening	service	to	get	 started	or	just	 to
close	up.
        “Gifty,	  how	are	the	 experiments	going?”	he	always	asks	with	 a	little	 wink.
He	seems	to	be	one	of	those	people	who	hears	“scientist”	and	thinks	“sci-fi,”	 and
his	winks	are	to	assure	me	that	he	won’t	tell	anyone	that	I’ve	been	trying	to	figure
out	how	to	clone	an	alien.	He	and	Han	get	along.
        I	 wish	 I	 were	 trying	 to	 figure	  out	 how	 to	 clone	an	 alien,	 but	 my	 work
pursuits	are	 much	 more	 modest:	neurons	and	 proteins	 and	mammals.	 I’m	 no
longer	interested	in	other	worlds	 or	spiritual	 planes.	I’ve	seen	enough	in	a	mouse
to	 understand	transcendence,	holiness,	redemption.	 In	  people,	I’ve	  seen	even
more.

214
        From	the	back	pew,	Christ’s	face	is	the	portrait	of	 ecstasy.	I	stare	at	it,	and	it
changes,	goes	from	angry	to	 pained	to	joyful.	  Some	days,	I	 sit	there	for	  hours,
some	days	mere	minutes,	but	I	 never	bow	my	 head.	I	 never	pray,	never	wait	 to
hear	God’s	voice,	 I	just	 look.	 I	 sit	 in	blessed	silence,	and	I	 remember.	 I	try	 to
make	order,	make	 sense,	make	meaning	of	the	jumble	 of	 it	 all.	 Always,	 I	light
two	candles	before	I	go.

215
                                                Acknowledgments






This	novel	is,	 in	many	ways,	a	conversation	between	my	 work	 and	interests	and
those	of	my	brilliant	 friend	 Christina	 Kim,	 a	postdoc	in	the	Ting	Lab	 at	Stanford
University.	 Gifty’s	 research	and	thesis	project	are	modeled	after	 Tina’s	doctoral
work	in	 the	Deisseroth	Lab	at	Stanford,	 particularly	 that	which	formed	 the	basis
of	 her	 coauthored	paper,	 “Molecular	  and	Circuit-Dynamical	   Identification	  of
Top-Down	 Neural	Mechanisms	for	 Restraint	 of	 Reward	Seeking,”	 published	in
Cell	in	 2017.	 The	experience	 of	 writing	  this	book,	 which	 included	 everything
from	tours	 of	Tina’s	lab	 to	rich	 discussions	about	questions	big	and	small,	is	one
that	I	will	 forever	 cherish.	Thank	you,	Tina,	for	 the	work	 that	you	do	and	for	 the
gift	of	 your	friendship.
        Thank	you	to	 the	Ucross	Foundation,	the	American	Academy	in	 Berlin,	and
the	University	 of	Würzburg	 for	 fellowships	 that	allowed	me	to	 devote	myself	to
writing	this	novel.
        Thank	 you	 to	 Guernica	 magazine	for	 giving	 my	 short	 story	 “Inscape”	 a
home.	This	novel	picks	 up	many	of	 the	characters	and	questions	from	that	short
story,	reshaping	and	repurposing	them	to	ask	new	questions.
        Thank	  you,	 Eric	  Simonoff,	  Tracy	  Fisher,	 and	 everyone	 at	 WME	  for
continued	faith	in	my	 work	and	career.	I’m	in	the	best	hands.
        Thank	 you,	Jordan	Pavlin,	 editor	 extraordinaire.	 What	a	 joy	 it	 is	to	 work
with	you,	to	 know	you.	Thank	 you	also	to	everyone	at	Knopf	for	 making	 a	home
for	my	 work.	I’m	 also	grateful	to	Mary	 Mount	 at	Viking	 UK,	 Tiffany	 Gassouk	at
Calmann-Lévy,	and	all	of	 the	wonderful	 editors	 and	publishing	houses	that	have
championed	my	work	abroad.
        Thank	you	to	 Josefine	Kals	for	being	the	world’s	best	publicist.	 I’m	lucky	 to
have	you	in	my	corner.
        Thank	 you	to	 my	 family	 and	 Matt’s	family	  and	to	 all	 of	 the	friends	 who
have	held	me	up	these	last	few	years.
        Thank	you	 to	Christina	Gonzalez	Ho,	trusted	reader	and	beloved	friend.	I’m

216
so	grateful	for	your	time	 and	your	care.
        Thank	you	 to	Clare	Jones	for	your	notes	on	this	novel	and	for	 our	treasured
correspondence	in	general.
        Finally,	 a	special	thank	you	to	 Matt,	 for	reading	 my	work,	 for	 all	the	years
of	 love	 and	faith	  and	 bottomless	kindness.	Life	  with	  you	 has	been	rich	  and
blessed.

217
                                           A	 NOTE	ABOUT	 THE	AUTHOR


Yaa	Gyasi	 was	 born	 in	 Ghana	and	 raised	 in	 Huntsville,	 Alabama.	 Her	 debut	 novel,
Homegoing,	was	awarded	the	National	Book	Critics	Circle’s	John	Leonard	Award	for	best
first	 book,	 the	PEN/Hemingway	 Award	 for	 a	 first	 book	 of	 fiction,	 the	 National	 Book
Foundation’s	“5	under	35”	honors	for	 2016,	and	the	American	 Book	Award.	 She	lives	in
Brooklyn.

218
                        What’s	 next	 on
                      your	 reading	 list?

                      Discover	your	next
                             great	read!

                                     	
Get	personalized	book	picks	and	up-to-date	news	about	this
                                author.

                           Sign	up	now.

