3
THE	  SECRET	   LIVES	   OF	 CHURCH
                          LADIES

                      DEESHA	PHILYAW







                     WEST	VIRGINIA	UNIVERSITY	PRESS
                             MORGANTOWN

4
Copyright	©	2020	by	Deesha	Philyaw
All	rights	reserved
First	edition	published	2020	by	West	Virginia	University	Press
Printed	in	the	United	States	of	America


ISBN
Paper	978-1-949199-73-4
Ebook	978-1-949199-74-1


Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Names:	Philyaw,	Deesha,	author.
Title:	The	secret	lives	of	church	ladies	/	Deesha	Philyaw.
Description:	First	edition.	|	Morgantown	:	West	Virginia	 University	Press,	2020.
Identifiers:	LCCN	2020008805	|	ISBN	9781949199734	(paperback)	|	ISBN	9781949199741	(ebook)
Classification:	LCC	PS3616.H479	A6	2020	|	DDC	813/.6—dc23
LC	record	available	at	https://lccn.loc.gov/2020008805


Cover	design	by	Stewart	Williams.
Cover	photo	by	Sewn	Apart	on	Unsplash.
Book	design	by	Than	Saffel	/	WVU	Press.


Stories	in	this	collection	appeared	in	slightly	different	form	in	the	following	 publications:
“Eula,”	Apogee	Journal,	no.	9,	Summer	2017;	“Not	Daniel,”	Cheat	River	Review,	issue	10,	Spring/Summer
2018;	“Snowfall,”	 Baltimore	Review,	Winter	2019;	“How	to	Make	Love	 to	a	Physicist,”	Barrelhouse,
Special	Issue:	I’ve	Got	Love	on	My	Mind:	Black	 Women	on	Love,	February	2020.


Ansel	Elkins,	excerpt	from	“Autobiography	 of	Eve”	from	Blue	Yodel.	Copyright	©	2015	by	Ansel	Elkins.
Reprinted	with	the	permission	of	the	author.

5
                For	Taylor	and	Peyton,
And	for	everyone	trying	to	get	free

6
Let	it	be	known:	I	did	not	fall	from	grace.


I	leapt

to	freedom.

                                                                                         —Ansel	Elkins,
                                                                            “Autobiography	of	Eve”

7
                                           CONTENTS






EULA

NOT-DANIEL

DEAR	SISTER

PEACH	COBBLER

SNOWFALL

HOW	TO	MAKE	LOVE	TO	A	PHYSICIST

JAEL

INSTRUCTIONS	FOR	MARRIED	CHRISTIAN	HUSBANDS

WHEN	EDDIE	LEVERT	COMES

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

8
                                                     EULA






EULA	BOOKS	the	suite	in	Clarksville,	two	towns	over.	I	bring	the	food.	This
year	it’s	sushi	for	me	and	cold	cuts	and	potato	salad	for	her.	Nothing	heavy.	Just
enough	to	sustain	us.	And	I	bring	the	champagne.	This	year,	which	like	every
year	could	be	our	last,	I	bring	three	bottles	of	André	Spumante.
    And	I	got	us	some	noisemakers	and	year	2000	glasses	to	wear.	The	lenses	are
the	two	zeroes	in	the	middle.	For	all	we	know,	the	Y2K	bug	will	have	us	sitting
in	the	dark	one	second	after	Dick	Clark	counts	down	in	Times	Square.	But	that’s
all	right	with	me.	Because	that	André	sips	just	as	well	in	the	dark.
    After	 we	settle	in,	Eula	digs	into	the	potato	salad	and	cold	cuts.	She’s	real
particular	about	what	she	eats.	About	most	things	really.	She	likes	things	just	so.
She’s	a	schoolteacher,	like	me,	so	we	have	to	mind	the	details,	though	Eula
minds	them	more	closely	than	I	do.	But	she	can’t	tell	I	bought	the	potato	salad
from	 Publix,	 added	some	chopped	boiled	egg,	 mustard,	pickle	 relish,	and
paprika,	and	put	it	in	my	red	Tupperware	bowl.	She	eats	seconds,	pats	her	belly,
and	tells	me	I	outdid	myself.
    After	we’re	finished	eating	and	polishing	off	a	bottle	of	the	André,	I	start	the
shower.	We	like	 it	 boiling	hot.	 The	heat	relaxes	me,	but	I	 feel	 like	 it	 does
something	else	for	Eula.	She	stays	in	there	long	after	I	get	out.	 Through	the
steamy	shower	door,	I	see	her	pink	shower	cap.	Her	head	is	bowed,	and	I	wonder
if	 she’s	asking	God’s	 forgiveness	for	stepping	outside	of	 His	 favor	 as	she
continues	to	wait	on	His	provision.



By	the	time	Eula	and	I	turned	thirty,	ten	years	ago,	we	had	been	best	friends	for
half	our	lives.	We	met	in	tenth	grade,	the	only	Black	girls	in	our	Honors	English
class.	Eula	had	 been	new	that	 year;	 her	family	  moved	down	 from	 North
Carolina.	She	needed	a	friend,	and	I	did	too.	We	were	daydreamers,	planning	our
double	Hawaiian	wedding	in	the	margins	of	our	math	notebooks.	Our	husbands
would	be	railroad	men	like	our	fathers.	We’d	teach	at	the	high	school,	join	the
Ladies	Auxiliary	at	church,	and	be	next-door	neighbors.	Our	kids	would	play
together.
    But	our	thirtieth	birthdays	found	us	teaching	at	the	high	school	and	serving	in

9
the	 Ladies	 Auxiliary	   with	  no	  other	 parts	 of	  our	  daydreams	 realized.	 We
celebrated	Eula’s	 birthday	 in	 her	apartment,	with	  too	many	 wine	 coolers.	She
ended	up	in	 my	 lap,	 her	 skirt	 bunched	up	 around	 her	waist.	 I	 saw	 the	white
cotton	panties	between	her	thick	brown	thighs.	She	smelled	like	vanilla.
    “Do	  you	ever	feel	 like	 you	could	 just	bust?”	 she	asked	me,	her	breath	fruity
and	hot	in	my	face.
    I	 didn’t	 answer,	afraid	that	my	honesty	would	send	Eula	running.	 But	it	didn’t
matter	because	she	kept	talking,	 begging	 me	to	 touch	her	 because	no	one	had
ever	touched	 her	down	  there.	She	 had	been	a	 good	 girl,	 she	 told	 me.	 But	 I
already	knew	that.	As	a	teen,	Eula	hadn’t	 sneaked	behind	her	parents’	backs	as	I
had,	curious,	then	disappointed,	 by	what	 too-rough	boys	had	 to	offer.	 And	 as	a
grown	woman,	 she	had	not	 endured	short-lived	 flings	  with	 men	whose	 names
weren’t	 worth	  remembering,	 as	 I	 had.	 Eula	 had	 committed	  to	 praying	 and
waiting	for	 her	Boaz,	like	Ruth	in	 the	Bible.
    Eula	 is	a	 true	believer.	 She	doesn’t	walk	 around	with	 questions	lingering	  in
her	throat	like	I	do.
    But	  that	 night,	 she	slid	 my	  fingers	 inside	 those	white	  cotton	 panties	and
forgot	all	 about	Boaz.	 We	stayed	up	 until	 we	were	slick	 with	 sweat.	Later	 that
morning,	Eula	tamped	down	regret	with	 silence	and	coffee.
    A	 month	or	so	later,	it	 was	New	Year’s	 Eve,	and	Eula	called	to	say	that	she’d
booked	a	suite	over	in	Clarksville.	 I	brought	white	 pizza	and	three	bottles	of	Asti
Spumante.



For	Eula’s	birthday	 the	next	year,	I	planned	a	special	dinner	at	my	house	for	us.	I
went	down	to	 the	fish	market	 on	Avery	 and	got	everything	 to	make	gumbo,	 her
favorite	dish.	Eula	 liked	my	 Grandma	Pauline’s	gumbo,	but	 without	the	okra,	 so
that’s	how	I	made	it.	 I	cooked	the	night	before	Eula’s	 birthday	because	Grandma
always	said	the	gumbo	tasted	better	after	 it	had	a	chance	to	 sit	in	 the	Frigidaire
for	a	day.
    As	  I	 stirred	 the	 roux,	 which	  is	 my	 least	 favorite	 part	 of	  making	 gumbo
because	it	requires	patience,	Eula	called	to	 ask	if	 she	could	get	a	 rain	check	on
dinner.	Reese,	an	attorney	from	our	singles	Bible	 study	whom	she’d	been	seeing
for	barely	 six	months,	wanted	to	 take	her	out	for	 her	birthday.	It	 was	a	surprise.
Her	           words	            tumbled	           all	            over	           each	           other
—OhCarolettaIthinkhemightaskmetomarryhim—and	   I	  just	  kept	  stirring	  that
roux.
    “You	  understand,	right?”	Eula	had	asked.

10
    “Sure.”	 I	 tried	to	 think	of	 something	else	to	say	that	Eula	would	 want	to	 hear
that	wouldn’t	  taste	wounded	 and	bitter	 in	 my	 mouth.	But	 I	 couldn’t	  come	up
with	anything.	 It	 didn’t	 matter	anyway	because	Eula	just	prattled	on,	 wondering
how	Reese	could’ve	managed	to	 guess	her	ring	size	and	what	she	would	 say	to
feign	surprise	when	he	popped	the	question.
    In	  the	end,	 both	Eula	 and	 Reese	got	a	 surprise	that	 night.	 Their	 romantic
dinner	at	a	rooftop	 restaurant	(the	original	 surprise)	 was	interrupted	 by	Reese’s
estranged	wife.
    Later,	 when	 Eula	 called	to	 tell	 me	what	 had	 happened,	her	fury	 just	 about
leaped	through	the	phone.	I	 sat	up	 in	bed,	 listening,	eating	 my	second	bowl	 of
gumbo—with	 okra—another	woman’s	husband	snoring	lightly	 beside	me.
    Over	  time,	 Eula	 had	other	 Reeses,	other	 almosts.	 But	 she	would	  end	 up
dismissing	them	as	too	old	or	too	young.	 Too	broke	or	too	stupid.	Or	 they	would
dismiss	her	once	they	 realized	they	 couldn’t	 woo	 or	pressure	her	 into	sleeping
with	 them.	Now’days,	 there	are	fewer	 and	fewer	 Reeses,	and	they	are	less	and
less	like	Boaz	with	each	passing	year.
    Sometimes	 I	wonder	 if	 Eula	 finds	 fault	with	  all	these	men	 because	secretly
she	doesn’t	want	any	of	them,	and	is	just	doing	what’s	expected	of	her.
    But	 these	are	the	kinds	of	things	Eula	and	I	don’t	talk	 about.



After	the	shower,	Eula	puts	on	a	white	 T-shirt	and	white	 cotton	panties.	She	falls
back	on	the	king-size	bed,	floating	 on	the	crisp	white	 sheets,	plump	pillows,	 and
billowy	 comforter.	  Her	hair	 is	 wrapped	in	 a	 pink	 silk	 scarf.	 She	takes	a	long
drink,	straight	from	 the	second	bottle	of	André.
    “Want	 some?”	She	holds	the	bottle	out	to	me.
    I	 crawl	 to	her,	from	 the	foot	 of	 the	bed.	When	I	 am	next	to	 her,	she	lifts	 the
bottle	 to	 my	 mouth	 and	then	 pours	 it	 down	 the	 front	 of	 my	 nightgown	  and
giggles.	“Let	  me	get	that,”	 she	says.	She	sets	the	 bottle	on	 the	nightstand	 and
pushes	me	back	on	the	pillows.	 She	straddles	me,	takes	off	 my	 nightgown,	and
licks	everywhere	the	champagne	has	touched.



About	 an	hour	later,	 I	 wake	up,	 still	 drunk.	 Eula	 is	up,	 drinking	 from	 the	 last
bottle	of	 André.	She	has	muted	the	TV,	 but	 I	can	tell	 Dick	 Clark	 is	introducing
some	little	white	 girl	 with	 multicolored	 hair	 who	had	a	hit	 early	last	year.	Can’t
remember	that	child’s	name,	and	I	guess	it	really	doesn’t	matter.	 She	can’t	dance
to	save	her	life	and	can’t	sing	a	lick.

11
    “I	 have	a	New	Year’s	resolution,”	Eula	says,	her	eyes	half-closed.	“If	I’m	still
alone	come	Valentine’s	Day,	it	will	be	the	last	one	I	spend	without	a	man	who
belongs	to	me	and	me	only.”
    “That’s	a	pretty	big	resolution,”	I	say,	reaching	for	the	bottle.	The	sting	of	her
saying	she’s	alone	doesn’t	roll	off	of	me	as	quickly	as	it	usually	does.	“What	do
you	plan	to	do?”
    “Like	 Pastor	says:	the	Lord	can’t	steer	a	parked	car.	I	need	to	position	myself
to	meet	someone	and	prepare	a	place	in	my	life	for	a	husband.”
    “Meaning?”
    “For	 starters,	I	been	slacking	off	on	going	to	Bible	study.	If	I	want	a	godly
man,	I	need	to	be	in	the	right	places.”
    “You	met	Reese	at	Bible	study	.	.	.”
    Eula	rolls	her	eyes.	“And	I’m	going	to	redecorate	my	house,”	she	continues.
“There’s	no	room	for	 a	man,	the	way	it	 is	 now.	I	 want	to	make	space	for	a
husband.”
    “Sorta	like	feng	shui.”
    “Feng	what?”
    “Never	 mind.”	 I	 think	 about	Eula	being	busy	with	 all	 these	man-finding
activities	while	I	 do	what?	Entertain	the	occasional	married	boyfriend?	Spend
next	New	Year’s	Eve	without	her?	I	want	a	change	too,	but	I	have	no	plan.
    “And	I’m	 going	to	join	the	singles	softball	team	at	church,”	Eula	says.
    “You	don’t	even	like	sports,”	I	say,	laughing.
    “Laugh	 all	you	want.”	 Eula	adjusts	the	pillows	behind	her	back.	“But	you
need	to	get	with	the	program	too.	Caroletta,	don’t	you	want	someone	to	come
home	to?	Someone	to	spend	your	life	with?	Don’t	you	want	to	be	happy?”
    I	look	at	Eula,	her	no-longer-fresh	ringlets	damp	from	the	time	spent	between
my	legs.	As	I	think	about	her	question,	something	both	cruel	and	pitiful	churns
inside	me	and	threatens	to	spill	out.	Since	when	does	she	know	or	care	anything
about	my	happiness?	Anything	at	all	about	it?
    “I	 am	happy,”	I	 say,	coaxing	my	voice	out	to	sound	braver	than	I	actually
feel.	“Right	now.	Right	here.	With	you.	And	it	doesn’t	have	to	be	just	this	one
night.	We	could—”
    “Caroletta,	I	hope	you	haven’t	given	up	on	finding	you	a	husband.	I’m	on	a
mission,	and	you	can	be	too.”	Eula	sounds	flat,	like	the	world’s	most	exhausted
saleslady.	She	scoots	away	from	me	to	the	edge	of	the	bed,	looking	at	the	TV.
    “Eula,	turn	around	and	look	at	me.	Please.”
    Eula	shakes	her	head.	To	the	TV,	she	says,	“I	don’t	want	to	die	a	virgin.	Do
you	want	to	die	a	virgin?”
    I	guess	I	wait	a	beat	too	long	to	respond.

12
    Eula	 whips	around	to	face	me.	“You	 .	.	.	aren’t?”
    I	 don’t	  know	 what’s	 funnier:	 that	 Eula	thinks	 my	 forty-year-old	  ass	hasn’t
had	sex	with	 a	man	in	 all	 these	many	years,	or	 that	she	still	 considers	 us	both
virgins	after	all	 we’ve	done	together	in	those	same	years.
    “Eula.”
    “You?	  With	 some	dirty-ass	man?”	Eula	 clamps	her	hand	over	 her	mouth.	In
that	moment,	 Sunday	 School	 Teacher	 Eula	 snatches	the	 reins	 from	 Biology
Teacher	Eula.	“You	aren’t	 clean?”
    “Eula!”
    I	 expect	her	to	grab	her	clothes	and	bolt.	 But	she	doesn’t.	She	just	sits	on	 the
bed,	her	body	racked	by	sobs.	“It	wasn’t	supposed	to	be	this	way,”	 she	cries	over
and	over	again.	I’m	not	even	sure	what	it	is.	Me	with	 men?	Her	with	 me?	Life?
    “Eula,	 what	way	 was	it	supposed	to	be?”
    She	 turns	around	 and	faces	me.	“I	  just	 want	to	 be	happy,”	 she	sobs.	“And
normal.”
    I	 want	to	close	the	gap	between	us,	pull	her	to	 me	and	rock	her	until	 the	tears
stop,	promise	 that	  everything	 will	  be	 okay,	 but	 I	  don’t	 dare.	 I	  can’t	 make
everything	okay,	not	the	way	she	wants	it.
    “Normal	   according	 to	 who,	 Eula?	 Men	 who	 been	 dead	for	  thousands	of
years?	Who	thought	slavery	was	cool	and	treated	women	like	property?”
    “The	  Bible	 is	 the	inerrant	 word	 of	 God,”	  Eula	whispers,	 as	defiantly	  as	a
whisper	can	be.
    “And	  you	 only	 believe	that	 because	of	how	 another	group	of	 men	 interpret
the	first	group	 of	men.	People	say	you’re	 supposed	to	put	your	faith	 in	God,	not
men.	Do	you	think	 God	wants	you,	or	anybody,	to	go	untouched	for	 decades	and
decades?	For	their	whole	 lives?	Like	  Sister	Stewart,	Sister	 Wilson,	 Sister	Hill,
my	mother	after	my	father	 died—all	those	women	at	church	who	think	 they	have
to	choose	between	pleasing	God	and	something	so	basic,	so	human	as	being	held
and	known	in	the	most	intimate	way.	If	 God	became	human	once—”
    “If?”	  Eula	says,	spitting	out	the	word.
    “—then	 why	 would	he	make	rules	that	force	such	a	painful	choice?”
    “I	 don’t	 question	God.”
    “But	  maybe	you	 should	question	the	 people	who	 taught	you	 this	version	 of
God.	Because	it’s	not	doing	you	any	favors.”
    Eula	 narrows	her	eyes	at	me.	“You’re	not	who	 I	thought	you	were.”
    “You’re	  not	who	you	thought	 you	were	either.”

13
On	the	 TV,	  the	Times	 Square	crowd	  is	 going	 wild.	 It’s	  almost	 time	 for	 the
countdown.	Eula	and	I	 are	lying	 in	the	bed	wearing	 only	 our	year	2000	glasses.
The	noisemakers	are	still	in	the	bag.
    “I	  want	to	 ring	 in	the	 New	Year	 in	 Times	Square	someday,”	 Eula	says,	but
her	words	are	kind	of	mashed	up	because	of	the	André.
    “With	  me?	Maybe	we	could	go	next	year,	instead	of	coming	here.”
    Eula	 doesn’t	answer.
    “Our	  friends	 down	 under	in	 Sydney,	Australia,	 were	the	 first	 to	ring	 in	 the
New	Year,”	 Dick	 Clark	 says	to	 a	white	 woman	in	 the	crowd	 wearing	 a	purple
velvet	Mad	 Hatter’s	 hat.	“And	 other	 countries	 have	celebrated	as	well	 without
any	loss	of	power	or	computer	glitches.	Do	 you	think	the	Y2K	bug	was	much	ado
about	nothing?”
    “I’m	  scared,	Caroletta.”
    “I	 know.”
    Eula	 begins	to	 whisper.	I	 move	closer	 to	hear	what	 she’s	saying	and	realize
that	she’s	praying.
    When	 she	says	amen,	I	get	up	and	walk	to	the	foot	of	the	bed	and	kneel	down.
Eula’s	toenails	are	painted	the	same	pink	as	her	scarf.	I	 reach	for	her	ankles	and
pull	her	toward	me.	She	scoots	on	her	butt	until	 she’s	at	the	edge,	her	feet	flat	on
the	bed	on	either	side	of	me.	She	spreads	her	knees	apart.	I	push	down	gently	on
the	inside	of	her	thighs,	until	 she	is	open,	like	an	altar.
    10-9-8	 .	.	.
    I	 am	speaking	in	tongues.
    4-3-2	 .	.	.
    Eula	 has	her	prayers	and	I	have	mine.

14
                                            NOT-DANIEL






I	PARKED	in	the	shadows	behind	the	hospice	center,	and	waited.	I	held	a	box	of
condoms	on	my	lap,	Magnum	XLs.	It	was	like	being	sixteen	again,	except	this
time	I	bought	the	condoms	instead	of	relying	on	the	boy.	This	time	the	boy	was	a
man	I	had	mistaken	for	someone	I’d	gone	to	junior	high	with	when	our	paths
first	crossed	two	weeks	before	at	the	main	entrance	of	the	hospice	center.	I	was
coming,	he	was	going.	I	thought	he	was	Daniel	McMurray	so	I	 stared	longer
than	I	should	have,	and	he	stared	back.	Later	that	evening,	I’d	run	into	him	again
coming	out	of	the	room	across	from	my	mother’s.	His	mother	had	breast	cancer,
mine	ovarian.
    I	checked	my	phone.	10:27.	I’d	timed	the	Walmart	run	for	the	condoms	pretty
well.	Not-Daniel	would	be	down	in	three	minutes.	To	throw	Nurse	Irie,	the	night
nurse,	off	the	trail,	we	never	left	or	returned	to	the	floor	at	the	same	time.	Her
name	wasn’t	really	Irie,	but	I	called	her	that	behind	her	back	because	she	was
Jamaican.	She	was	also	mean	as	a	snake.	I	had	complained	to	the	head	of	the
center	about	her,	suggesting	that	her	brusque	manner	was	better	suited	for	the
morgue.	But	Nurse	Irie	liked	Not-Daniel.	She	didn’t	 cop	an	attitude	when	he
asked	questions	about	his	mother’s	care.	He	told	me	she	even	joked	with	him
late	one	night	as	he	walked	around	the	floor	in	his	skimpy	running	shorts:	“Boi,
you	keep	walking	around	here	in	those	itty	 bitty	 tings,	someone	might	mess
around	and	give	you	a	sponge	bath.”
    Nurse	Irie	 was	not	a	 stupid	woman.	Perhaps	she	would	put	two	and	two
together	and	figure	out	that	Not-Daniel	and	I	were	.	.	.	what	were	we?	What	do
you	call	it	when	your	mothers	are	hospice	neighbors	and	the	nights	are	endless
and	sleepless	and	here’s	someone	else	who	spent	the	day	talking	to	insurance
companies	and	creditors	and	banks	and	pastors	and	relatives	and	friends,	some
more	well-intentioned	than	others?	Someone	else	who	is	the	dutiful	son	to	your
dutiful	 daughter,	another	family’s	 chief	 shit	handler,	bail	 bondsman,	maid,
chauffeur,	therapist,	career	advisor,	ATM.	  Here’s	 someone	else	who	 both
welcomes	and	dreads	death	as	it	loiters	in	the	wings,	an	unpredictable	actor.
    What	do	you	call	it	when	that	someone	else	wears	a	wedding	band	but	never
mentions	his	wife	by	name?	A	wife	and	two	kids	back	home	in	the	next	state
over.	Don’t	ask,	don’t	tell.

15
    At	  exactly	 ten	thirty,	  Not-Daniel	 tapped	 the	passenger-side	window.	 For	 a
few	 moments,	we	 sat	in	 silence	the	 way	 we	 always	did	 at	 first.	 Sometimes	I
would	 cry,	 sometimes	he	 would	 too,	 because	we	could	 out	 here,	 beyond	the
reach	of	our	 mothers’	Jesus,	nurses	on	autopilot,	empty	 platitudes,	and	garbage
theology	about	God’s	 will	 disguised	as	comfort.	 And	 then	eventually,	one	of	 us
would	speak.
    But	 this	night	.	 .	.	how	to	begin?	Pick	up	where	we’d	 left	off	 the	night	before?
When	 yet	 another	 rambling	 conversation	 about	 funerals	 and	 selfish	 siblings
suddenly	became	kissing,	 became	my	 T-shirt	 off,	 became	my	 nipples	 in	 Not-
Daniel’s	mouth.
    This	  is	 how	 we	  began:	Not-Daniel	  took	  the	 box	 of	  condoms	 from	 me,
removed	one,	and	then	set	the	box	on	the	dashboard	next	to	my	 phone.	Then	he
set	his	phone	on	the	dashboard.	I	knew	his	ringer	 volume,	like	 mine,	was	on	the
highest	setting,	because	the	call,	that	 call,	could	 come	at	any	 moment.	Then	he
took	my	face	in	his	hands	and	looked	at	me.	I	dropped	my	eyes.
    “No,”	  he	said.	“I	need	you	to	be	.	.	.	here.	All	 of	you.	Here.”
    Lifting	  my	eyes	to	meet	his,	I	felt	 like	Sisyphus	pushing	that	rock.	In	 his	eyes,
I	saw	wifekidsdyingmother.	I	 blinked,	and	blinked	again,	until	 my	vision	 cleared.
    In	  the	 back	 seat,	Not-Daniel	  undressed	me,	 undressed	himself,	  and	 then
buried	his	 face	 between	my	 legs.	 I	 reached	over	 my	 head,	clutched	 the	door
behind	me,	and	cried	as	I	came	over	and	over	again.
    By	 the	 time	Not-Daniel	  put	on	the	 condom	and	pulled	 me	to	 my	knees,	my
legs	were	 limp	 and	 useless.	He	turned	 me	away	 from	  him,	 pressed	his	palm
against	the	center	of	my	back	 and	pushed	me	forward.	He	draped	his	 body	over
mine	and	entered	me.	He	was	rough,	but	not	unkind.
    I	 wondered	whether	he	was	thinking	  what	I	 was	thinking:	 what	if	 one	of	 our
mothers	dies	while	 we’re	 down	here	rutting	  around,	as	my	grandmother	 would
say?
    But	 in	the	cramped	space	of	the	back	seat	and	of	our	grief	and	our	need,	there
was	no	room	for	guilt	 or	fear.	Only	relief.
    And	 that’s	what	 I	told	 Not-Daniel	 when	we	were	both	 spent,	our	damp	backs
sticking	to	the	leather	seat.
    “Relieved?”	 He	 frowned	and	then	smiled.	 “Relieved?	Then	I	 failed	to	 deliver
the	goods.”
    “No,	  no,”	 I	 said.	“You	 .	 .	.	 delivered	the	 goods.	The	goods	were	 delivered.
And	received.	But	I	 do	have	a	question	.	.	.”
    “Shoot.”
    “Were	 you	worried	 that	one	of	them	would	die	while	 we	were	down	here?”
    “Thought	 never	crossed	my	mind.”

16
    “Really?”
    “Really.	Listen,	I	can	either	deliver	the	goods,	or	I	can	think	about	my	mama,
dying	or	not.	I	can’t	do	both.”
    And	 then	I	laughed,	even	though	I	felt	like	 I	shouldn’t	have.	Even	though
nothing	was	as	it	should	be.

17
                                           DEAR	    SISTER






DEAR	JACKIE:
    I’ve	started	this	letter	about	five	different	times	in	five	different	ways.	Finally
I	just	told	myself	you’re	either	going	to	read	it	or	you’re	not,	and	it’s	not	going
to	come	down	to	how	I	write	it.	It’s	all	about	who	you	are	and	what	you’ve	been
through	and	what,	if	anything,	it	means	to	you	to	share	a	father	with	my	sisters
Renee,	Kimba,	Tasheta,	and	me.	Maybe	it	means	nothing.	Maybe	your	life	has
been	just	fine	without	our	father	in	it,	which	I	hope	is	the	case.	Maybe	it	means
everything,	and	you	have	longed	to	know	him	and	struggled	because	you	didn’t.
Either	way,	you	have	a	right	to	know	that	our	father	Wallace	“Stet”	Brown	died
last	week	of	a	massive	stroke.
    As	far	as	we	know,	you	never	met	our	father.	The	last	time	he	saw	you,	you
were	an	infant.	If	that’s	 the	case,	and	if	it’s	any	consolation:	you	didn’t	 miss
much.	(Tasheta,	our	baby	sister,	asked	me	to	tell	you	that.	 We’re	all	 sitting
around	at	Grandma’s	house,	and	everyone	is	talking	at	once,	telling	me	what	I
should	write	to	you.	I’m	 mostly	ignoring	 them.	They	picked	me	to	write	this
because	I	shoot	straight	and	don’t	mince	words.	But	I	 also	have	tact,	unlike
Tasheta.)
    Oh!	In	 case	you’re	wondering,	we	always	just	called	it	“Grandma’s	house,”
even	though	Granddaddy	lived	here	too,	when	he	was	alive.	He	died	of	a	heart
attack	in	2002,	God	rest	his	soul.	You	would	have	loved	him.	Everybody	did.
Always	had	a	joke	or	funny	story	to	tell.	He	was	good	people,	just	like	Grandma.
They	lost	their	kids	to	the	street	or	hard	living,	one	way	or	another,	even	though
they	tried	their	best	to	raise	them	right.	But	some	people	just	go	their	own	way,
you	know?
    Anyway,	 back	 to	 Stet.	Tasheta	is	 right.	 You	 didn’t	 miss	much.	 Stet—
everybody	but	Grandma	called	him	“Stet”	because	back	in	high	school,	he	wore
a	Stetson—Stet	wasn’t	much	of	a	daddy.	Each	of	us	girls	had	a	different	kind	of
relationship	with	him,	none	of	them	healthy	and	none	of	them	what	we	needed	it
to	be.
    Kimba	 is	 the	 oldest,	and	 she’s	the	 peacekeeper.	She	called	our	 father
“Wallace,”	but	she	mostly	pretended	he	didn’t	exist.	Over	the	years,	she’s	kept
Tasheta	and	Renee	from	strangling	each	other.	She	went	to	Harvard.	Her	mother

18
(Jan)	and	my	mother	 had	been	friends	 .	.	.	 before	Stet.	But	 by	 the	time	 Kimba
and	I	were	in	 elementary	school,	they	 had	put	their	 differences	aside	and	raised
us	together	like	sisters.	My	mama	said,	“Y’all	  gon’	 need	each	other	one	day.	Me
and	Jan	aren’t	always	going	to	be	here.	And	you	sure	as	hell	can’t	 count	on	your
daddy.”
    Anyway	 .	.	.	Kimba	 lives	in	 Philadelphia	now,	with	 her	husband	and	two	kids.
Your	 niece	 and	nephew.	 She’s	 the	 only	 one	 of	 us	 with	 kids,	 and	 she’s	 the
quietest	one.	 Like	 I	 said,	 the	peacekeeper.	She	flew	  down	 as	soon	as	 Renee
called	her	with	 the	news,	and	she’s	helping	out	with	 Grandma.	But	I	 can	tell	she
really	wants	to	get	the	hell	out	of	town	 and	back	to	her	life.
    Speaking	 of	Grandma	.	 .	.	I	 don’t	 think	 Alzheimer’s	 has	fully	 set	in	 yet,	but
she’s	on	her	way.	She	can’t	always	remember	our	names,	but	she	knows	that	her
baby	boy	died.	And	she’s	sad	about	it.	She’s	been	crying	off	 and	on.	At	 seventy-
five,	she’s	outlived	 her	 husband	and	all	but	one	of	 her	children,	 our	Uncle	 Bird
who	moved	in	to	take	care	of	her	when	Granddaddy	died.
    Last	 week,	 after	 Kimba	 arrived,	 we	 met	 up	 for	 dinner	 at	Grandma’s.	 Her
neighbors	and	the	people	 from	 her	church	had	dropped	 off	 food.	 We	had	food
for	 days:	fried	 chicken,	 baked	 chicken,	 macaroni	 and	cheese,	greens,	deviled
eggs,	potato	salad,	black-eyed	peas	and	rice,	pound	cake.
    So	we	were	sitting	 there	eating	and	whatnot,	and	Grandma	says,	“Which	 one-
a	y’all	 pregnant?”	 She	waved	 a	chicken	 leg	around	 like	 a	pointer.	 “I	 dreamed
about	fish	near	‘bout	every	night	this	 week.”
    We	 been	 hearing	about	 Grandma’s	 fishy	 dreams	all	 our	 lives.	 With	 seven
children,	 nineteen	grandchildren	 (including	 you),	 eight	 great-grands,	and	three
great-great-grands,	Grandma	has	dreamed	about	fish	a	lot.
    “Somebody	 ‘round	 here	pregnant,”	she	muttered.
    Renee,	Kimba,	 and	I	just	 looked	at	each	other	and	shook	our	 heads.	“It’s	 not
us,	Grandma,”	Renee	said.	(Tasheta	hadn’t	gotten	here	yet;	she’s	always	late.)
    Anyway	 .	 .	.	Grandma	and	her	fishy	dreams	announced	the	existence	of	every
one	 of	   her	  children,	  grandchildren,	   great-grandchildren,	  and	  great-great-
grandchildren.	 (“Except	  for	  Khalil,”	   she	 always	  reminded	 us.	 “You	   know
Derrick	never	brang	that	girl	 around	until	 that	baby	was	two	weeks	old.	And	 you
know	she	had	the	nerve	to	 get	an	attitude	because	I	told	 her	she	shouldn’t	 have
that	baby	out	so	soon	with	no	shoes	on	his	feet,	no	hat,	nothing.	 I	don’t	 care	if	it
was	June.”	June	1986,	but	Grandma	still	talks	about	that	girl	 and	that	baby	like	it
was	yesterday.	Khalil	is	nineteen	and	is	a	daddy	his	own	self	now!)
    If	 Grandma	 dreams	about	fish,	there	is	 a	baby	baking	inside	 someone	in	her
life.	 Everybody	talks	 about	how	 she’s	only	 been	wrong	once,	and	they	 chalk	it
up	to	the	fact	that	 she	was	in	the	hospital	at	the	time	 from	complications	 related

19
to	her	diabetes	and	was	probably	just	having	 wild	 dreams	because	she	was	sick.
But	Jackie,	I’m	 going	to	 tell	you	 a	secret	that	only	our	sisters	know:	 I	knew	 that
wasn’t	true.	I	 felt	 more	guilty	 about	ruining	 Grandma’s	 track	record	in	 the	eyes
of	the	family	 than	I	did	about	the	abortion	 in	the	eyes	of	God.	Fifteen	years	later,
and	Grandma	still	 complaining	 about	how	 “the	 sugar	is	even	worser	than	 them
doctors	realize.	Messing	 around	with	  folks’	 dreams	.	 .	.”	 But	 I	 don’t	 have	the
heart	to	tell	her	what	I	did.
    But	 this	time,	 it’s	really	 not	me	who’s	 pregnant.	I	know	 for	a	fact	 that	it	ain’t
me,	because	I	ain’t	 been	with	nobody	 in	almost	 a	year.	Because	men	are	tiring,
and	I	don’t	have	the	energy.	Are	you	married?	Do	you	 have	kids?
    Anyway	  .	.	.	 Maybe	it’s	 one	 of	our	 cousins,	or	second	cousins?	Or	Tasheta.
But	she	gets	those	Depo	shots	.	.	.
    I	 know	 who	ain’t	 pregnant	for	 sure:	our	middle	 sister,	Renee.	Because	she	is
probably	still	 a	virgin.	 Renee	is	definitely	 the	most	delusional	 one	of	us	when	it
comes	to	Stet.	She	is	 my	 full	 blood	 sister.	(I	 don’t	 like	 to	think	 about	 it,	 but	I
guess	my	mama	felt	like	 being	 the	same	fool	twice	 where	Stet	was	 concerned.)
Renee	and	me	don’t	 have	much	 else	in	 common.	 Like	 the	situation	 with	 Stet.
When	we	 were	 in	 grade	school,	 she	was	 always	 telling	 people	 that	 Stet	and
Mama	were	 married,	that	 he	took	 us	on	 Bahamas	cruises	every	year,	 and	that
Stet	bought	her	a	Barbie	Dreamhouse	for	Christmas.	Every	 year	it	was	some	big
gift.	 Meanwhile	 Stet	 went	 on	Bahamas	cruises	 every	year	 all	 right—with	  his
girlfriends.	 And	 he	never	once	bought	 us	gifts.	 All	  we	could	 count	on	 him	for
was	broken	promises,	late	child	support	(if	 there	was	any	at	all),	and	summers	at
Grandma’s	house.	Those	summers	were	the	only	good	thing	I	can	say	about	him,
and	really	they	weren’t	 about	him	 because	he’d	be	in	the	streets	the	whole	 time
we	were	there.
    But	 none	of	 that	 fazed	Renee.	She	bought	that	 man	a	card	 and	a	gift	 every
birthday,	every	Father’s	Day,	every	Christmas.	Like	 he	was	Father	of	the	Year	or
something.	Mama	 would	  ask	me	 if	 I	  wanted	to	 get	 him	 something	 too.	 No,
ma’am.	That’s	just	what	I	 told	her.	No,	ma’am.
    So	 Tasheta	and	me,	we	fell	 in	 line	 somewhere	in	 the	space	between	Kimba
and	Renee.	Like	 a	daughter	purgatory	 where	 you	don’t	 expect	 him	 to	get	 you
anything	for	 your	 birthday	 or	 Christmas,	ever,	 but	it	 still	  hurts	like	 hell	 every
time	he	doesn’t.
    One	 time,	 one	 Father’s	 Day,	 Renee	and	 I	 were	 at	church	 with	  Grandma.
Renee	was	ten,	I	was	thirteen.	 Stet	had	promised	Grandma	that	he	 would	come
to	church.	He	was	always	 promising	Grandma	he	would	 come	to	church.	 Renee
and	I	sat	 on	either	side	 of	Grandma	 in	the	 second	pew	or	 the	right	 side	of	 the
sanctuary,	where	 Grandma	 always	  sat.	Renee	 just	 kept	 turning	  around	 and

20
turning	around,	 looking	 at	the	 door	at	 the	back	of	 the	church.	 I	 know	she	was
thinking	Stet	was	going	 to	walk	 in	any	minute.	She	was	holding	 a	gift,	a	pack	of
socks	she’d	gotten	for	him	and	wrapped	herself	in	Christmas	paper.	Pastor	got	to
the	end	 of	 the	 sermon,	and	 Renee	just	 kept	 turning	  around,	turning	  around.
Grandma	patted	her	knee	and	hugged	her	close.	But	she	kept	looking	back.
    Then	 the	pastor	did	 the	altar	 call,	 inviting	 anyone	 who	wanted	 to	ask	Jesus
into	 their	 heart	to	 come	 forward.	 And	 then	 he	asked	 all	 the	 fathers	to	 come
forward	to	 commit	 or	recommit	 their	 lives	 to	their	 children.	 Renee	watched	all
those	men	come	forward	and	kneel	at	the	altar	and	promise	to	be	good	fathers	to
their	children.	Then	she	looked	back	one	last	time,	and	the	tears	started.
    On	 the	 way	 out	 the	 church,	 she	threw	 the	 socks	in	 the	 garbage	can.	 If	 I
could’ve	 taken	that	pain	 away	from	 her	that	day,	 I	would	 have.	But	 I	 couldn’t.
All	 I	 could	say	to	 her	is	 what	I’d	 heard	 our	mama	say	about	 Stet,	“He	 doesn’t
deserve	us.”	I	 knew	it	 was	true—he	 didn’t	 deserve	us.	But	I	 don’t	 think	 Renee
ever	believed	that.	I	don’t	 think	she’s	ever	learned	what	she	deserves,	what	she’s
worth.



So	I	had	to	take	a	little	break	from	writing	  you.	Fixed	me	another	plate.	Thinking
about	that	 Father’s	 Day	 at	church	 years	ago	 made	me	 wonder	 what	 Father’s
Days	were	like	for	 you,	and	all	the	other	days	as	well.	Is	 it	better	to	have	the	one
big	hurt	 of	your	 father	not	 being	around	and	not	 all	 those	little	 hurts	that	come
when	he	disappoints	you?	Or	is	it	better	to	have	a	piece	of	a	father,	hurts	and	all?
    Well,	 it’s	 not	 like	any	 of	us	got	to	 choose	in	the	beginning.	But	 we	do	get	 to
decide	how	much	space	to	give	him	now.
    I	 really	 hope	that	this	letter	doesn’t	 make	things	harder	for	you.	 It	wasn’t	 our
idea	to	reach	out	at	first.	Growing	 up	we’d	heard	things	here	and	there,	that	there
was	another	sister,	but	we	didn’t	pay	it	 no	never	mind.	But	while	 we	were	sitting
here	a	few	  days	ago,	 Grandma’s	 neighbor	 Miss	 Margaret	 stopped	by	 with	 a
sweet	potato	pie.
    She	said,	“Didn’t	  y’all	 have	another	sister	.	.	.	the	fat	one?”
    We	 had	no	idea	what	she	was	talking	about.
    “She	 was	over	here	visiting	a	few	years	back.	Was	married	to	some	man	from
up	North.”
    “Oh,	  that	  was	 me,	 Miss	 Margaret,”	  Kimba	  said.	 “My	   husband	is	  from
Philadelphia.	And	I	 was	pregnant	the	last	time	I	was	here.”
    “No,	 you	were	just	 fat.	I	remember	when	you	were	pregnant.”
    I	 swear,	old	 people	stay	saying	slick	 shit	 because	they	know	we	can’t	 shake

21
them.	Kimba	just	looked	at	me	like,	 “Is	this	 bitch	for	real?”
    And	   Miss	   Margaret	  kept	   talking.	   “And	   there	  was	  another	  one	  of
y’all	 .	.	.	another	girl	Stet	had.”
    “We	 never	met	her,”	Renee	said,	a	little	too	quickly.
    “Well,	  she	has	a	right	to	know,”	 Miss	 Margaret	said.	She	turned	to	Grandma.
“Don’t	 you	think	 she	has	a	right	to	know,	Mae?”
    Grandma	looked	 up	from	her	piece	of	pie.	“Who?”
    Miss	 Margaret	shook	her	head.	“Never	mind.”
    Then	 Tasheta	came	 in,	 loud	 and	 on	the	 phone,	 as	usual.	 “Girl!”	   she	was
saying	to	someone,	“Tell	  him	 you	not	 a	mind	 reader.	He	better	 speak	up	if	 he
wants	to	be	down.	 Closed	mouths	don’t	 get	head!”	 And	 then	she	cracked	up	at
her	own	wordplay.	 “I’m	  serious	.	 .	.	Look.	 You	 know	 how	 they	say,	‘No	 child
left	behind’?	I	 say,	‘No	nigga	left	 undrained.’	”
    “Tasheta!”	  Renee	jumped	up	from	 the	table.	“That’s	  disgusting.	Show	 some
respect.”
    Tasheta	held	her	 open	palm	inches	away	 from	Renee’s	face.	Dismissed.	 She
still	wore	hospital	 scrubs,	and	she’d	pulled	her	microbraids	up	into	a	bun.
    Miss	 Margaret	 turned	 up	her	 nose.	“Lord	 Jesus,	let	 me	get	 up	out	 of	 here.
Mae,	I	will	 talk	to	 you	later.	Take	care.”
    Tasheta	ended	her	call	and	kissed	Grandma	on	the	cheek.	“Hey,	Grandma.”
    “Lord	  knows	 where	that	 mouth	has	been,”	 Miss	 Margaret	 mumbled	on	 her
way	out	the	door.
    “Thank	  you	for	 stopping	 by,	Miss	 Margaret,”	 Kimba	 said	following	  her	out
onto	the	front	porch.	“And	 for	 the	pie.	We’ll	 see	you	at	the	service	on	Saturday.”
    That	 scene	pretty	much	tells	you	everything	 you	need	to	know	about	Tasheta.
Well,	that	and	the	fact	 that	she	and	one	of	her	married	boyfriends	just	celebrated
their	fifth	 anniversary.
    Kimba	 asked	Tasheta,	“Do	you	ever	remember	Wallace	talking	 about	another
daughter	of	his?”
    Renee	huffed.	 “Come	on,	 Grandma.	I’m	 going	to	 run	you	a	bath.	It’s	 getting
late.”
    Tasheta	 thought	 about	 Kimba’s	  question	 between	 bites	 of	  macaroni	 and
cheese	that	 she	was	 eating	 straight	 from	  the	 baking	 dish.	 “Nah,”	  she	 said.
“Doesn’t	ring	 a	bell.”
    “Miss	  Margaret	thinks	 we	should	 get	in	 touch	with	 her.	But	 we	 don’t	 know
anything	about	her.”
    “Did	  you	ask	Uncle	Bird?”
    Tasheta	is	wild,	 but	 she’s	also	smart.	Her	mom	 used	to	be	a	stripper,	but	she
made	sure	Tasheta	stayed	in	her	books	 and	went	 to	college	 like	 the	rest	of	 us.

22
She’s	a	nurse,	Kimba’s	 a	 professor,	Renee’s	a	kindergarten	 teacher,	and	I’m	 a
program	director	at	a	social	services	nonprofit.	What	do	you	 do?
    So	.	.	 .	I	volunteered	to	go	talk	 to	Uncle	 Bird	(real	 name:	Bert)	who	was	back
in	the	 bedroom	he	used	to	 share	with	 Stet	when	they	 were	boys.	 Uncle	Bird’s
eyes	were	red	from	crying.	 Stet’s	passing	really	 shook	him	up.	That	 was	his	big
brother	and	best	friend.
    Uncle	  Bird	 couldn’t	  recall	 your	 name,	and	 he	 could	 only	 remember	 your
mama’s	first	name.	But	he	said	he	remembered	your	mom	coming	by	Grandma’s
house	a	few	times,	and	he	saw	you	once	when	you	were	a	baby.
    “Your	  daddy	was	something	else,”	 Uncle	Bird	 said.	He	was	 stretched	out	on
his	old	 twin	 bed.	I	sat	on	 Stet’s.	“Nothing	  got	past	him.	 You	know	 back	 in	the
day,	I	 used	 to	 do	 my	 dirt.	 And	 he’d	 call	  me	on	 it.	 We	 were	 sitting	  around
drankin’	 with	some	fellas	one	time.	 I	had	just	gotten	back	from	 Miami,	 handling
some	business,	but	I	 wasn’t	 saying	what	 that	business	was.	Stet	pointed	 at	me
from	 across	the	table	and	 said,	‘Only	  a	coupla	 of	 things	a	 nigga	is	 driving	 to
Miami	 for	.	.	.	to	buy	some	dope,	see	some	kids,	or	make	some	more	kids.’	”
    Uncle	  Bird	  laughed.	“And	  I	  said,	 ‘Nigga,	 I	  know	 you	 not	 talking	  about
somebody	having	a	bunch	 of	kids.	 You	 the	only	 motherfucker	I	 know	 describe
his	kids	like	 a	Spades	hand.’	”	 Uncle	 Bird	 mimicked	 my	father’s	 slow	 drawl:	“
‘Uhhh	.	.	.	I	 got	five	and	a	possible.’	”
    We	 both	 laughed.	And	 then	Uncle	 Bert	was	crying	 again.	 Grief	 is	like	 that.
He	hadn’t	 just	lost	 Stet.	He’d	 also	lost	 his	four	 other	siblings,	 all	 too	soon.	 To
drugs,	violence,	or	both.	We	barely	got	to	know	 our	aunts	and	uncles.
    When	 I	 got	back	 to	the	 dining	 room,	Tasheta	was	pouring	 tequila	 shots	for
herself	and	Kimba.	She	went	and	got	another	glass	and	poured	me	one	too.
    You	 probably	 won’t	 be	surprised	 to	know	 that	Renee	didn’t	 want	 us	to	find
you.	(And	 that	she	turned	 her	nose	up	at	 the	tequila.)	 She	said	you’d	 probably
come	sniffing	 around	 thinking	 Stet	 left	 some	money.	 I	reminded	 her	 that	Stet
didn’t	 have	a	pot	to	piss	in	 or	a	window	  to	throw	 it	out	 of	when	 he	died.	Don’t
mind	her.	I	 told	you,	she’s	delusional.	 After	 all	these	years,	she’s	still	the	doting
daughter.	She	used	to	go	 over	there	 and	grocery	shop	 and	cook	for	 him	 every
week.	She	spent	Friday	 nights	over	 there	watching	 TV	 like	 an	old	 person.	She
was	the	one	who	found	him	 dead	on	the	bathroom	floor.	 I	 asked	her	once	if	she
was	dating.	She	said	she	believes	in	courting,	 not	dating,	 and	that	someday,	the
man	God	chose	for	her	would	find	 her.	I	wondered	how	 he	was	supposed	to	find
her	since	she	didn’t	go	anywhere	but	to	work	 and	Stet’s	house.	Did	she	think	the
cable	guy	or	Stet’s	building	 super	could	be	the	man	God	chose?
    While	  we	were	 sitting	 there	sipping,	 Tasheta’s	phone	 rang.	Kimba	 glanced
down	and	read	the	name	on	the	caller	ID:	“	‘Rectal	 Rooter’?	Tasheta,	what	in	the

23
world?”
    Tasheta	 snatched	up	 the	phone.	 “Mind	  your	 business!”	 She	went	 into	 the
living	 room	and	proceeded	to	have	another	loud	conversation.
    Renee	looked	 like	 she	was	going	to	 pass	out.	Kimba	and	 I	just	 took	another
shot.
    When	 Tasheta	came	back	to	the	dining	room,	Renee	was	still	pissy.	“Tasheta,
even	if	 you	don’t	 have	any	self-respect,	you	 should	at	least	respect	the	sanctity
of	 other	  people’s	 marriages.”	  Tasheta	 took	  another	 shot.	  “I	  respect	 their
marriages,”	she	 said,	slapping	 her	glass	 down	 on	the	 table.	“Until	   they	don’t
want	me	to.”
    Kimba	 giggled,	 and	I	 lost	it.	 We	all	 busted	out	laughing—except	 for	 Renee,
of	course.
    “You	  two	condone	her	behavior?”	Renee	asked.
    Kimba,	  loosened	up	by	 the	tequila,	said,	 “It’s	 not	 for	 me	to	condone	 or	not
condone.	Tash	is	a	grown-ass	woman.”
    “Don’t	   even	bother,	 Kimba,”	  Tasheta	said.	 “When	 you’re	  not	 here,	I	 just
ignore	Miss	Holier-Than-Thou.”
    “Back	 to	the	subject	at	hand	.	.	.”	Renee	said.	“It’s	 for	the	best	that	Uncle	Bert
couldn’t	remember	that	other	girl’s	 name.	Everything	happens	for	a	reason.”
    “Jesus	Christ,	I	 swear	your	native	tongue	is	‘Cliché.’	 ”
    “Don’t	  you—”
    “—take	 the	Lord’s	 name	in	vain,	 blah,	blah,	blah.	Do	you	 realize	you	cling	 to
an	imaginary	  white	 daddy	 because	your	  flesh-and-blood	 daddy	 wasn’t	 shit?
Well,	 guess	what.	Your	 imaginary	 white	 daddy	 ain’t	 shit	 either.	If	 he	 was,	he
would’ve	 given	you	a	real	daddy	that	was	worth	a	damn.”
    Renee	took	 a	deep	breath	and	turned	 her	back	to	 Tasheta	and	addressed	the
rest	of	us.	“As	I	was	saying:	it’s	 for	the	best.	She	isn’t	really	 one	of	us	anyway.”
    “One	 of	 us?”	Tasheta	laughed.	“And	 who	are	we	exactly?	 Except	a	bunch	of
women	fathered	 by	the	 same	old	 deadbeat	nigga	with	 a	thing	 for	 barely	 legal
girls.	She	most	definitely	 is	one	of	us.”
    “I	  mean”—Renee	whipped	around	again	to	 face	Tasheta—”	she	didn’t	 know
our	father	like	 we	did.	 And	even	though	 you	did	 not	respect	him	in	 life,	 at	least
show	some	respect	for	the	dead.”
    Tasheta	began	to	speak,	but	Kimba	cut	 her	off.	“To	 your	 corners,	ladies.	You
are	working	my	last	good	nerve.”	 She	rubbed	her	temples.
    Tasheta	giggled.	“Girl,	  that’s	just	the	tequila.”
    Renee	said,	“Scripture	says,	‘Honor	 thy	father	and	thy	mother—’	 ”
    “Honor	  thy	father?”	 Tasheta	yelled.	“When	 did	that	motherfucker	 ever	honor
you?	Or	 me?	Or	Kimba?	 Or	 Nichelle?	 Or	anybody	 but	his	 own	 trifling	  self?	I

24
ain’t	honoring	 shit.”
    “Blasphemer!”	  Renee	screamed	and	covered	her	ears.
    Tasheta	laughed.	“Are	 you	fucking	 kidding	me	right	 now?”
    “Both	  of	you!”	  Kimba	 hissed.	“Keep	 it	 down.	Grandma	and	 Uncle	Bird	 are
resting.”
    Renee	lowered	her	 voice.	“I	 know	 one	thing.	You	 better	not	make	 a	scene	at
the	funeral.”
    Tasheta	tilted	her	head	to	the	side.	“Or	what?”
    (You	  might	 be	interested	 to	know	  that	Tasheta	is	 the	 only	 one	of	 us	 who
knows	how	to	fight.	 Kimba	 will	 debate	you	until	 you	 cry	uncle.	Renee	will	 pray
for	you.	And	 I’m	 just	gonna	talk	a	lot	of	shit	from	 a	distance.)
    “Or	 .	.	.	or	I	 will	 have	you	escorted	from	the	church.”
    “Yeah,	 okay.	Good	luck	 with	that.”
    “I’m	  serious,	Tasheta.	Funerals	are	to	honor	the	dead	and	comfort	 the	living.
If	you	can’t	 respect	that,	you	need	to	stay	away.”
    “Listen,	  I	know	 you	think	 you’re	 in	charge	and	you	 were	his	favorite	 and	all
of	that.	You	 can	have	that.	But	you	don’t	 run	me.	You.	 Don’t.	 Run.	Shit.	 Here.”
Tasheta	punctuated	each	word	of	her	last	sentence	with	a	clap.
    “Can	 we	call	a	truce?”	Kimba	 asked.
    “No!”	  Tasheta	and	Renee	said.
    “Renee,”	 I	 said.	“Stop	carrying	 on	like	 we’re	some	kind	 of	great	dynasty	and
Stet	was	some	kind	 of	patriarch.	 And	 if	 you’re	 going	to	 quote	Scripture,	 quote
the	  whole	  thing.	   ‘Honor	   your	   father	  and	  mother—which	    is	  the	  first
commandment	with	 a	promise—so	 that	 it	 may	go	 well	 with	 you	 and	that	 you
may	enjoy	long	 life	 on	the	earth.’	Girl,	 I	 get	it.	 You	are	trying	 to	get	that	crown
in	 heaven.	And	 you	 wanted	 desperately	for	 that	 man	to	 love	 you	 back.	 And
maybe	he	 did.	 But	 respect	the	 fact	 that	the	 rest	 of	 us	didn’t	  want	 what	 you
wanted	and	didn’t	get	whatever	it	is	you	 think	you	got	from	 him.”
    Renee	folded	 her	 arms	and	began	to	 cry.	She	looked	 so	much	 like	 her	ten-
year-old	self	that	Father’s	Day	in	church,	 I	almost	backed	down.	Almost.
    “And,”	   I	 said,	 “if	  we’re	 going	 to	 keep	it	  really	 real,	 the	next	 verse	 says,
‘Fathers,	don’t	 exasperate	your	children;	 instead,	bring	 them	 up	in	 the	training
and	instruction	of	the	Lord.’	 ”
    “In	  other	 words,”	 Tasheta	said,	“if	  you	 weren’t	 beating	 him	 over	the	 head
with	Scripture,	leave	me	the	fuck	alone	about	it.”
    “And	  you	.	.	 .”	 I	turned	to	 Tasheta.	“We	are	more	than	 just	some	deadbeat’s
kids.	 We’re	 sisters.	We	 don’t	  always	 get	 along,	but	 we’ve	  always	 had	each
other’s	backs.	I’m	 not	 going	to	 wear	black	and	sit	 up	in	 that	church	because	he
was	some	 great	 father.	 We	 all	  know	 he	 wasn’t.	  I’m	  going	 because	I	  love

25
Grandma	and	Uncle	 Bird	 and	Renee	and	Kimba	 and	your	 messy	ass.	Stet	was
our	connection,	 but	it’s	 not	 like	 we	haven’t	 spent	our	 whole	 lives	together,	 99
percent	of	the	time	without	 him.	We	 spent	whole	summers	in	this	house,	playing
all	day	in	 that	tiny-ass	front	 yard	because	Grandma	wouldn’t	 let	us	out	the	gate.
Remember?”
    Kimba	  and	Tasheta	nodded	and	started	cracking	 up.	 Even	Renee	cracked	a
smile.
    Kimba	 said,	“Remember	 that	time	 we	came	in	from	 playing,	 and	Uncle	Bird
said,	‘Gotdamn,	y’all	 smell	like	 a	pack	of	billy	 goats!’	”
    “And	  Grandma	hit	 him	in	 the	back	with	 the	rolled	 up	newspaper	for	cussing
in	her	house?”	Renee	said,	rolling	her	eyes	in	Tasheta’s	direction.
    We	 laughed	some	more,	then	we	sat	there,	quiet	 for	the	first	 time	 in	forever,
remembering.	There	 had	been	good	 times	and	 close	times.	 Those	summers	at
Grandma’s.	Spending	 the	night	 at	each	other’s	 houses	during	 the	school	 year.
Swapping	clothes.	 Trips	 to	 Disney	 World.	 Worrying	  over	 boys.	 Complaining
about	 our	 mothers.	 Doing	  each	 other’s	 hair.	  Proms.	 Graduations.	 Kimba’s
wedding.
    And	 Stet	had	had	nothing	 to	do	with	 any	of	that.	 Because	he	was	a	man	who
took	without	 giving,	he	left	 us	nothing	to	grieve.
    Tasheta	broke	the	silence.	She	stood	up	and	made	herself	a	plate	to	go.	“I	 got
work	 in	the	 morning.	 I’m	 out,”	 she	said.	She	grabbed	her	 keys	and	purse,	and
hugged	everyone	goodbye	except	Renee.
    At	 this	point,	 you	may	be	thinking	 that	this	situation	is	a	hot	mess,	and	there’s
no	way	in	the	world	 you	want	to	have	anything	to	 do	with	us.	But	 I	promise	you:
we	are	the	best	sisters	you	could	ask	for.	Let	me	tell	you	what	happened	next.
    The	 next	time	we	were	all	together	was	for	 the	limo	ride	 to	the	funeral.	Renee
put	all	of	us	sisters	in	one	limo,	 and	Grandma,	Uncle	Bird,	and	Kimba’s	 husband
and	kids	in	the	other.
    Renee	and	 Tasheta	were	still	 in	 the	midst	 of	 a	cold	war,	 but	 at	least	it	 was
cold.	Tasheta	showed	 up	at	 Grandma’s	house	the	 morning	 of	 the	funeral	 in	 a
backless	black	dress	and	clear	heels,	but	 agreed	to	wear	 a	blazer	Renee	pulled
out	of	the	trunk	of	her	car.
    The	 funeral	  was	 .	.	 .	 a	 funeral.	 Renee,	 Grandma,	 and	Uncle	  Bird	 cried.
Kimba’s	 kids	were	 restless;	her	mom	tried	 to	keep	 them	occupied	with	 snacks.
My	mother	 sat	in	the	last	pew;	I	 didn’t	 see	her,	but	that’s	where	she	told	me	she
would	 be.	A	 bunch	of	 Stet’s	 friends	 who	 knew	nothing	 about	 him	 as	a	father
stood	up	and	talked	about	what	a	great	friend	he	was.	The	choir	 sang	two	songs.
The	pastor	spoke	of	my	 grandparents’	faithfulness	 as	a	covering	on	 the	lives	of
their	children	  and	their	 children’s	 children,	 which	 I	 suppose	was	 the	most	 he

26
could	say.	And	then	he	did	the	thing	 pastors	always	do	at	the	funeral	of	someone
who	hadn’t	darkened	the	church’s	 door	in	 a	few	decades:	reminded	mourners	of
their	own	 mortality	 and	where	they	are	likely	 to	 spend	eternity	if	 they	don’t	 get
right	with	 Jesus.
    Jesus	and	I	got	right	 at	an	altar	call	years	ago,	so	I	basically	 zoned	out	at	that
point.	 Stet	 and	 I	 had	 also	made	 our	 peace	 a	long	  time	 ago	 too.	 I	 stopped
expecting	him	 to	be	a	 father,	and	he	stopped	expecting	 me	to	be	 Renee.	When
the	usher	came	to	lead	us	out	of	the	sanctuary	when	the	 service	was	over,	I	was
beyond	ready	to	go.
    At	 the	 graveside,	we	sisters	gathered	round	Grandma	 and	Uncle	Bird	 as	the
casket	was	lowered	into	the	ground.	After	everyone	dispersed	to	head	back	to	the
church	for	the	 repast,	I	stood	next	to	 the	grave,	alone.	I	wasn’t	 ready	to	be	with
people	just	yet.
    But	 of	 course,	Black	 people	can	never	just	 leave	you	alone.	A	 light-skinned
man	with	 jowls	  and	graying	 hair	 walked	 over	 and	stood	next	 to	 me.	“I’m	  so
sorry	for	your	loss,”	 he	said.
    “Thank	 you.”
    “I	  was	your	 daddy’s	friend.	 Chauncey?”	 Chauncey	waited	 for	 some	sign	of
recognition	on	my	 face.	When	there	was	none,	he	just	kept	 talking,	wagging	 his
finger	at	me.
    “You	   know,	  your	 daddy	 always	  talked	 about	 you.	  Bragged	 about	 you.
Always	getting	 straight	As	in	school.	Going	 off	to	college	and	whatnot.	Yale!”
    “That’s	 .	.	.	not	me.	That’s	 my	sister,	Kimba.	And	 she	went	to	Harvard.”
    “Oh,	  well,	 you	know,	 alla	y’all	  made	him	 proud	.	 .	.	Yessir,	 mmmh	 mmmh
mmmh!	 Stet	  got	 some	  really	  beautiful	  daughters.”	  Chauncey	 rubbed	  my
shoulder,	and	I	shuddered	at	his	touch.	I’m	sure	he	felt	it,	but	he	kept	on	rubbing.
My	skin	went	 clammy	beneath	the	fabric	of	my	suit	 jacket.
    “Real	 beautiful	 girls,”	 he	said.
    It	 took	a	few	seconds	for	Chauncey’s	words	to	register	as	a	compliment.	Then
it	 took	  a	 few	 seconds	 more	 for	  this	 to	  register	 as	 a	 highly	  inappropriate
compliment,	given	the	circumstances	and	the	way	his	hand	lingered	on	me.
    “So	 whatchu	doin’	 later	on?”	he	asked.
    I	  pulled	 away.	 I	 squinted.	 This	 couldn’t	  be	 happening.	 “You’ve	  got	 five
seconds	to	get	the	fuck	away	from	 me,”	 I	said,	“before	 I	 start	screaming	for	my
uncle	to	come	over	here	and	stomp	a	mudhole	in	you.	Five	.	.	.”
    Chauncey	backed	away.
    In	 the	limo,	 I	was	quiet.	I	 figured	everyone	would	 just	think	 the	weight	of	 the
day	was	on	me.	But	not	Tasheta.	I	told	you	that	girl	is	 smart.
    “NiNi,	  what’s	 the	matter?”

27
    I	 swallowed	hard	and	told	them	what	had	happened.
    “Oh,	 hell,	no,”	 Renee	said.	“That	motherfucker	.	.	.”	 We	all	stared	at	her.
    At	 the	repast,	I	 sat	with	 Grandma,	Uncle	Bird,	 Kimba	 and	her	crew,	 and	my
mother.	Ladies	from	 the	 church	brought	 us	heaping	plates	of	 food	 and	cups	of
fruit	punch.
    At	  the	next	table,	 I	 saw	Tasheta	sitting	 across	from	 Chauncey,	smiling	 and
nodding.	From	 what	 I	could	 make	out,	 he	was	once	 again	talking	 about	Stet’s
beautiful	 daughters.	Renee	joined	 them	 and	set	 a	plate	 of	 food	 and	a	 cup	of
punch	in	front	 of	Chauncey.	He	kept	 on	talking,	 and	Renee	and	Tasheta	kept	on
smiling	and	nodding.
    And	 then	Chauncey	took	a	long	drink	of	 his	fruit	 punch.
    And	 screamed.
    He	 clawed	at	his	throat.	He	 broke	into	 a	sweat,	and	his	eyes	filled	with	 tears.
Some	of	 the	 ladies	from	  the	church	 rushed	over	 to	 help.	 Renee	and	Tasheta
floated	over	to	our	table	with	 their	plates,	sat	down,	and	kept	eating.
    “What	 happened	to	Chauncey?”	Uncle	Bird	 asked.
    “Maybe	  he	put	 a	little	  too	much	 hot	 sauce	on	his	 chicken.	Or	 something,”
Renee	said.	“Grandma,	can	I	get	you	anything?”
    “Oh,	 no,	 baby,”	Grandma	said.	 “I’m	 good.	 Just	need	to	find	out	 who	in	 here
pregnant.	I	keep	having	them	fish	dreams	.	.	.”
    It	 was	a	long	day.
    And	 this	was	a	long	letter.	But	 we	didn’t	 just	want	you	to	know	 that	Stet	died.
We	also	wanted	you	to	know	 us.	Even	Renee.	She’ll	 come	around.	When	Uncle
Bird	 finally	 remembered	your	 mother’s	last	 name,	she	pouted	a	little,	 but	she’s
just	as	curious	about	you	as	the	rest	of	us	are.
    And	 Kimba	 says	that	if	 you’re	 ever	in	 Philadelphia,	let	 her	know.	All	  of	our
addresses	and	phone	numbers	are	below.
    And	 Uncle	 Bird	 said	to	tell	 you	that	 he’s	got	room	 in	his	 heart	for	one	more
niece.
    And	 I’ve	 got	room	in	mine	 for	one	more	sister.
    Finally,	 Tasheta	wants	to	know	if	 you	prefer	brown	or	 white	liquor.
                                                                                                              Your	 sister,
                                                                                                                    Nichelle

P.S.	Grandma	wants	to	know	if	you’re	 pregnant.

28
                                      PEACH	      COBBLER






MY	MOTHER’S	peach	cobbler	was	so	good,	it	made	God	himself	cheat	on	his
wife.	When	I	was	five,	 I	hovered	around	my	mother	in	the	kitchen,	watching,
close	enough	to	have	memorized	all	the	ingredients	and	steps	by	the	time	I	was
six.	But	not	too	close	to	make	her	yell	at	me	for	being	in	the	way.	And	not	close
enough	to	see	the	exact	measurements	she	used.	She	never	wrote	the	recipe
down.	Without	 having	to	 be	told,	 I	 learned	not	to	ask	 questions	about	that
cobbler,	or	about	God.	I	learned	not	to	say	anything	at	all	about	him	hunching
over	our	kitchen	table	every	Monday	eating	plate	after	plate	of	peach	cobbler,
and	then	disappearing	into	the	bedroom	I	shared	with	my	mother.
    I	 became	a	silent	student	of	my	mother	and	her	cobbler-making	ways.	Even
when	I	was	older	and	no	longer	believed	that	God	and	Reverend	Troy	Neely
were	one	and	the	same,	I	still	longed	to	perfect	the	sweetness	and	textures	of	my
mother’s	cobbler.	My	mother,	who	fed	me	TV	dinners,	baked	a	peach	cobbler
with	fresh	peaches	every	Monday,	her	day	off	from	the	diner	where	she	waited
tables.	She	always	said	Sunday	was	her	Saturday	and	Monday	was	her	Sunday.
What	I	knew	was	that	none	of	her	days	were	for	me.
    And	for	many	of	those	Mondays	off	and	on	during	my	childhood,	God	(to	my
child’s	mind)	would	stop	by	and	eat	an	entire	8	x	8	pan	of	cobbler.	My	mother
never	ate	any	of	the	cobbler	herself;	she	said	she	didn’t	like	peaches.	She	would
shoo	me	out	of	the	kitchen	before	God	could	offer	me	any,	but	I	 doubted	he
would	have	offered	even	if	I’d	sat	right	down	next	to	him.	God	was	an	old	fat
man,	like	a	Black	Santa,	and	I	imagined	my	mother’s	peach	cobbler	contributing
to	his	girth.
    Some	Mondays,	God	would	arrive	after	dinner	and	leave	as	I	lay	curled	up	on
the	couch	watching	Little	House	on	the	Prairie	in	the	living	room.	Other	times
my	mother	and	God	would	already	be	in	the	bedroom	when	I	got	home	from
school.	I	could	hear	moaning	and	pounding,	like	a	board	hitting	a	wall,	as	soon
as	I	entered	the	house.	I	would	shut	the	front	door	quietly	behind	me	and	tiptoe
down	the	hall	 to	listen	outside	the	bedroom	door.	“Oh,	 God!	 Oh,	God!	Oh,
God!”	my	mother	would	cry.	I	 could	hear	God	too,	his	voice	low	and	growly,
saying,	“Yes,	yes,	yes!”
    Even	before	he	started	coming	by	on	Mondays,	I	had	suspected	that	Pastor

29
Neely,	the	pastor	of	Hope	in	Christ	 Baptist	Church,	was	God.	He	 was	big,	black,
and	powerful,	as	I	 imagined	God	to	 be.	My	very	 first	 Easter	speech,	memorized
in	 kindergarten	during	  Sunday	School,	 was	“Jesus	 is	the	 Son	of	  God,”	 but	 I
didn’t	 find	  it	 odd	that	 Black	 God	 could	 have	 a	blue-eyed,	 blond	 son.	Pastor
Neely	was	dark,	 his	wife	 was	 pale,	and	their	 son,	Trevor,	 who	was	around	 my
age,	had	gray	 eyes	and	wasn’t	 too	 much	 darker	than	 the	Jesus	whose	picture
hung	all	over	church.	Plus,	midway	 through	every	Sunday	service,	Pastor	Neely,
his	wife,	  and	Trevor	 stood	 in	 the	front	 of	 the	 sanctuary	and	 collected	 a	love
offering	from	 the	congregation	as	the	choir	sang	“I	 Love	You	 (Lord	Today).”	 So
it	was	 easy	for	 me	to	 deduce	that	Pastor	 Neely	was	 the	“Lord.”	  My	  mother’s
cries	of	passion	through	our	bedroom	door	confirmed	it.
    I	 enjoyed	the	 theater	of	Pastor	Neely’s	 Sunday	sermons.	From	the	pulpit,	 he
thundered	and	roared	at	the	congregation	about	God’s	wrath	and	judgment.	 And
when	he	intoned	about	God’s	 goodness	and	mercy,	he	wrapped	his	arms	around
himself	 and	rocked.	 Then	 he	 stepped	down	 from	 the	 pulpit	 and	 prowled	 the
aisles	of	the	sanctuary,	energized	and	excited	to	tell	 us	what	he	called	 the	Good
News.	For	a	big	 man,	he	moved	with	 surprising	 ease	and	grace.	By	the	time	he
got	to	 the	altar	call,	 most	of	 the	women	 and	some	of	 the	men	would	 be	 up	on
their	feet,	 swaying	 and	crying	 out.	But	 not	 my	 mother.	She	stayed	seated,	her
face	unreadable	as	usual.
    Pastor	and	First	Lady	 Neely	were	the	opposite	of	Jack	Sprat	and	his	wife.	 He,
thick	and	 corpulent.	She,	gangly	 and	gaunt,	like	 a	child’s	  stick	figure	 drawing.
During	the	love	 offering,	 she	stood	as	straight	and	stiff	as	an	arrow.	Her	straight
brown	hair	 hung	past	her	shoulders,	and	I	thought	she	was	a	white	 woman	until
years	later,	when	I	saw	her	up	close	for	the	first	time,	at	her	front	door.
    Like	 many	 of	the	church	 ladies,	First	Lady	 Neely	 wore	a	wide-brimmed	 hat,
but	hers	hung	low	 and	almost	obscured	her	eyes.	But	I	 could	see	enough	of	 her
to	know	 that	 she	did	not	 have	big,	 begging	eyes	like	  my	mother;	 she	was	not
beautiful	like	 my	 mother.	She	did	 not	have	my	 mother’s	 round	breasts	and	full
hips,	the	 kind	 that	 excited	 strange	men	on	 the	 street.	Men	 my	 mother	 called
“dirty	 motherfuckers”	 when	they	said	nasty	things	to	her	as	we	walked	past.	First
Lady	Neely	 probably	 never	walked	anywhere.	 I	saw	her	 stepping	out	of	 a	pink
Cadillac	 in	 the	church	 parking	 lot	 one	 day.	 I	 heard	one	of	  the	church	 ladies
standing	nearby	say	she	had	earned	that	car	selling	Mary	Kay.
    Pastor	Neely	 always	drove	 a	luxury	 car,	a	new	one	each	year,	gifts	 from	 the
congregation.	He	parked	 it	 in	our	 backyard,	which	 was	 adjacent	to	the	 woods.
Our	house	sat	alone	at	the	dead	end	of	a	gravel	road.	The	nearest	neighbor	was	a
half	a	mile	away,	near	my	bus	stop.
    One	 day,	in	 second	grade,	I	ran	that	 whole	half	 mile	 home,	excited	 to	share

30
some	good	news	with	my	 mother.	I	 burst	into	the	house,	threw	 my	backpack	on
the	couch,	and	ran	straight	into	the	kitchen,	breathless.
    Pastor	Neely	 sat	at	the	table,	 hunched	over.	It	 was	a	Monday.	 He	looked	 up
from	his	 plate	of	 cobbler	and	said	 hello	in	 that	fake,	 forced	way	 that	drags	out
the	o—the	 way	people	say	 it	 when	they	don’t	  enjoy	talking	 to	 children.	 I	 said
hello	 back,	and	 he	went	 right	  back	to	 his	 cobbler.	 He	 ate	surprisingly	  small
spoonfuls,	slowly.	 His	full	 lips,	 slightly	 parted	and	glistening,	 made	me	think	of
the	kissing	I	saw	on	TV	 and	the	movies.	The	spoon	practically	disappeared	in	his
bear	paw	of	 a	hand.	His	fingers	 resembled	the	thick	 sausages	my	mother	made
for	breakfast	sometimes	on	Sunday	morning.
    My	  mother	 leaned	 against	the	 counter	 near	the	 back	 door	 with	  her	arms
folded,	watching	 Pastor	Neely	eat.	She	looked	 pleased—not	particularly	 happy,
but	pleased.	And	yet	she	watched	him	so	intently	she	also	appeared	ready	to	rush
and	block	the	door	if	he	tried	to	leave.
    “Mama!”	  I	said,	still	 gasping	to	catch	my	breath.	“Guess	what!”
    “What?”	  She	never	took	her	eyes	off	the	pastor.
    “Latasha	 Wilson	 invited	  me	to	her	 birthday	 slumber	party.	 Can	I	 go?”	 The
talk	at	 school	 was	Latasha	Wilson	 lived	  in	 a	two-story	 house	and	 had	a	pink
canopy	Barbie	 bed.	Her	hair	 was	always	 neatly	pressed	and	pulled	 into	 a	high
ponytail	 of	 shiny,	 spiraling	 curls.	 Her	 father	 worked	 at	a	 bank.	 The	birthday
party	invitation,	 which	I’d	 shoved	down	inside	 the	front	of	my	 shirt,	smelled	like
bubble	gum.	 Latasha	 smelled	 like	 bubble	 gum.	 I	 bet	 her	house	 smelled	like
bubble	gum	too.	I	couldn’t	 wait	to	find	 out.
    “No,”	  my	mother	said.
    I	  bit	 down	 on	 the	 “why	  not”	  that	 almost	 slipped	 out	 of	 my	 mouth.	  My
mother’s	eyes	were	still	 on	Pastor	Neely.	His	 eyes	were	still	on	 the	cobbler.	My
eyes	filled	with	 tears.
    “Go	 on	and	change	out	of	your	school	clothes,”	my	 mother	said.
    Tears	spilled	 down	my	 cheeks	as	I	backed	out	of	the	 kitchen.	At	 first	 I	stood
in	the	hallway	out	of	 sight	instead	of	going	to	the	bedroom	to	change.	Normally	 I
did	what	my	mother	told	 me	to	do.	But	at	that	moment,	I	was	too	crushed.
    I	 peeked	around	the	corner.	My	mother	had	sat	down	at	the	table,	across	from
Pastor	Neely.	She	couldn’t	see	me	peeking,	but	Pastor	Neely	suddenly	looked	up
from	the	cobbler,	 right	at	me!	 I	quickly	 moved	 out	of	sight,	 bracing	myself.	 But
instead	of	ratting	me	out,	Pastor	Neely	asked	my	mother	a	question:	“Why	 won’t
you	let	the	girl	go	to	 the	party?”
    I	 peeked	around	the	corner	again.
    My	 mother	sighed.	“Because	I	like	 to	keep	to	myself	and	she	needs	to	learn	to
keep	to	 herself	 too.	 It’s	  better	 that	 way.	 You	 go	 accepting	 invitations,	  then

31
people	expect	an	invitation	in	return.	 Then	you	got	people	coming	in	your	 house,
looking	 at	 what	you	 have	 and	what	 you	 don’t	 have.	 And	 the	 next	thing	 you
know,	your	 business	is	all	 over	 town.”	 My	 mother	 ran	her	fingertips	 along	 the
edge	of	the	table	 and	smiled	 to	herself.	“And	  I’m	 sure	you	 can	understand	not
wanting	to	have	your	business	all	over	town.”
    Pastor	 Neely	 didn’t	 say	anything.	 He	 just	 took	another	 bite	of	 cobbler	 and
shook	his	head.
    “And	  besides	.	.	 .”	 my	 mother	said,	 “I’m	  trying	 to	 raise	her	to	 be	satisfied
with	what	 she	has.	I	know	 that	lil	  girl	 Latasha’s	mama	and	her	daddy.	Went	 to
school	with	them.	They’ve	 always	been	flashy,	like	to	show	 off.	He	used	to	drive
her	around	in	 his	 daddy’s	 Lincoln	 until	  his	daddy	 bought	 him	 a	Mustang.	 At
sixteen	years	 old.	 They	 got	 money	 and	all	  that	come	 with	  it.	 So	 you	 know
Latasha	don’t	 want	for	 nothing	 and	that	 birthday	 party	is	 going	to	 be	over	 the
top.”
    “I	  don’t	 know	these	people,”	 Pastor	Neely	said,	“but	 if	 the	Lord	 has	blessed
them,	and	they	want	 to	celebrate	their	 child’s	 birthday	 and	invite	 your	 child	 to
share	in	it,	 I	 don’t	 see	the	problem.”	  It	 was	strange	hearing	 Pastor	Neely	 talk
about	the	Lord	 outside	 of	 his	 pulpit.	 Instead	of	 that	 scary,	booming	 voice,	 he
sounded	like	a	regular	person.	A	regular	 person	who	might	 convince	my	mother
to	let	 me	go	 to	Latasha	Wilson’s	  birthday	 party.	I	 crossed	my	 fingers	on	 both
hands.
    My	 mother	sat	up	straighter	in	 her	chair.	When	she	spoke,	it	was	slowly,	 as	if
she	were	 trying	  to	 choose	her	 words	  carefully.	 “They	  can	 raise	 their	 child
however	 they	 see	fit.	  But	  I’m	  not	 going	  to	 raise	 mine	 to	 go	  through	 life
expecting	it	to	be	sweet,	when	for	 her,	it	ain’t	 going	to	be.	The	sooner	she	learns
to	accept	what	 is	 and	what	ain’t,	  the	better.	She	 get	a	taste	of	 that	 sweetness,
she’s	going	to	want	it	so	bad,	she’ll	grow	 up	and	settle	for	crumbs	of	it.”
    Pastor	 Neely	 glanced	at	me	 again,	shook	 his	 head,	and	ate	the	 last	bite	 of
cobbler.
    I	 ducked	 back	 out	of	 sight	 and	uncrossed	my	 fingers.	 My	 eyes	 filled	 with
tears	again.	Without	 looking,	 I	 knew	 my	mother	 would	 whisk	 away	the	empty
cobbler	pan,	the	pastor’s	 plate,	and	the	spoon.	 I	knew	 she	would	 dunk	them	 in
the	soapy	dishwater	in	the	sink,	like	she	always	did,	so	that	I	couldn’t	 even	sneak
a	taste	of	the	remnants	later.
    “You	  got	the	best	cobbler	in	 the	world	 right	 here,”	I	 heard	Pastor	Neely	say,
Latasha	Wilson’s	 birthday	party	 invitation	 apparently	 forgotten.	He	 said	this	all
the	time.	And	 because	I	believed	he	was	a	kind	 of	Black	 Santa,	I	imagined	 him
preaching	at	 church	 on	 Sunday,	 traveling	 the	 whole	 world	  Tuesday	through
Saturday	to	try	 other	 mothers’	 peach	cobblers,	but	 always	coming	 back	to	 my

32
mother’s	on	Monday.
    I	 went	and	changed	out	of	my	school	clothes,	then	sat	on	the	couch,	unsure	of
what	to	do	with	this	 new	feeling	toward	my	 mother:	anger.
    I	 heard	them	 go	into	 our	 bedroom	and	 shut	the	door.	 I	 got	up	 to	put	 a	TV
dinner	in	the	oven.	Sometimes	my	 mother	remembered	to	put	one	in,	sometimes
she	didn’t.	The	fried	 chicken,	mashed	potatoes,	corn,	and	warm	brownie	was	my
favorite.	I	always	ate	the	brownie	first,	 while	 it	was	still	 gooey	in	the	middle.
    Sometimes	 Pastor	 Neely	  and	 my	 mother	  would	  be	 in	 the	 bedroom	 for
minutes,	sometimes	an	 hour.	Always	  there	was	laughter	 when	 they	came	 out.
My	mother	 would	 be	laughing	at	some	joke	I	 hadn’t	 heard,	and	she	would	wish
Pastor	Neely	 a	good	 night.	 And	 he	 would	 laugh	 and	thank	 her	again	 for	 the
peach	cobbler.
    I	 remember	the	laughter	because	the	silence	in	our	house	between	visits	from
Pastor	Neely	made	me	 wish	 I	knew	 the	right	 jokes	 to	tell	 to	 make	my	 mother
laugh	like	 that.	I	 didn’t	 know	the	 right	jokes,	 but	maybe	if	 I	 watched	her	hands
as	she	sliced	the	peaches,	counted	how	 many	times	 she	stirred,	 and	learned	to
gauge	by	smell	 the	exact	moment	 to	take	the	 cobbler	from	 the	oven—maybe	 I
could	 make	 a	cobbler	  that	 pleased	God.	 And	 maybe	 that	 would	  please	my
mother.
    On	 those	Mondays	that	God	 didn’t	 come,	my	 mother	would	 toss	the	cobbler
in	the	garbage	after	dinner,	pour	 herself	a	large	tumbler	 of	Tanqueray,	and	send
me	to	bed	 early.	Sometimes	he	 wouldn’t	 come	for	 several	weeks	 in	a	 row.	Or
several	months.	I	remembered	one	time	a	toothless	old	woman	testified	at	church
saying,	“God	may	not	come	when	you	want	him,	 but	he’s	always	right	 on	time.”
    One	 Monday	 night,	 when	I	 was	eight,	 I	 lay	 in	bed,	 restless,	thinking	 about
that	cobbler	in	the	bottom	of	 the	garbage	can.	But	this	night,	I	remembered	that	I
had	taken	the	garbage	out	and	put	 in	a	fresh	 bag	right	 before	my	 mother	threw
the	cobbler	away.	I	 got	up,	as	if	 I	had	to	go	to	 the	bathroom,	but	I	 went	into	 the
kitchen	instead.
    In	 the	darkness,	I	reached	down	into	the	garbage	can	until	my	 fingertips	were
wet	and	sticky.	I	 grabbed	a	handful	of	the	cobbler	and	shoved	it	 all	in	my	 mouth
at	once.	The	sugary	juice	dribbled	over	the	corner	of	my	 mouth	down	to	my	 chin
as	I	chewed.	I	savored	the	peaches	and	the	soft	bits	of	crust	soaked	through	with
the	syrup.	 Nothing	 had	 ever	 tasted	so	good.	 From	 memory,	 I	 pictured	 every
movement	of	my	mother’s	 hands.	How	she	dunked	the	peaches	in	boiling	water,
then	ran	 them	under	 cold	 tap	water	 to	 slide	 the	peels	 off.	 The	 easy	way	 she
wielded	the	knife	to	 slice	the	peaches.	The	care	she	took	to	drain	canned	peaches
when	Georgia	peaches	were	out	of	season.
    I	 wanted	to	be	those	peaches.	I	longed	to	be	handled	by	caring	hands.	And	if	I

33
couldn’t,	I	 wanted	the	next	best	thing:	to	 make	something	so	wonderful	 with	my
own	hands.
    “What	 are	you	doing?”
    I	 swung	around.	My	 mother	stood	in	 the	doorway	 with	her	bare	arms	folded.
She	wore	a	faded	cotton	nightgown	that	had	been	sky	blue	once	upon	a	time.
    “I	 asked	you	a	question,”	she	said,	her	voice	still	thick	 with	 gin.
    Tears	streaked	my	cheeks,	and	my	sticky	 fingers	were	still	 in	my	 mouth.	I	bit
down	on	them,	not	sure	how	to	answer	her,	and	afraid	not	 to	answer.	My	mother
didn’t	 whup	me	 often—by	 then,	I	 had	learned	how	 to	stay	 on	the	right	 side	of
her	anger	most	of	 the	time.	 But	 when	she	did,	 it	was	 like	 she	had	lowered	her
bucket	into	an	ancient	well	of	 fury	that	ran	far	deeper	than	my	present	crime.	She
would	wail	 along	with	 me	as	she	hit	me,	saying	over	and	over	that	I	had	to	learn.
I	had	to.
    “Answer	 me.”
    “I	 wanted	some	of	the	cobbler.”
    “Is	 it	 yours?”
    “No,	 ma’am.”
    “What	 did	 I	tell	you	 about	taking	things	that	are	not	yours?”
    “It’s	  stealing.”
    “Who	 does	that	cobbler	belong	to?”
    My	  mother	and	 I	had	 never	spoken	about	 what	happened	on	Mondays,	 but
instinct	 had	told	  me	it	 wasn’t	  something	she	 wanted	to	 talk	 about,	 and	 as	a
general	rule,	my	mother	had	no	patience	for	my	questions.
    “It	 belongs	to	.	.	.	to	God.”
    My	 mother’s	 eyes	widened.	“Are	 you	 sassing	me,	girl?”	 She	stepped	toward
me.	I	 ran	to	the	 back	door	 and	pressed	my	back	against	 it.	Outside,	 I	 decided,
was	still	scarier	than	inside.
    My	  words	came	tumbling	 out.	 “No,	 Mama.	 I’m	 not	sassing	you.	 You	 make
the	cobbler	for	God.”
    “I	 make	the	.	.	.	?”	 Mama	dropped	into	a	chair	at	the	kitchen	table.	“You	 think
that	.	.	.”	 She	made	a	sound,	something	like	laughing	and	coughing	 and	choking
all	at	once.
    “Sit	 down.”
    I	 sat	in	 the	chair	 across	from	 her.	“I	 know	 you	 don’t	 understand	why	 some
things	are	the	way	they	are,”	Mama	said.	“You	 just	 haven’t	lived	 long	enough	to
know.	But	I	 know.	I	know	 what’s	best.	I	know	 what’s	good	for	you.”
    Mama	 reached	over	and	touched	the	back	of	my	hand.	The	thrill	  of	her	touch
made	me	forget	for	a	moment	that	I	was	in	trouble.
    “One	 thing	 you	gotta	understand,	though:	Pastor	Neely	is	not	 God,”	she	said.

34
“He	 is	 a	 friend	 of	 mine.	 That’s	 why	  he	comes	 by	 here.”	 She	 spoke	with	  a
softness	that	 matched	her	 touch	 and	 tamped	down	 my	 fear.	 Even	 when	 she
continued,	 saying	“But	  that	 ain’t	  nobody’s	 business	but	 mine,”	  some	of	  the
softness	remained.	I	wished	this	softer	mama	would	show	up	more	often.
    “Do	 you	understand	me?”
    I	 didn’t.	 Not	completely.	 But	I	 understood	enough	to	know	I	 was	being	asked
to	keep	a	secret.	“Yes,	ma’am,”	I	said.
    And	 it	 was	 an	easy	secret	to	 keep.	First	 there	were	 the	questions	of	 who	 I
would	tell	 and	why	 they	would	 care	to	 know.	Not	 being	 allowed	to	 spend	time
with	my	 classmates	outside	of	school	had	positioned	 me	firmly	  on	the	sidelines
of	any	 group	 of	 girls	 that	would	  have	had	me	 in	 the	first	  place.	Pretty	 much
everybody	on	our	side	of	town	was	poor.	But	 thanks	to	my	too-small	or	too-large
Goodwill	 clothes	and	run-over	shoes,	the	other	girls	never	found	 themselves	last
in	the	elementary	school	pecking	order.
    And	 while	 those	girls	(save	Latasha	Wilson)	weren’t	much	 better	off	than	me,
at	least	their	 hair	 was	 brushed	into	 carefully	 parted,	 well-oiled	 ponytails	 with
barrettes	most	days.	This	currency	of	being	neat	and	cared	for	was	always	out	of
my	reach,	a	 fact	that	 was	evident	every	 time	 I	stood	 on	a	chair	 in	 front	 of	the
bathroom	mirror,	 struggling	 to	 wrestle	my	 giant	ball	 of	 thick	 hair	 into	a	 single
puff	atop	 my	head.	Mama	 always	said	she	had	never	been	good	 at	that	kind	 of
thing—she	 had	loose	 curls	 that	 didn’t	 require	 taming—and	 she	 was	relieved
when	I	could	finally	 do	it	 myself.
    So	 I	 had	no	 real	friends	 to	 confide	 in	 about	Pastor	Neely,	 and	 the	idea	 of
saying	anything	 at	all—not	  to	mention	 my	 mother’s	 business—at	length	to	 an
adult?	The	idea	of	it	made	my	stomach	flip-flop.
    Even	 if	 my	 mother	hadn’t	 asked	me	to	 keep	her	secret,	what	 happened	one
Monday	when	I	was	ten	guaranteed	I	would	never	tell.
    One	 hot	  day	 in	 late	 May,	 I	  was	 walking	  home	from	  the	 bus	 stop.	 Our
electricity	 had	been	shut	off	again,	and	all	the	windows	 in	 our	house	were	open,
to	catch	a	 breeze.	As	I	 approached	the	house,	one	of	 those	wished-for	 breezes
swept	past,	lifted	 the	curtains	at	our	bedroom	 window	 and	held	them	in	 mid-air
long	enough	for	me	to	see	Pastor	Neely’s	huge,	bare	ass,	to	see	him	standing	and
thrusting	against	my	mother,	crushing	her	against	our	dresser.
    As	 I	  walked	 closer	toward	 the	 front	 door,	 the	 curtains	 continued	their	 air
dance,	and	I	  could	 see	more	 of	 Pastor	Neely.	  I	 could	 see	him	 gripping	  my
mother’s	 hips	with	  those	fat	 sausage	fingers	of	 his	 covered,	I	 imagined,	 with
sticky	syrup	from	 the	cobbler,	oozing	 down	my	 mother’s	body,	and	I	 hated	him.
This	was	sex,	the	it	girls	at	school	giggled	about	behind	their	hands.
    I	 got	my	first	 period	a	week	later,	a	shock	to	both	my	 mother	and	me.	I	didn’t

35
know	what	 was	happening,	and	at	first	 my	mother	 would	only	 say,	“You’re	  too
young,	you’re	 too	young	.	.	.”	 Her	crumpled	 face	and	the	bulky	pad	between	my
legs	felt	like	a	punishment.
    By	 the	 time	I	 turned	eleven,	I	 was	covered	 in	pimples	 and	wore	 a	36D	bra.
My	 mother	was	more	embarrassed	by	my	 breasts	than	I	was,	always	 chastising
me	to	cover	up,	as	if	that	was	possible.	I	 sensed	her	retreating	even	further	away
from	me,	 so	I	made	the	first	 move.	 I	moved	 out	of	 our	bedroom,	 took	over	 the
living	 room,	and	slept	on	the	couch.
    When	 I	stopped	going	to	church,	my	mother	didn’t	 push.
    Even	 though	 I	 no	longer	 ate	 the	peach	cobblers	 out	 of	 the	garbage	can	 at
night,	 my	 hunger	remained.	 I	 still	 watched	 my	 mother	 make	them	 because	I
didn’t	want	 to	forget	how	 she	did	it.	Maybe	I	 could	make	one	for	myself.	 Once	I
asked	if	 she	could	buy	 extra	 peaches	so	that	I	 could	 make	a	cobbler.	 “I	 don’t
have	money	to	waste	on	you	messing	around	in	my	kitchen”	was	her	answer.
    At	 fourteen,	 I	got	 a	job	 at	the	mall,	 at	Thom	 McAn	 shoe	store.	I	 would	buy
my	own	damned	peaches.
    I	 made	my	 cobblers	on	Friday	 nights	when	my	 mother	would	 hole	 up	in	her
bedroom	with	 a	 bottle	of	 Tanqueray	 and	I	 had	the	 kitchen	 to	myself.	 I	 didn’t
change	a	 single	  step	or	  ingredient,	 so	 my	  cobblers	 tasted	 as	good	  as	my
mother’s,	even	better	eaten	off	 a	plate	instead	of	 my	 fingers.	I	 ate	cobbler	with
every	meal	throughout	the	weekend	until	it	 was	all	gone.	I	would	 soak	the	empty
pan	 in	 the	 sink,	  my	  hands	lingering	  in	  the	 warm	  dishwater.	 I	  had	 made
something	wonderful.
    Only	 once	did	 my	mother	acknowledge	my	 cobbler	making.	 She	came	out	of
her	room	one	Friday	 night	 and	stood	in	 the	doorway	 of	the	 kitchen	wearing	 an
oversized	flannel	 shirt,	 gin	in	 hand,	watching	 me.	The	 liquor	 made	her	 slower
and	more	deliberate,	softer,	and	even	more	beautiful	somehow.	Her	 hair	was	out
of	its	 usual	bun,	and	 it	flowed	 over	 her	shoulders.	She	was	in	 her	mid-thirties,
but	looked	girlish,	 like	a	life-sized	 doll.
    “You	  think	you	know	 what	you	doin’,	 huh?	Think	 you	so	smart.	Smarter	than
everybody.”
    I	 turned	away	and	went	back	to	stirring	the	batter	for	 my	crust.
    My	  mother	walked	 over	to	me,	 so	close	I	could	 smell	the	 gin	on	her	 breath.
“There’s	book	smart,	and	there’s	life	 smart,”	she	said.	“If	 you	was	life	smart,	you
wouldn’t	 try	and	be	anything	like	 me.”
    I	 imagined	 asking	Pastor	Neely	to	 try	 my	cobbler.	 But	besides	our	awkward
hellos,	we	 never	 said	a	 word	 to	 each	other.	If	  I	 was	in	 the	 kitchen	 when	 he
arrived,	I	 would	leave	and	go	 into	the	living	  room.	Still,	 I	 imagined	him	 tasting
my	cobbler	and	telling	 me	it	was	better	than	my	mother’s—the	 best	in	the	world.

36
I	also	imagined	serving	him	a	piece	with	ground-up	glass	baked	into	the	crust
and	watching	him	crumple	to	the	floor.	More	than	that,	I	wanted	my	mother	to
know	and	be	proud	that	I	could	make	a	good	cobbler.	Mostly	I	just	wanted	my
mother.
    By	eleventh	grade,	I	had	tired	of	fighting	off	boys	and	gave	in.	But	none	of
the	boys	I	fooled	around	with	in	the	park	behind	the	school	deserved	my	peach
cobbler.	Mostly	they	just	wanted	to	 mess	with	my	breasts,	and	mostly	I	just
wanted	to	be	touched.
    One	Monday	night,	in	mid-January	of	my	junior	year,	my	mother	came	into
the	living	room	with	me	after	Pastor	Neely	left.	I	felt	my	chest	tighten.	I	much
preferred	our	usual	routine	where	I	couldn’t	bear	to	look	at	her	after	he	left	and
she	didn’t	seem	to	want	my	company	either.	But	that	night,	she	joined	me	on	the
couch	and	handed	me	a	piece	of	paper.
    “This	 is	the	Neelys’	 address.	They	are	expecting	you	Tuesdays	right	after
school.	For	tutoring.	Trevor	is	having	trouble	in	math,”	she	said.	“I	told	him	how
you	get	straight	As	and	all	in	the	advanced	classes.	He’s	just	going	to	tell	her
that	the	school	recommended	you	as	a	tutor.”
    He.	And	her.	So	we	were	not	going	to	say	Pastor	Neely’s	name	or	his	wife’s
name.
    Of	course,	there	were	many	things	we	were	not	going	to	say.
    I	was	going	to	keep	my	mouth	shut,	as	expected.	As	it	was	always	expected.
    That	first	Tuesday,	when	First	Lady	Neely	threw	open	the	front	door	of	their
McMansion	before	I	could	even	knock,	I	realized	that	she	was	black,	not	white.
Up	close	I	could	see	her	full	lips	and	broad	nose.	And	looking	at	her	relaxed	hair
pulled	back	into	a	loose	ponytail,	I	could	tell	it	was	almost	time	for	a	touch-up.
    “Hello,	 Olivia!	 I’m	 Marilyn	 Neely,”	 she	said,	ushering	me	into	the	foyer.
“But	 you	can	call	 me	Miz	 Marilyn.	 And	 I	 hope	you	don’t	 mind,”	she	said,
wrapping	her	bony	arms	around	me.	“I’m	a	hugger!”
    Realizing	that	she	wasn’t	the	white	 woman	ice	queen	I	remembered	from
years	ago	made	me	feel	even	worse	about	being	in	her	home.	I	willed	myself	not
to	stiffen	at	her	touch,	tried	to	remember	that	I	hadn’t	done	anything	wrong,	that
I	wasn’t	the	one	betraying	her.	I	touched	her	back	lightly	during	the	hug,	and	I
could	feel	her	shoulder	blades	protruding.	I	felt	huge	by	comparison,	like	I	could
crush	her	bones	with	one	hard	squeeze.	With	one	hard	truth.
    I	 felt	 light-headed	at	the	image	of	 such	power,	at	 the	memory	of	 Pastor
Neely’s	naked	ass,	and	at	the	thought	of	my	mother.	What	if	this	woman	can
read	my	thoughts?	I	swayed	and	almost	lost	my	balance.
    “Are	 you	 okay,	 honey?”	Miz	 Marilyn	 held	 me	by	 my	 shoulders	with	a
surprisingly	strong	grip.	 On	 each	of	 her	 hands,	three	huge	diamond	 rings

37
sparkled.
    She	guided	 me	to	a	small	 sofa	inside	 the	foyer.	 “This	 settee	has	been	in	my
family	 for	 fifty	  years,”	 she	said.	“My	  papa	used	to	 say	settee	was	 French	for
‘useless	chair’!”
    She	laughed	at	her	own	 joke,	and	I	tried	 to	smile,	but	 my	lips,	 like	the	rest	of
me,	were	shaking.	“I’m	  fine,”	 I	said.	“Just	 a	little	 weak.	I	skipped	 lunch	today.”
Which	wasn’t	 a	complete	 lie.	I	 skipped	lunch	 most	days	because	cafeteria	food
was	gross	and	I	preferred	the	company	of	books	over	that	of	my	peers.
    Miz	 Marilyn	  clapped	her	hands.	“Well,	 come	on	into	 the	dining	room.	 I	have
a	nice	 snack	 prepared,	 and	that	 is	 where	 you	  and	Trevor	  will	  be	 working.
Trevor!”	 she	yelled	up	the	stairs.
    Trevor	   Neely	  was	 a	  star	 football	   player	 and	  college-bound	  senior	 at
Woodbury	 Academy,	a	local	 private	 school.	He	was	 fair,	tall,	 and	lean	 like	 his
mother.	No	doubt	 he	had	his	pick	 of	 girls	 at	school.	I	 thought	he	would	 have	a
problem	with	 his	tutor	being	a	year	younger	than	him,	 and	a	girl.	 But	if	 either	of
those	things	bothered	him,	he	never	said.
    After	  his	mother	introduced	 us	and	then	left,	 closing	the	 pocket	doors	of	 the
dining	 room	 behind	 her,	 Trevor	 stared	 openly	 at	 my	 breasts.	His	 gray	 eyes
flashed	with	confidence.
    I	 picked	up	 a	finger	sandwich,	 chicken	salad,	from	 the	tray	Miz	 Marilyn	  had
prepared.	Between	bites,	I	 said,	“So	 .	 .	.	why	 don’t	 you	 show	 me	what	you’re
working	on	in	 precalc?”
    But	 Trevor	kept	staring,	at	my	 breasts,	into	my	eyes,	then	back	to	my	breasts.
    “Yes,”	  I	 told	 him.	  “I	 have	 big	 tits.	 Huge	boobs.	 Giant	 hooters.	Enormous
knockers.	And	 yes,	you’re	 cute,	but	 your	eyes	don’t	 work	 on	 me.	Now	 cut	the
bullshit,	and	let’s	get	to	work.”
    Trevor	 laughed,	showing	 his	perfect	 teeth.	“You	 all	 right,”	 he	said.	“You	 all
right.”
    He	 showed	me	his	last	test,	on	which	he’d	 gotten	a	69	percent.	We	went	over
his	mistakes	 for	 about	 half	 an	 hour,	 then	 he	asked	 to	 take	a	 break.	 We	 ate
sandwiches	and	sipped	 Coke.	 This	 time	 when	 Trevor	 looked	 at	 me,	 I	 found
myself	looking	 away.	He	really	was	cute.
    “Have	 you	seen	that	new	Fat	Boys	video?	With	the	Beach	Boys?”
    “	 ‘Wipeout’?”
    “Yeah,	 that’s	it.	 It’s	a	trip,”	 he	said,	laughing.
    “I	 heard	the	song	on	the	radio,	but	I	haven’t	seen	the	video.”
    “What?	 They	play	it,	 like,	fifty	  times	a	day	on	MTV.”
    “I	 don’t	 have	cable.”
    “You	  don’t	have	cable?”

38
    I	shrugged.
    “But	I	 know	you	watch	The	Cosby	Show.”
    “Yep.	You	know	who	I	can’t	stand?	Vanessa.	She	is	so	annoying!”
    “She	makes	me	glad	I	don’t	have	any	brothers	or	sisters.”
    “Me	too.	Though	I	wouldn’t	mind	Denise.	She’s	cool.”
    “That	honey	is	foine.	I	wouldn’t	want	her	for	a	sister,	though.	That’s	illegal!”
    We	both	cracked	up,	and	then	silence	followed.	My	hand	rested	near	Trevor’s
on	the	dining	room	table.	His	fingers	were	not	stubby	sausages	like	his	father’s.
They	were	long	and	slim,	and	I	wondered	how	they	would	feel	inside	me,	how
he	would	feel	inside	me.	What	if	 I	 went	all	 the	way	with	 him?	Something	I
hadn’t	done	before.	I	 pictured	it:	 Trevor	and	me,	naked	and	all	 tangled	up,
groping	and	sucking,	on	the	 dining	room	 table	beneath	his	mother’s	crystal
chandelier.	I	felt	sick	again	at	the	thought,	this	time	at	the	pit	of	my	stomach.
Sick	with	desire.	The	words	took	shape	in	my	mind,	black	and	slick	 like	oil,
rising	from	the	page	of	a	trashy	novel	I’d	gotten	from	the	grocery	store	the	week
before.
    In	that	moment,	I	understood	how	enough	desire	could	drown	you,	take	you
all	the	way	under.
    I	closed	my	eyes,	cleared	the	fantasies,	and	pulled	myself	back	to	the	surface.
    At	home	that	night,	I	took	the	envelope	of	money	Miz	Marilyn	had	given	me
and	dropped	it	on	the	kitchen	counter	next	to	where	my	mother	stood	washing
dishes.	I	headed	for	the	living	room.
    “How	was	it?”	my	mother	called	after	me.
    I	 stopped	without	turning	around	to	face	her.	How	was	it?	How	was	it?	Was
she	serious?	Oh,	it	was	about	what	you	would	expect	from	spending	time	with
the	wife	and	son	of	the	preacher	your	mom	is	fucking	on	a	weekly	basis.
    “Fine,”	I	 said,	my	back	still	turned.
    “That’s	it?	Just	‘fine’?”
    “Yes,	ma’am.”
    “Here.	Take	this.	It’s	yours.”
    I	turned	around.	My	mother	held	the	envelope	out	to	me.
    “No,	ma’am.	I	don’t	want	it.”
    “Here,”	she	said.	She	shook	the	envelope.	I	sighed	and	took	it.
    “Sit	 down.”	I	 sat	at	the	table,	and	my	mother	sat	across	from	me.	“Tell	me
about	the	house.”
    “It’s	 .	.	.	big.	And	.	.	.	full	of	old,	expensive	furniture.”
    My	mother	frowned.	“What	else?	What	about	her?”
    “What	about	her?”
    “Watch	your	tone.	And	don’t	get	smart	with	me.”

39
    “I’m	 not.	I	just	.	.	.	I	don’t	know	what	you	want	me	to	say.”	I	shrugged.	I	felt
a	strange	sense	of	loyalty	to	Miz	Marilyn	and	to	Trevor.	None	of	us	asked	to	be
in	this	situation.
    “She	was	nice.”
    “And	.	.	.	?”
    “And	.	.	.	I	don’t	know.	She’s	not	white.”
    “You	 thought	she	was	white?”	My	mother	laughed,	loud	and	throaty.	“No,
she’s	just	high	yellow.	 As	black	 as	he	is,	he	likes	a	 high-yellow	woman,	of
course.”	My	mother	was	only	a	shade	or	two	darker	than	Miz	Marilyn.	I	 was
darker	than	my	mother,	but	not	as	dark	as	Pastor	Neely.	A	sick	feeling	came
over	me,	for	 the	third	 time	that	day:	 could	Pastor	Neely	be	my	 father?	My
mother	only	ever	said	he	was	someone	I	wouldn’t	want	to	know.
    As	if	 she’d	read	my	mind,	my	mother	said,	“Just	like	your	daddy.	Black	as
midnight,	but	chased	high-yellow	and	white	women	nonstop.”
    “May	I	 be	excused?”
    My	mother	looked	disappointed.	“I	made	you	a	TV	dinner.”
    “Thanks,	but	I’m	not	hungry.”
    “Did	 you	eat	over	there?”
    “Just	some	sandwiches.”
    “What	kind?”
    I	 had	to	bite	my	tongue.	I	couldn’t	believe	she	was	giving	the	third	degree
about	a	damn	sandwich.	I	just	wanted	to	go	take	a	shower.	“Chicken	salad.”
    “And	what	else?”
    “Coke.”
    “And	that’s	it?	Hmph.”
    “Yes,	that	was	it,”	I	said.	“May	I	please	be	excused?”
    My	mother	waved	me	away.
    Later	that	night	 and	many	nights	after	over	the	months	I	tutored	Trevor,	I
drifted	in	and	out	 of	dreams	about	him.	I	had	liked	 a	couple	of	the	boys	I’d
fooled	around	with,	had	liked	a	few	others	from	a	distance.	But	Trevor	was	the
first	boy	I	really	crushed	on.	His	big,	curious	eyes;	the	round	tip	of	his	nose;	and
his	full	lips.	A	 smile	or	a	laugh	was	never	far	from	his	mouth.	I	wanted	to	kiss
him.	Every	Tuesday	brought	a	new	opportunity	to	kiss	him.	The	way	I	would
catch	him	looking	at	me,	I	was	sure	the	feeling	was	mutual.	But	all	I	allowed
myself	to	do	was	inhale	the	sweet	mix	of	hair	grease,	soap,	and	sweat	emanating
from	him	when	our	heads	hovered	together	over	his	precalculus	textbook.	On	the
rare	occasions	when	I	did	allow	 our	eyes	to	meet	for	 longer	than	a	 second,
Trevor	would	smile,	satisfied.	And	I	would	be	flooded	with	a	mix	of	desire	and
irrational	guilt.	Trevor	 couldn’t	blame	me	for	what	my	 mother	and	his	father

40
were	doing.	And	 while	I	 certainly	 wasn’t	going	 to	tell	 him,	my	 knowing	and	his
not	knowing	just	felt	 wrong	somehow.	But	 what	could	I	do?
    All	  of	 this	 cemented	my	 understanding	of	 God	 as	a	twisted	 puppet	 master
watching	his	creations	bounce	around,	trapped	and	tangled	up	in	tragedies	for	his
amusement.
    Despite	 the	tension,	 Trevor	 and	I	 always	got	 back	to	 the	work,	 back	 to	the
reason	for	my	being	there:	he	wanted	to	do	well	in	precalculus,	and	I	 wanted	him
to	do	well	 so	that	he	would	 graduate	and	I	could	stop	 hugging	his	mother	 every
week,	like	 a	Judas	by	 proxy,	and	 frustrating	 my	 mother	with	 reports	of	 turkey
sandwiches,	sloppy	joes,	 and	corn	dogs.	 But	I	 would	 miss	 spending	time	 with
him,	guilt	 and	all.
    I	 managed	to	 avoid	 Pastor	Neely	for	 four	 Tuesdays	of	 tutoring.	 But	 on	 the
fifth	 Tuesday,	he	opened	the	door	when	 I	rang	 the	bell.	 I	took	 a	step	back.	My
mouth	went	dry,	and	I	did	not	 return	his	hello.
    Pastor	 Neely	  grinned	 and	 extended	 his	 hand	 to	  me	 the	 way	 he	 did	  to
parishioners	during	the	love	offering.	 I	 looked	down	at	those	fat	sausage	fingers,
and	my	stomach	 lurched.	He	 dropped	his	hand	and	 his	grin,	 but	his	 voice	 was
cheerful.	“Come	on	in.	Olivia	 .	.	.	is	it?”
    “Yes,	 sir.”
    I	  stepped	 partway	 into	  the	 foyer,	  but	 kept	 one	 foot	  close	 to	 the	 door,
imagining	the	fallout	 if	 I	just	turned	and	ran.
    Trevor	  came	 bounding	  down	 the	 stairs.	 He	  froze	 on	 the	  last	 stair	 and
narrowed	his	eyes	at	his	father.	“Where’s	Mom?”
    “She	 went	 to	 check	on	 your	 Aunt	 Catherine.	 She	hasn’t	 been	feeling	 well
lately.”
    “Oh,”	  Trevor	said.	He	didn’t	 move	from	that	bottom	 stair.
    “Well,	  just	do	whatever	you	 do	when	your	mother	 is	here,”	Pastor	Neely	told
Trevor.	“I’ll	  be	downstairs	in	the	study.”
    Trevor	 waited	until	 his	father	was	gone	before	stepping	down	into	the	foyer.
    “Come	 all	the	way	in,”	 he	said.	“You	 look	like	 you	ready	to	bolt.	You	 okay?”
    “Yeah,”	  I	said.	“Why	 wouldn’t	 I	be?”
    “Sometimes	 people	are	intimidated	by	my	dad.	You	 look	scared.”
    I	 managed	a	laugh	I	hoped	was	convincing.	“Me?	 Scared?	Please.	You	looked
scared.”
    Trevor’s	  face	 reddened	 a	 bit,	 and	 he	 looked	 at	 the	 ground.	 “I	  was	 just
surprised	to	see	him	home	this	early.	That’s	all.”
    I	 wasn’t	buying	 it.	But	then	he	flashed	me	a	smile,	so	I	dropped	it.
    Miz	  Marilyn	  had	left	  us	grilled	 cheese	sandwiches	wrapped	 in	 foil	  on	the
dining	room	table.

41
    Trevor	 took	 a	huge	bite	out	of	 a	sandwich.	“My	 mom’s	 not	the	greatest	cook
in	the	world,	but	she	makes	a	good	grilled	cheese.”
    I	  took	a	 bite.	 The	sandwich	 was	 buttery	 and	delicious.	 “This	  is	goo—,”	  I
started	to	say,	but	Trevor	 was	on	 me,	his	lips	 on	mine,	 his	body	 pressing	mine
against	the	table.
    I	 swallowed	 the	 bits	 of	 sandwich	in	 my	 mouth	 and	then	 returned	Trevor’s
kiss.	He	slid	 his	hands	beneath	my	 shirt	and	 cupped	my	breasts.	I	 moaned	and
placed	my	palm	on	the	table	to	steady	myself.
    Trevor	  reached	around	to	 unhook	 my	 bra.	 “No!”	  I	 whispered.	 “We	  can’t.
Your	dad	.	.	.”
    “.	 .	.	is	in	his	study.”
    “Yeah,	 but	.	.	.”
    Trevor	 held	his	hands	up	and	backed	away.	“You’re	probably	 right.”
    I	 exhaled,	relieved	 that	he	 wasn’t	upset,	but	 also	screaming	with	 joy	 inside,
already	replaying	the	kiss	in	my	mind.
    “Now	   you	 expect	  me	 to	 just	  sit	 here	 with	  blue	  balls	 and	 solve	 some
polynomial	 equations,”	  Trevor	 said.	 He	 made	a	 big	 show	 of	 walking	  wide-
legged	to	his	chair.
    “You	  are	so	silly,”	I	 said.
    And	 after	that,	we	started	each	tutoring	session	with	a	brief	 make-out	session.
We	knew	 that	if	 Miz	  Marilyn	 was	going	 to	 check	on	 us,	it	 wouldn’t	 be	in	 the
first	 few	 minutes.	 Oddly	 enough,	making	 out	 with	  Trevor	 made	me	 feel	less
guilty	 where	he	and	Miz	Marilyn	  were	concerned.	For	a	few	moments	at	least,	I
could	forget	about	our	parents,	and	just	be	a	girl	kissing	a	boy	she	liked.	Simple.
    At	  the	 end	 of	 April,	   Miz	  Marilyn	  turned	 sixty.	  “It’s	  my	 birthday!”	   she
announced	as	she	threw	the	door	open	to	let	me	in.
    “Happy	 birthday!”	  I	said.
    “I	  am	sixty	 years	old	today.	 No	spring	 chicken!”	 she	chuckled.	 “You	 know,
Trevor	was	my	miracle	 child,	my	 change-of-life	baby	.	 .	.”	Trevor	 had	come	into
the	foyer,	 but	turned	on	 his	heel	when	 he	heard	the	topic	 of	 conversation.	Miz
Marilyn	 reached	out	and	pulled	him	back.
    “I	  thought	it	 wasn’t	 God’s	 will	 for	 me	to	 ever	be	a	mother,	 but	he	gave	me
my	beautiful	 boy	 when	I	 was	forty-three!”	  she	said,	throwing	  her	arms	around
Trevor.
    “Ma,	 come	on,	cut	it	 out,”	Trevor	 said,	squirming	away.	“I	 need	to	study.”
    “All	  right,	 all	 right,”	 Miz	  Marilyn	 said.	“I’ll	   leave	you	two	 scholars	 to	your
work.”
    In	 the	dining	 room,	 Trevor	 tried	to	 kiss	me.	 “No!”	  I	hissed	and	pushed	him
away.	I	turned	my	back	to	him	to	 wipe	away	tears.

42
    “Okay	 .	.	.”	 he	said.	“That	time	of	 the	month,	I	guess.”
    “You’re	  not	funny.”
    Trevor	 shook	his	 head.	We	sat	down	 and	went	over	 the	problems	he	missed
on	a	pop	quiz.	Then	he	started	his	homework,	stopping	to	ask	questions	when	he
needed	to.	After	a	while,	I	started	to	pack	up	and	leave.
    “What	  are	you	doing?”	 Trevor	 looked	 at	his	 watch.	“We’ve	  still	 got	 fifteen
minutes	left.”
    “So	 you’re	a	timekeeper	now?”	 I	snapped.
    “No,	  I	just	.	 .	.”	 Trevor	looked	 dejected.	“I	 just	had	a	question	about	number
six.”
    I	 sighed,	dropped	my	bag,	and	sat	back	down	in	 the	chair.	“Look,”	  I	 said.	“If
your	mother	wants	to	hug	you,	let	her.	Don’t	 be	an	asshole.”
    The	 following	  week,	 Trevor	 answered	the	door	 when	I	 arrived.	 He	 wore	a
Public	Enemy	 T-shirt	 and	a	pair	of	 basketball	shorts.	Message:	I’m	 a	jock,	 and
I’m	righteous.	How	 could	I	 possibly	stay	mad	at	him?
    I	 stepped	inside.	“Where’s	Miz	 Marilyn?”
    “She	 and	my	dad	just	left	to	 go	the	hospital.	My	 aunt’s	really	sick.”	 His	 voice
cracked	a	little,	and	he	pretended	to	cough	to	cover	it	up.
    “I’m	  sorry.	I	 hope	she’s	okay.”
    “Yeah,”	  Trevor	 said.	“I	 heard	my	mom	 say	she	might	not	make	it.	 Her	heart
is	failing.	 They	are	going	to	make	a	prayer	circle	around	her.	Like	 that’s	going	to
help.”
    “You	  don’t	believe	in	 prayer?”
    Trevor	 looked	 at	 me.	“I’m	  a	PK.	 Of	 course	I	 believe	 in	prayer.”	 His	 voice
dripped	with	sarcasm.
    “What’s	  a	PK?”
    “Preacher’s	 Kid.	I	 thought	everybody	knew	that.”
    “Well,	  you	thought	wrong.”
    We	 stood	there,	staring	at	each	other.
    “I	 never	told	 anybody,”	I	 said,	“but	I	don’t	 believe	in	prayer	either.”
    Trevor	 did	 that	half-smile	 thing	 and	shook	his	head.	“I	 bet	you	 have	a	lot	 of
secrets.”
    “I’m	  good	at	keeping	secrets.”
    Trevor	 reached	for	my	hand,	and	I	gave	it	to	him.
    Upstairs	 in	 his	bedroom,	Trevor	 put	 a	cassette	in	his	boom	 box	and	pressed
Play.	As	Keith	 Sweat	crooned	“Make	 It	Last	 Forever,”	we	 kissed	and	undressed
each	other.
    “Wow,”	   Trevor	 said	once	my	 bra	and	 panties	were	off.	  Instantly	 his	hands
were	everywhere.	For	once	I	didn’t	 feel	embarrassed	or	annoyed.	I	felt	powerful.

43
    I	 pushed	Trevor	back	on	the	bed	and	straddled	him,	 letting	 my	breasts	sweep
against	his	face.
    “You	  ever	did	it	before?”	he	asked.
    “No.	 You?”
    He	 hesitated	a	beat	too	long,	so	I	 knew	that	no	matter	 what	he	said,	the	truth
was	that	he	hadn’t.
    He	  told	 the	 truth.	 And	  then	 together	we	  figured	 out	 how	 to	  put	 on	 the
condom.
    Trevor	 closed	his	eyes	as	he	positioned	himself	between	my	legs.	I	 wondered
what	he	was	 thinking	 about.	I	 was	trying	 not	 to	think	 about	 his	father	 and	my
mother.	The	white-hot	 pain	of	 him	entering	 me	brought	me	to	 tears.	Tears	from
the	fresh	pain	and	from	old	hurts	ran	together.
    “You	  want	me	to	stop?”	Trevor	asked,	still	thrusting.
    I	 never	wanted	him	to	stop.
    When	 it	 was	over,	 we	finished	 the	risky	 business	of	 removing	 the	condom.
My	 fears	of	 getting	pregnant,	all	 the	what-ifs	  I	had	held	 at	bay	 while	 we	were
doing	 it,	 they	 all	 came	 flooding	  back.	My	  mother	 would	 kill	  me.	 And	  Miz
Marilyn	 .	 .	.	I	 didn’t	 even	want	 to	think	 about	 how	upset	and	disappointed	 she
would	 be.	If	 Trevor	 was	thinking	 about	 any	of	 this,	he	 didn’t	 show	 it.	He	 just
adjusted	the	pillow	beneath	our	heads,	laid	back,	and	smiled	at	me.
    I	  propped	myself	 up	 on	 one	elbow.	 “Don’t	   you	 think	 we	 should	 go	back
downstairs?	Your	parents	could	come	back	at	any	time.”
    “They’ll	  be	praying	 for	hours.	Trust	me.”
    So	 I	 laid	 down	 on	the	 pillow	  next	to	 him	 and	 stared	at	the	 ceiling.	 “Now
what?”
    “You	  didn’t	like	 it?”
    “No,	  it’s	not	 that	.	.	.	 I	don’t	 know.	 It’s	 weird.	How	 something	can	feel	 right
and	wrong	at	the	same	time.”
    “My	   father	  would	  say	  that	 what	  we	  just	  did	 is	  plain	  wrong,	  a	  sin.
Fornication.”
    “Do	 you	believe	 that?”
    He	 shrugged.
    “Do	 you	believe	 in	God?”
    He	 shrugged	again.
    “For	 a	long	time,”	 I	said,	“I	 thought	your	 father	was	God.”
    “Yeah.	 You	 and	me	both.”
    And	 then	 Trevor	 reached	for	me	 with	 one	hand	and	 for	a	 condom	with	 the
other.
    Miz	  Marilyn’s	  sister	died	a	 few	days	 later.	When	 I	showed	 up	for	 Trevor’s

44
next	tutoring	 session,	I	 brought	Miz	  Marilyn	 a	 peach	cobbler	I’d	  baked.	I	 had
hoped	that	Pastor	Neely	wouldn’t	  be	there	and	was	relieved	 when	he	wasn’t.	 It
would	be	 the	last	tutoring	 session;	Trevor	 had	finals,	then	 graduation,	and	then
he	was	off	to	More-house	in	Atlanta.
    “I’m	  so	sorry	about	your	sister,”	I	 said.
    “Thank	 you,	dear,”	 Miz	Marilyn	  said.	“She’s	at	peace	now.”
    Miz	  Marilyn’s	  eyes	were	red	from	 crying.	 It	 was	the	first	  time	I’d	 seen	her
without	 a	full	 face	of	 makeup,	and	her	hair	 was	loose	and	a	bit	 bushy.	But	 she
clapped	her	 hands	when	 I	 showed	her	 the	cobbler.	 “Oh,	  my	 word!	 It	 almost
looks	too	good	to	eat.	Almost!	 Trevor!”
    As	 Miz	  Marilyn	 chattered	 on	about	the	 cobbler	 and	how	 her	sister	used	 to
make	good	apple	cobblers,	“God	 rest	her	 soul,”	I	 noticed	 a	new	framed	picture
on	the	hall	table.	In	 it,	Trevor	 wore	a	tux,	and	his	arm	 was	around	a	pretty	light-
skinned	girl	 in	 a	seafoam-green	prom	gown.	 Her	makeup	was	flawless	 and	her
hair	was	 done	up	 in	 glossy	 ringlets.	 They	 looked	 like	 wedding	 cake	toppers,
posed	and	stiff.
    “—my	  best	 china	 and	silverware.	 Because	a	 special	treat	 calls	 for	 special
dishes.	Oh,	didn’t	  Trevor	 and	Monica	 look	 lovely?”	  Miz	 Marilyn	  asked	when
she	saw	me	staring	 at	the	photo.	 “They	 took	 that	picture	 in	 her	backyard.	The
Caldwells	have	a	beautiful	home	up	in	Hillcrest.	 A	 perfect	backdrop.”
    A	  Woodbury	  Academy	  girl	  from	  Hillcrest.	  Whose	  mother	 hadn’t	  been
fucking	his	father	for	 over	a	decade.
    “Yes,”	  I	said.	“It’s	 perfect.”
    In	  the	dining	  room,	 I	 could	 barely	 swallow	  a	 bite,	 but	 Miz	 Marilyn	  and
Trevor	dug	into	 the	cobbler.	They	both	 said	it	was	the	best	they’d	 ever	had.	Miz
Marilyn	 closed	 her	eyes	 every	time	 she	took	 a	 bite.	 I	 tried	 to	 absorb	all	 this
goodness,	but	I	didn’t	deserve	it.	I	 didn’t	even	belong	there,	sullying	 her	spotless
home.	Trevor	 finished	his	 first	 helping,	 pushed	his	plate	aside,	and	ate	directly
from	the	pan.	I	wanted	to	stab	him	with	 my	fork.
    Trevor	 kept	 stealing	glances,	asking	 me	questions	with	 his	eyes.	When	 Miz
Marilyn	 left	us	alone	to	study,	he	stopped	me	when	I	asked	to	see	his	homework.
“You	 okay?”
    “It’s	  not	your	concern.”
    “Whoa.	 You	 pregnant?”
    “What?	 No!”	 I	 said,	way	too	loudly.
    “Then	 what—”
    “Nothing.	  Let’s	just	go	over	your	 homework.”
    “You’re	  not	going	to	tell	 me	what’s	the	matter?”
    What	 was	the	matter?	What	was	I	expecting?	For	 him	to	take	me	to	the	prom

45
just	because	we’d	 had	sex?	 He	hadn’t	 told	 me	 he	had	a	 girlfriend,	  but	I	 also
hadn’t	asked.	What	did	he	owe	me?	What	did	anyone	owe	me?
    “I	 didn’t	 know	 you	had	a	girlfriend.”
    “Oh,”	  Trevor	said.	“Yeah.”
    Yeah?	That	was	it?	Yeah?
    The	 next	 forty	  minutes	 felt	 like	  a	year.	 Trevor	 finished	  his	 homework.	 I
checked	it,	and	 we	went	 over	the	ones	he	 missed.	I	spoke	 as	little	 as	possible.
My	voice	was	slow	 and	heavy	and	felt	like	it	belonged	to	someone	else.
    When	 the	session	was	over,	I	grabbed	my	bag	to	leave.
    “Wait,”	  Trevor	 said.	He	stood	up	and	pulled	me	to	him.
    “Let	 me	go.”	 I	pushed	him	away.
    Trevor	 shrugged.	“All	 right.	 If	that’s	 how	you	want	to	be.”
    How	 did	I	 want	to	be?
    I	 wanted	to	be	free	of	other	people’s	secrets.
    “Yeah,”	  I	said.	“That’s	 how	I	want	to	 be.”
    In	 the	foyer,	Miz	 Marilyn	  handed	me	my	cleaned	baking	pan	and	my	last	pay
envelope.	“With	 a	bonus!”	she	said,	hugging	me.	As	I	stepped	outside,	she	called
after	me.	“Please	come	and	see	me,	anytime.	 This	 big	old	 house	will	 be	lonely
come	fall.”
    “Yes,	 ma’am,”	 I	said,	knowing	 I	never	would.
    As	 soon	as	I	was	on	the	street	and	out	of	sight,	I	ran.	I	ran	and	cried	the	entire
bus	ride	home.
    I	 stormed	into	 the	 house	and	found	my	 mother	in	 the	kitchen,	 putting	 away
groceries.
    “How	  was—?”
    “Take	 it!”	  I	threw	the	envelope	at	her	chest.	She	put	up	her	hands	to	block	 it,
and	the	envelope	fell	 at	her	feet.	I	 dropped	the	empty	cobbler	 pan	and	kicked	it
across	the	room	as	hard	as	I	could.	It	slammed	into	the	bottom	of	the	stove.
    “Girl,	  I	don’t	 know	what’s	 gotten	into	you,	but—”
    “I	 don’t	 want	his	money,	and	I	don’t	 want	him	in	 this	house	ever	again!”
    My	 mother’s	 laugh	was	dry	 and	scornful.	She	crossed	the	room	and	got	right
up	in	my	 face.	“Whose	 money	do	 you	think	 keeps	us	in	this	 house?	When	was
the	last	time	 you	remember	the	lights	 being	 shut	off?	 Or	the	water?	You	 can’t,
can	you?	Instead	of	talking	 about	what	you	don’t	 want,	you	 need	to	be	thanking
him.”
    I	 shook	my	 head.	“No.	 I	 won’t	 ever	thank	 him	 for	cheating	 on	his	wife,	 for
bringing	me	around	his	family,”	  I	said.	“And	 I	would	 have	rather	been	homeless,
but	I	guess	I	should	thank	you	for	 fucking	him	 all	these	years	to	keep	a	roof	over
my	head.”

46
    My	 mother	raised	her	hand	and	slapped	me	so	hard	across	the	mouth,	I	almost
lost	my	footing.	 I	 raised	my	hand	to	 slap	her	back,	and	she	looked	up	at	it.	 “Go
ahead,”	she	said.	“Take	your	best	shot.	And	then	get	the	hell	out	of	my	house.”
    I	 balled	my	 hand	into	a	fist.	 “Why	 couldn’t	 you	 leave	me	out	of	 this?”	Tears
streamed	down	my	 face.	My	 mother	 kept	her	eyes	on	 my	 raised	fist.	 “Look	 at
me!”	I	 screamed.	But	she	wouldn’t.
    “You	  could’ve	said	no,”	 my	mother	whispered.
    “Could	  I,	really?	I	 don’t	 recall	being	asked.	So	don’t	 you	try	 and	turn	this	on
me!”
    My	 mother	slapped	me	again.	“You	 watch	your	mouth!”
    I	  raised	my	 fist	 again.	 “I	  hope	Pastor	Neely	 chokes	 and	dies	 on	 the	next
cobbler	you	make.”
    “Don’t	  talk	like	 that,	Olivia!	 God	don’t	 like	ugly.”
    “There’s	  nothing	 you	 can	say	to	 me	 about	God.	 Ever.	 Because	you’re	 the
ugliest.	 You	 and	 Pastor	 Neely.	 The	 ugliest.”	  My	  chest	was	 heaving,	 and	 I
couldn’t	 stop	the	 tears	even	if	  I	 had	wanted	to.	 “So	 you	 don’t	 have	to	 worry
anymore,	Mama,”	I	 said,	“about	me	wanting	to	be	anything	like	 you.	I	swear,	my
life	 won’t	  be	anything	 like	  yours.	Because	 it	 will	  be	sweet,	 and	it	 won’t	  be
crumbs.”
    And	 then	I	dropped	my	fist.	 Because	in	the	meantime,	I	had	nowhere	to	go.

47
                                                 SNOWFALL







BLACK	 WOMEN	 aren’t	 meant	to	shovel	snow.	Rhonda	mumbles	this	as	we	are
knee-deep	in	the	stuff.	 We	 have	to	do	it.	 When	 it	 snows	heavily	 overnight,	we
wake	before	the	sun	comes	up	to	get	dressed,	shovel	ourselves	out,	clear	off	our
Honda,	prevent	 slip-and-fall	 lawsuits	 from	 neighbors,	 and	still	 get	 to	work	 on
time.
    But	 I	 know	where	 Rhonda	is	coming	from.	 We,	 who	apparently	are	built	 for
everything,	 are	simply	 not	 built	 for	 this.	 No	 gloves	 exist	that	 keep	our	 hands
from	freezing	 as	we	move	snow	 and	ice	from	 one	spot	to	 another	and	from	 the
car	windshield.	No	 boots	exist	that	can	keep	the	cold	from	numbing	 our	toes.	No
number	of	layers	and	 waterproof	pants	keep	the	chill	 at	 bay.	We	feel	 it	through
our	chests.	 And	 no,	 the	physical	 activity	  does	 not	warm	 us	 up.	 It	 makes	us
resentful.
    We	 don’t	  like	 to	 admit	 it,	 but	 the	 snow	 is	 beautiful.	 When	 it’s	 that	 light
dusting	that	 rests	on	 bare	 branches,	when	 it	 looks	 all	 puffy	 and	 cottony	 and
innocent.	The	problem	is	the	work	snow	demands.
    Still,	 I	 say,	“Maybe	 it’s	 just	us,”	as	I	 clear	a	stripe	into	the	snow	on	 the	trunk
of	the	car.	“All	 the	Black	 women	born	and	raised	in	this	city	.	.	.	well,	 yeah,	there
aren’t	that	many	.	.	.	but	they	 must	be	used	to	it	by	now.	It’s	 only	our	 first	winter
here.	Maybe	in	time	.	.	.”
    “Not	  everything	has	to	be	interrogated,	Arletha,”	  Rhonda	says	as	she	scrapes
away	at	 a	patch	 of	 ice	on	 the	 edge	of	 the	driveway.	  I’m	 Arletha	 when	 she’s
pissed	at	me;	I’m	Leelee	the	rest	of	 the	time,	which	 is	most	of	 the	time.	Most	 of
the	time	we	 live	 in	the	space	between	my	 need	to	dissect	and	her	need	to	 keep
things	whole	with	 declarative	statements.
    Right	 now	we	are	living	 in	 the	space	of	the	morning	after	yet	another	bedtime
conversation	that	started	 innocently	 enough.	We	 are	living	  in	the	 space	of	me
staring	at	the	ceiling	for	 hours,	then	oversleeping,	again;	of	Rhonda	having	to	do
the	bulk	 of	 the	snow	 and	ice	 clearing,	again.	 The	third	 time	 I	 rolled	 over	and
asked	Rhonda	to	give	 me	five	 more	 minutes,	she	didn’t	 answer.	 By	the	 time	 I
woke	up,	 I	 could	 hear	 her	shovel	 stabbing	 the	sheet	of	 ice	 on	 the	driveway.
Through	our	bedroom	 window,	 I	watched	her	work.	 Skullcap	 pulled	down	 tight
over	her	 locs	which	 fell	  over	her	 shoulders	and	were	 dotted	with	  snowflakes.

48
Slim	arms	delivering	 harder	blows	to	the	ice	than	seemed	possible.
    I	 brush	the	last	mounds	of	snow	off	 the	hood	of	the	car	and	return	my	 scraper
to	the	trunk.	Rhonda	is	almost	done	clearing	the	ice.
    When	 my	 teaching	 job	 at	 the	university	  brought	 us	here	 last	summer,	 we
knew	there	would	be	snow,	but	we	 didn’t	 know	the	stuff	 would	shape	the	course
of	so	many	 of	our	 days	and	nights.	 Neither	of	 us	has	fully	  mastered	driving	 in
the	snow	yet,	and	our	experience	with	 Uber	 drivers	has	been	hit	or	 miss.	So	we
stock	up	on	groceries	and	run	as	many	errands	as	possible	on	clear	days.
    But	 it’s	 not	just	the	snow.	The	cold	 temperatures	alone	have	kept	us	in	binge-
watching	episodes	of	 The	 Office	and	 having	 Thai	food	 delivered.	 There’s	 just
something	about	 being	 out	 in	 it	 that	 makes	 us	mildly	  cranky	 and	 singularly
focused	on	getting	to	the	next	heated	place.
    We	 were	born	and	raised	in	warmer	places,	Georgia	and	Florida.	 Warmer	too
in	 the	residual	 charm,	 polite	 smiles,	 and	gentility	  of	 the	 white	 people	whose
ancestors	owned	ours.	In	the	South,	 the	weather	does	not	force	 tears	from	your
eyes,	causing	the	faces	of	 passing	strangers	to	 register	worry	 about	 you,	for	 a
millisecond.	It’s	 the	wind,	 you	want	to	tell	 them,	but	a	millisecond	 is	not	enough
time.	In	 the	South,	the	 weather	does	not	hurt	 you	down	 to	your	 bones	or	force
you	to	wake	up	a	half	an	hour	early	 to	remedy	what	has	been	done	to	your	steps,
your	sidewalk,	your	driveway,	 and	your	car	as	you	slept.
    But	 the	South	has	hurricanes,	they	say.	Yes,	but	not	 damn-near	daily,	not	 for
a	full	quarter	of	the	year.
    You	 tell	 people	up	here	that	you’re	from	 the	South,	and	nine	times	out	of	ten,
they	say	the	 same	old	thing:	 “I’m	   sure	you	miss	 the	sunshine.”	 Rhonda	and	 I
both	miss	taking	sunshine	and	easy	morning	commutes	for	granted.	But	what	we
really	miss	 are	the	laughter	and	embrace	of	 our	mothers	 and	grandmothers	and
aunties,	kin	and	not	kin.	We	 miss	the	big	oak	tables	in	their	dining	 rooms	where,
as	kids	 in	 the	seventies	and	 eighties,	we	 ate	bowl	  after	bowl	  of	 their	 banana
pudding	as	they	talked	to	 each	other	about	how	much	weight	 you’d	 gained,	like
you	weren’t	 even	there.	We	miss	helping	 them	snap	green	beans	and	shell	peas
sitting	 at	their	 kitchen	 tables	watching	 The	Young	and	 the	Restless	on	the	 TV
perched	on	the	pass-through.	We	miss	how	they	loved	Victor	Newman,	hated	Jill
Foster,	 and	 envied	  Miss	  Chancellor	 and	  how	  she	 dripped	 diamonds	  and
chandeliers.
    We	 miss	 their	 bare	brown	 arms	 reaching	to	 hang	 clothes	on	 the	line	 with
wooden	pins.	We	miss	their	sun	tea	brewed	all	day	in	 big	jars	on	the	picnic	 table
in	the	backyard,	then	later	loaded	with	 sugar	and	sipped	over	plates	of	their	fried
chicken	in	 the	early	evening.	We	 miss	lying	 next	to	 them	at	night	 in	their	 four-
poster	 beds	 with	  too-soft	  mattresses	covered	  by	 ironed	  sheets	 and	 three-

49
generation-old	blankets.	We	miss	their	 housecoats,	perfumed	with	Absorbine	 Jr.
liniment	 and	hints	of	 the	White	 Shoulders	they’d	 spritzed	 on	from	 an	atomizer
that	morning	before	church.	We	miss	tracing	 the	soft	folds	in	 their	skin	when	 we
held	hands	and	watched	our	 favorite	 TV	 shows	in	 their	 beds.	Dallas,	 Dynasty,
Knots	Landing,	and	Falcon	Crest.
    We	  miss	 how	 they	  laughed	 and	 were	 easy	with	  each	 other.	 How	  their
friendships	  lasted	 lifetimes,	   outlasting	  wayward	  husbands	  and	 ungrateful
children.	Outlasted	that	time	 Alma	caught	Joe	cheating	and	she	whacked	him	on
the	top	of	 the	head	with	 the	sword	he’d	 brought	back	from	 the	war,	 but	he	told
the	people	at	the	 hospital	he	 didn’t	 know	 who	 did	it.	 Outlasted	 having	to	 hide
your	 medicine	 bottles	 in	 your	 shoes	because,	otherwise,	 seven	 of	 your	 nine
children	were	liable	 to	steal	them.	We	 miss	how	they	seemed	to	judge	everyone
but	themselves.	Or	maybe	that	 judgment	was	in	 the	“nerve”	 pills	 they	procured
from	 the	Chinese	doctor	 on	 Bay	 St.	who	 didn’t	  ask	questions.	We	 miss	 their
furtive	 cups	 of	 brown	 liquor	  on	 Friday	 and	 unabashed	cries	for	  Jesus	come
Sunday.
    We	 miss	 their	 one	gold	 tooth	 that	 made	us	wonder	 who	 they	 had	been	as
young	women.
    We	 miss	their	 blue	crabs,	the	 shells	boiled	to	 a	blood	 red	in	 wash	tubs	atop
bricks	 over	 makeshift	 fires	 built	 in	 the	 yard.	 The	 wash	tubs	 reminded	 us	 of
cauldrons,	full	 of	 rock	 salt–	and	cayenne-drenched	water	bubbling	 and	 rolling,
mesh	bags	of	seasonings	and	halved	onions	 and	peppers	floating	 on	top,	 along
with	 potatoes	and	ears	of	 corn.	We	 miss	how	 they	 stood	over	those	 cauldrons
like	witches,	 stirring	a	potion.	 With	 sweat	beading	on	the	tips	of	 their	noses	and
smoke	swirling	around	their	 hands	and	wrists,	they	wielded	long-handled	spoons
to	press	the	frantic,	flailing	 crabs	toward	their	deaths.
    We	 miss	how	they	made	our	Easter	dresses	and	pound	cakes	and	a	way	out	of
no	way.
    But	 we	 lost	all	 those	things	 when	we	 chose	each	other.	Only	 the	 memories
remain.	Which	 is	why,	 even	though	we	grew	 up	in	 different	 places,	so	many	of
our	bedtime	conversations	start	with	 “Remember	 when	.	.	 .,	”	 as	we	lie	there	in
the	dark	 with	 our	 nostalgia	and	 nothing	 to	distract	 us	 from	 it.	 Not	 even	each
other,	not	anymore.



It	did	 snow	once	in	my	 little	 town	in	 Florida.	 In	1989.	I	 was	home	from	 college
for	winter	 break.	I	was	visiting	 Tonya,	a	childhood	 friend,	 when	my	mom	 called
her	house	looking	  for	 me,	 worried.	 Had	 I	 seen	the	 weather	report?	 I	 hadn’t.

50
When	she	told	 me	the	forecast	called	 for	 snow	and	ice,	 I	 laughed	and	asked	if
she’d	been	drinking.
    Mama	  huffed.	 “Girl,	   I’m	  serious.	 This	 weather	 ain’t	  to	 be	 played	 with.
Mayretta	said	over	 by	her,	 cars	just	slip-sliding	  all	over	 the	road	because	these
people	don’t	know	 how	to	drive	 in	it.	I	 know	I	 asked	you	to	stop	by	Church’s	on
your	way	 home	 and	get	 me	a	two-piece,	 but	 you	 just	 come	straight	 on	home
now.”
    “Yes,	 ma’am.”
    But	 of	course	I	didn’t	 listen.
    I	 stayed	at	 Tonya’s	 another	hour.	 Mama	told	 me	 later	that	 she	tried	to	 call
back,	but	apparently	Tonya’s	mother	was	on	the	phone	and	they	didn’t	have	call-
waiting.	And	 when	Mama	finally	  got	through,	I’d	 left.	 Of	course	this	was	before
cell	phones.	So	the	minute	I	walked	in	the	door,	Mama	started	fussing.
    “I	 was	worried	 sick,	thinking	 you	were	dead	in	a	ditch	somewhere!”
    I	 held	out	the	bag	of	 Church’s	chicken	 to	her,	and	she	looked	at	it	 like	it	 was
an	alien.
    “I	 told	 you—”
    “I	 know,”	  I	said.	“But	 the	roads	between	Tonya’s	and	Church’s	and	Church’s
and	here	were	 fine.	 And	 I	 know	 you	really	 wanted	 the	chicken.	 I	 got	 you	all
wings.”	I	 held	the	bag	out	to	her	again.	“And	I	 remembered	your	hot	pepper.”
    My	 mama	dropped	down	 into	her	favorite	 armchair	and	laughed	and	cried	all
at	once.	She	pulled	 me	down	 onto	her	 lap	and	rocked	 me.	I	 was	as	big	 as	she
was,	so	we	must’ve	been	a	sight.
    “Leelee,	 you’re	 all	I’ve	 got	in	 this	world,”	  Mama	said.	“The	 idea	of	anything
happening	to	you	.	.	.”
    It	  had	 always	 been	just	  Mama	 and	 me.	Mama	  never	married	  or,	 to	 my
knowledge,	dated.	My	father	 didn’t	 want	to	be	one,	at	least	not	mine.	Mama	told
me	he	had	a	wife	 and	kids	 and	was	a	 deacon	at	the	church	she	and	 her	family
used	to	go	to	before	I	was	born.	She	said	the	Lord	had	given	me	to	her	when	 she
was	forty-one—“No	  spring	 chicken!”—and	 He	 doesn’t	make	 mistakes.	I	knew
Mama	loved	 me.	I	knew	 she	always	worked	 two	 jobs	and	sacrificed	 so	I	 could
have	everything	I	 needed	and	most	everything	 I	 wanted.	Disney	 World	 when	I
was	five,	 when	it	 was	all	 she	could	 do	to	 keep	the	 lights	 on.	Sending	me	 ten-
dollar	money	orders	at	college	when	my	 tuition	was	the	same	amount	she	earned
in	a	year	at	her	second	job.	That’s	 why	 I’d	 insisted	on	bringing	 her	the	chicken;
she	did	everything	for	me	and	so	little	for	 herself.
    But	  like	   a	 beautiful	  quilt	  in	  summertime,	  my	  mother’s	  love	  was	 the
suffocating	 kind,	 the	kind	 you	 chafe	 against	and	 don’t	 miss	until	  the	seasons
change	and	it’s	gone.

51
    Back	 then,	I	 didn’t	 know	 if	 my	mother	 would	 still	 love	me	 if	 she	knew	that
Tonya	was	more	than	just	a	friend.	And	I	 wasn’t	trying	 to	find	out.



Rhonda	and	I	 are	not	without	  Black	women	 friends	 in	this	 city.	 There’s	 Faith,
Staycee,	Melanie,	Kelli.	 But	 friendship	is	 not	the	same	as	history,	just	as	a	bone
is	not	the	same	as	its	marrow.	 These	friends,	 they	tell	 us	that	this	 city—of	 iron
and	steel	and	 cold—is	 better,	 safer	than	where	 we	 come	from.	 They	 imagine
where	we	come	 from	 and	see	Confederate	flags	and	rednecks	and	dusty	 dudes
with	gold	grillz	 rapping	 about	bitches	and	hos.	They	don’t	see	home.
    When	 we	lie	in	bed	at	night	 and	“remember	when,”	Rhonda	doesn’t	see	home
either.	Just	 sepia	moments	 and	 sepia	people,	 artifacts	 frozen	 in	 amber.	 Like
putting	the	well-worn	 photo	 album	back	on	the	shelf,	or	 turning	off	 the	TV	 after
watching	Good	Times	on	TV	 Land.	She	drifts	 off	 to	sleep	so	easily.	Leaving	me
alone	to	fend	off	my	thoughts.
    Last	 night,	 my	 thoughts	won.	 I	 stared	at	 the	ceiling	 and	 thought	 about	my
mother	lying	 in	her	bed,	a	quilt	 and	a	portable	heater	sufficient	 for	 winter	in	 her
world.	I	 haven’t	spoken	to	 her	since	October,	but	even	then	we	pretty	 much	just
checked	in	to	make	sure	the	other	person	was	alive.	 We	talked	about	the	Ladies
Auxiliary	  fish	 fry	 and	the	 hat	she	bought	 for	 Women’s	 Day	 at	church;	 which
elderly	neighbor’s	 son	got	sent	to	prison,	 third	 strike,	for	 selling	drugs;	 whether
or	not	I	 like	 my	job	 at	the	university	 (yes).	And	 then	the	usual	 tension	returned
and	the	regret	we	each	felt—for	calling,	 for	answering—was	palpable.
    On	 these	 rare	calls,	 my	 mother	 never	 asks	about	 Rhonda.	 I	 stared	at	 the
ceiling	and	wondered	 if	my	 mother	still	 refers	 to	Rhonda	as	“some	girl	 she	met
on	the	internet”	 when	she	talks	to	Miss	 Mayretta	and	her	other	friends	 about	us.
She	knows	Rhonda’s	name	because	I	told	her.	I	told	her	everything	about	me	she
claimed	she	didn’t	 know,	an	ignorance	belied	 by	her	questions,	years	of	endless
questions,	about	the	nameless	boys	 who	never	 called,	never	 took	me	 to	prom,
never	gave	her	a	different	reason	to	be	ashamed	of	me.
    My	  mother	knew	Rhonda’s	 name	and	she	refused	to	say	it.	 Refused	to	meet
her.	Refused	to	do	anything	but	pray	for	 my	soul.	As	 I	walked	out	 her	front	door
for	the	last	 time	eight	 months	ago,	she	hurled	 the	words	at	 my	back:	 “Running
off	from	 here	with	some	girl	 you	met	on	the	internet.	Who	raised	you?”
    Leelee,	you’re	 all	I’ve	 got	in	this	world	 .	.	.
    How	 could	my	 mother’s	world	 just	keep	right	on	spinning	without	 me	in	it?
    Maybe	  it	  hadn’t.	 Maybe	  she	 was	 lying	  in	 bed	 thinking	   about	 me	 too,
worrying.	 Maybe.

52
    Rhonda’s	 mother	had	put	her	out	as	a	teenager.	They	hadn’t	spoken	in	twenty
years.	Rhonda	had	couch	surfed	for	a	while,	 turned	eighteen,	moved	to	 the	city,
and	got	a	job	 at	the	post	office.	 She	saved	up	for	 an	apartment	of	 her	own	 and
vowed	never	again	to	be	anywhere	she	wasn’t	wanted.	When	I	met	 her,	we	were
thirty,	 and	she’d	just	 bought	a	house.	We’d	 visited	 back	and	forth	 between	her
town	and	 mine	for	 a	few	 years	until	 I	 got	 the	job	 at	the	university.	 She	 didn’t
hesitate	when	I	asked	her	to	move	here	with	me.
    “You	  are	 home,	LeeLee,”	 she’d	 said.	 And	 at	first	  I	 didn’t	 catch	 what	 she
meant.	Then	I	 did.	 When	we	 first	 moved	here,	I	 believed	she	could	 be	right.	 I
believed	that	we	were	all	the	home	either	of	us	could	ever	need.	Through	the	end
of	a	mild	summer,	and	through	a	gorgeous	red-gold	fall,	I	 believed	it.
    And	  then	 last	 night,	 after	 an	 hour	 or	  so	of	  staring	 at	 the	 ceiling,	 I	  did
something	I	never	 do.	I	woke	 Rhonda	up.	And	 I	 asked	her,	“Do	 you	ever	think
about	us	moving	back	South,	back	home?”
    Earlier	 this	year,	a	cousin	had	told	 Rhonda	that	whenever	people	asked	about
her,	her	mother	 told	them	 she	was	probably	 dead	somewhere,	even	though	the
cousin	had	let	her	know	that	Rhonda	was	alive	and	well.
    In	 the	dark,	 I	 couldn’t	 make	out	Rhonda’s	 face,	but	 in	the	 ensuing	silence	I
imagined	her	blinking	  her	way	 out	of	 the	sleep	fog.	 Then	 she	said,	“Arletha,	 I
already	told	you	where	home	is.	For	me.”
    And	 immediately,	 I	wished	I	could	 take	the	question	back.



Rhonda	leans	the	shovel	against	the	side	 of	the	 house	and	sprinkles	salt	on	 the
cleared	driveway	and	sidewalk.	I	wait	 for	her	inside	the	warm	 car.	With	only	 one
car	and	a	shitty	 mass	transit	 system,	I	 will	 drop	 her	off	 at	 her	clerk	 job	 at	the
courthouse	and	then	 drive	 to	campus.	 On	Fridays,	 I	 teach	an	 afternoon	class,
Black	Feminisms,	so	I	have	a	few	hours	to	get	some	grading	and	prep	done.
    When	  Rhonda	is	 done	 with	 the	 salt,	 she	climbs	  in	 beside	me.	 I	  brush	a
smattering	of	snowflakes	from	 her	locs	and	they	melt	 from	 the	heat	of	my	hand.
I	can’t	 tell	 if	 she	stiffened	at	my	 touch	or	 if	 I	 just	imagined	 it.	Her	 silence	as	I
back	out	of	the	driveway	suggests	the	former.
    “Forecast	 says	 there’s	 another	storm	 coming	  through	 later,”	 I	  say.	“How
many	more	weeks	of	this	shit?”
    “Whatever	 that	groundhog	says,	I	guess,”	Rhonda	says.
    It’s	 slow-going	 down	 the	steep	hills	that	lead	out	 of	our	 neighborhood.	I	fear
the	brakes	locking	up	and	us	coasting	right	 through	 a	stop	sign.	A	bigger	 fear	is
other	drivers,	 probably	natives	 who	slow	 down	 very	little	  if	 at	all	 on	days	like

53
this.	Once	the	roads	are	clear,	it’s	 a	free-for-all.	 But	 I	guess	if	you’ve	 been	here
long	enough,	you	have	more	 confidence	that	the	black	 road	is	just	 road	and	not
black	ice.	Rhonda	and	 I	don’t	 yet	 have	a	critical	 mass	of	data	points	 to	give	us
that	 confidence.	 But	 the	 natives	 don’t	  know	 this,	 of	  course.	They	  ride	 our
bumper,	honk,	 or	swerve	 around	us	 when	we	 go	too	 slowly	 for	 their	 liking.	  I
want	to	hang	a	sign	in	the	back	window	 that	says,	“We	are	not	from	 here.	Please
understand.”
    Rhonda	just	says,	“Fuck	 these	people,”	and	flips	them	off	as	they	whiz	 by	us.
    But	 today’s	ride	into	 the	city	is	fuck-free.	 Rude	drivers	pass	and	honk	without
a	word	from	 Rhonda.	 In	front	 of	 the	courthouse,	I	 lean	over	 to	kiss	 her	before
she	gets	out	of	 the	car,	and	our	 lips	 barely	touch	 before	she’s	gone.	How	 long
had	it	been	since	we’d	done	anything	more	in	bed	than	kiss	and	reminisce?
    But	 the	 kiss,	 such	as	it	 is,	 is	still	  a	kiss.	 And	 I	 wonder	 if	 I	 will	  ever	stop
noticing	and	 cataloging	all	 the	things	we	 do	here	that	we	 didn’t—couldn’t—do
back	home.	 I	 wonder	 if	 that	 catalog	 will	  ever	 grow	 long	 enough	to	 become
enough.	For	me.
    Once	I	 get	to	campus,	it’s	harder	than	usual	to	find	 parking	because	snow	has
been	plowed	into	 some	of	the	spaces.	Eventually	 I	find	 a	spot	 two	blocks	 from
my	office	 on	a	tree-lined	 side	street.	I	brace	myself	for	 the	cold	 and	throw	open
the	car	door.
    I	 step	out	and	my	 feet	slide	from	 under	me	in	 an	instant.	My	 butt	slams	onto
the	patch	of	 ice,	 and	my	 shoulder	and	back	 scrape	against	the	base	of	 the	car
when	I	land.	The	 car	door	blocks	my	 view,	and	my	 first	thought	 is	Does	anyone
see	me?	But	I’m	not	sure	whether	I	want	to	be	seen.
    The	 cold	 seeps	through	 my	 waterproof	 pants	and	pain	 shoots	up	 from	 my
lower	 back	to	 my	 shoulders.	I	 want	 to	 get	up,	 but	I’m	  afraid	 of	 slipping	 and
falling	 again.	 I	 can	hear	people	 walking	 and	 driving	 past.	 I	 could	 call	 out	 to
them.	I	 could	 get	 help.	I	 look	 up	 at	 the	sky,	 which	 is	 gray	 like	 the	branches
overhead.	The	 branches	bend	toward	 me,	 yielding	  beneath	the	weight	  of	 the
snow	piled	along	them.
    A	 thought	crystallizes	 and	takes	hold,	a	thought	I	haven’t	had	in	years,	maybe
a	decade:	I	want	my	mother.
    If	 my	 phone	weren’t	in	 my	purse	in	 the	back	seat	of	the	car,	I	 would	call	 my
mother	right	 this	minute.	My	 mother	 who	had	been	my	 soft	place	to	land.	 Until
she	wasn’t.
    Everything	  hurts,	and	I	 suspect	standing	up	will	  hurt	 even	more.	I	 wince	 at
the	thought	of	walking	 the	two	 blocks	to	my	office.	 Then	I	 tell	myself	 I’m	 being
ridiculous.	Get	up.	 Get	up	get	up	get	up.	I	repeat	this	in	 my	head	and	then	under
my	breath	until	 I	am	on	 my	knees.	I	hoist	 myself	back	into	 the	driver’s	 seat	and

54
slam	the	door	shut.	I	turn	the	car	on	and	the	heat.	I’m	sobbing	now,	and	it’s	as	if
the	sound	belongs	to	someone	else.	Like	the	time	I	woke	up	from	minor	surgery
annoyed	that	there	was	a	woman	nearby	who	wouldn’t	stop	crying,	not	realizing
that	the	woman	was	me.
    It	 hurts	to	reach	back	and	grab	my	purse,	but	I	do	it	anyway.	I	take	out	my
phone	and	pull	up	my	mother’s	number.	I	sit	there	with	my	finger	hovering	over
the	Call	button,	for	forever	it	seems.	But	then	I	scroll	through	the	Recent	Calls
list	and	tap	Rhonda’s	name.	I	try	 to	 get	the	crying	under	control	 before	she
answers,	but	I	can’t.
    “Leelee,	baby,	slow	down,	slow	down,”	she	says.	“I	can’t	understand	what
you’re	saying.	What	happened?”
    “I	 hate	this	fucking	snow!”
    “Okay	.	.	.”
    “I	 hate	the	snow.	I	hate	winter.	I	hate	this	city!	I	don’t	want	to	be	here.”
    Silence.	Rhonda	sighs.	“Where	do	you	want	to	be?”
    “I	 .	.	.	don’t	know.”
    “I	 think	you	do	know.”
    “I	 slipped.”
    “What?”
    “I	 slipped	and	fell	getting	out	of	the	car.	I’m	fine.	But	.	.	.	I	almost	called	my
mother.”
    Silence.	And	then	Rhonda	says,	“Must	be	nice.”
    I	 want	to	 explain	how	it	 was	just	 a	primal	 reaction,	this	urge	to	call	 my
mother.	I	want	to	tell	her	that	she	is	home	too,	that	she	is	now	my	soft	place	to
land,	and	I	am	hers.
    But	nothing	I	 can	say	will	 change	the	fact	of	my	mother-privilege:	I	could
call	my	mother	if	I	wanted	to	and	she	would	answer	and	she	might	even	offer	a
modicum	of	comfort	and	concern,	same	as	she	would	offer	a	stranger.	I	could	get
that,	at	least.	Rhonda	could	not.
    “LeeLee,	if	 you’re	 sure	you’re	fine,”	Rhonda	says,	“I	 have	to	get	back	to
work.”
    Fresh	tears	sting	my	eyes.	“I’m	sure.	Yeah.”
    The	call	drops,	and	I	return	the	phone	to	my	purse.	I	push	through	the	pain
and	get	out	of	the	car	again,	this	time	stepping	over	the	icy	patch.	The	walk	to
the	office	isn’t	 too	 bad,	but	I	 can	feel	a	 bruise	pulsing	across	my	back	and
shoulders.
    By	the	time	my	class	starts,	I’ve	taken	three	Tylenol,	and	I	get	through	it	by
sitting	in	a	chair	in	the	front	of	the	room	instead	of	standing	and	lecturing	like	I
normally	do.	I	 feel	like	maybe	I’m	 moving	a	beat	slower	than	usual.	But	my

55
students,	an	engaged	group	of	twelve	women	and	two	men,	don’t	seem	to	notice.
I	tell	 them	they	 are	the	only	 bright	 spot	in	 an	otherwise	awful	 day.	 I’m	 certain
this	weirds	them	out,	but	I	felt	 like	saying	it.
    Later,	 when	Rhonda	gets	in	 the	car,	she	asks	how	 I’m	 feeling.	 I	tell	 her	I’m
fine,	and	we	make	the	slow	crawl	through	rush-hour	traffic.
    “LeeLee	 .	.	.	I’m	 sorry	for	 what	I	said	earlier.	‘Must	 be	nice.’	”
    “It’s	  okay,	babe.	I	get	it.”
    “Actually,	  it’s	 not	okay.	 Just	because	my	.	.	.	just	because	somebody	hurt	me
doesn’t	make	it	okay	 for	me	to	hurt	 you,	to	not	be	there	the	way	 you	need	me	to
be.”
    I’m	  not	sure	what	to	say.	The	 snow	is	just	starting	 to	come	down	 hard	as	we
enter	our	neighborhood.	 I	 pull	 the	car	 into	 the	driveway	 and	push	through	 the
pain	again	 to	 slowly	 ease	out	 of	 the	 car.	When	 my	 feet	 are	 steady,	I	 notice
Rhonda	standing	next	to	the	driver’s	side	door	with	 her	car	keys	in	her	hand.
    “Head	 on	upstairs,	and	I’ll	 see	you	in	a	few,”	she	says.
    “Where	 are	you	going?	It’s	 snowing.”
    “I	 know.	 I’ll	 be	all	right.”
    “But	 where	are	you	going?”
    Rhonda	 shakes	her	head.	“Just	 go	in	 the	house	and	 get	yourself	 in	 a	warm
bath.	Please?”
    I	 go	inside,	 run	the	bath,	and	try	 not	to	worry.	 Our	 tub	is	the	claw-foot	  kind,
the	kind	 we’d	 had	in	 my	 house	growing	 up.	Rhonda	thinks	 I	 chose	this	 house
because	of	the	tub,	and	she	might	be	right.	There	were	houses	in	better	shape	and
in	better	 neighborhoods	than	this	 one,	but	 only	 this	one	had	 a	claw-foot	 tub.	 I
sink	down,	 letting	 the	 water	cover	 my	 back	and	 shoulders,	letting	 my	 eyelids
close.
    I	 guess	this	 is	how	 Rhonda	felt	 the	 night	 of	the	 first	 snow.	I	 was	out	 in	 it,
driving,	and	she	was	at	home,	worried.	She	had	stayed	home	from	work	 that	day
to	wait	for	 the	electrician	 to	come	and	replace	some	outlets	in	the	house.	Traffic
was	awful	because	of	the	snow	and	an	accident,	so	by	the	time	I	got	home,	it	had
been	dark	for	a	while.	 Rhonda	had	been	torn	between	staying	on	the	phone	with
me	to	 know	 I	was	 safe	and	hanging	 up	so	 I	 wouldn’t	 be	 distracted.	Then	 my
phone	died	and	that	dilemma	was	solved.
    Now	 my	fully	 charged	phone	rests	on	the	floor	next	to	the	tub.
    I	  distract	 myself	 with	  a	 childhood	 game:	 I	 soap	 up	my	  hands	and	 blow
bubbles	using	my	 fingers	in	 the	“okay”	 sign	 position	 as	a	makeshift	wand.	The
pain	in	my	 back	and	shoulders	begins	to	 subside.	I	imagine	 it	disappearing	into
the	water	mixed	in	with	 the	soap	residue.
    Eventually	  I	doze	off.	 I	 wake	up	 off	 and	on	to	 add	hot	water	 and	check	my

56
phone.	At	 one	point,	there’s	 a	text	 from	Rhonda:	 On	my	way.	 I	text	 back	Love
you.	No	reply.
    When	 I	wake	up	again,	Rhonda	is	 standing	next	to	the	tub	holding	 one	of	the
oversized	T-shirts	I	sleep	in.
    “Your	  back	looks	like	 you’ve	 been	in	a	fight	 with	 a	bear	.	.	 .	and	lost.	Come
on,”	she	says.	“I	 have	something	for	 you	downstairs.”	 She’s	changed	out	of	 her
work	clothes	and	into	 a	strapless	sundress	I	haven’t	seen	since	before	we	moved
here.	I	dry	off	and	follow	 her	downstairs.
    I	 smell	it	 before	I	see	it.	The	pepper	hits	my	 nose	first,	and	then	the	full	 array
of	aromas:	onions,	peppers,	Old	Bay,	Zatarain’s	crab	boil	seasoning.
    Grocery	 store	bags	litter	 the	floor	 and	counters.	The	kitchen	 table	is	covered
in	newspapers	that	Rhonda	must’ve	bought	at	the	store.	My	mother	always	saved
old	newspapers	to	cover	 the	picnic	 table	 in	the	 backyard.	And	 just	 like	 on	my
mother’s	table,	 there	are	little	 bowls	 of	melted	 butter,	a	bottle	 of	Louisiana	 hot
sauce,	and	a	pitcher	of	sweet	tea.
    On	 the	stove,	the	 stockpot	is	 full	 of	 roiling,	 bright-red	 water,	a	tiny,	 furious
ocean	full	of	snow	crab	legs,	potatoes,	and	ears	of	corn.
    We’ve	 tried	 before	to	get	live	blue	 crabs	at	Wholey’s,	the	fresh	seafood	place
everyone	recommends,	but	their	shipment	comes	in	early	Monday	 mornings	and
they	sell	out	within	 minutes.
    I	 turn	to	 Rhonda.	She	smiles	and	throws	her	arms	out	wide.	 “They’re	 frozen,
but	the	best	cure	we	got	for	the	winter	blues.”
    Just	then,	I	catch	on	to	the	song	playing	 on	Rhonda’s	iPod:	“Summertime”	 by
DJ	Jazzy	Jeff	and	the	Fresh	Prince.	I	 two-step	my	way	 into	Rhonda’s	 arms,	and
we	swing	each	other	around	and	around	the	kitchen	until	 the	crabs	are	ready	and
our	faces	are	damp	from	the	moist,	salty	air.
    Rhonda	 fills	  an	aluminum	 pan	 with	 crabs	and	 sets	it	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the
table.	I	pour	us	some	tea.
    “Not	  that	you	need	my	permission,”	Rhonda	says	as	she	joins	me	at	the	table,
“but	it’s	 okay	 with	 me	if	 you	want	 to	call	 your	mother.	I	 mean,	don’t	 let	me	be
the	reason	you	don’t	 call	 her.	And	 maybe	you	want	 to	go	 see	her.	Spend	some
time	with	 her.	She	calls,	not	much,	but	that	means	she	is	leaving	space	for	you	in
her	life.”
    I	 try	to	detect	any	trace	of	resignation	or	martyrdom	 beneath	her	words,	but	as
is	always	the	case,	what	Rhonda	says	is	exactly	what	she	means.
    “Babe,”	  I	 say,	 “the	 space	my	 mother	has	 left	 for	 me	isn’t	  big	 enough	for
two.”
    Rhonda	nods,	and	we	dig	in.
    Outside,	 snow	blankets	 our	deck.	 It	 will	 fall	  all	 night,	and	 tomorrow,	 we’ll

57
again	do	its	bidding.

58
             HOW	    TO	  MAKE	     LOVE	     TO	  A	 PHYSICIST






HOW	DO	you	make	love	to	a	physicist?	You	do	it	on	Pi	Day—pi	is	a	constant,
also	irrational—but	the	groundwork	is	laid	months	in	advance.	First	you	must
meet	him	in	passing	at	a	STEAM	conference.	As	a	middle	school	art	teacher,
you	are	there	to	ensure	the	A(rts)	are	truly	represented	and	not	lost	amid	the
giants	of	Science,	Technology,	Engineering,	Math.	But	as	a	Black	woman,	you
are	there	playing	Count	the	 Negroes,	as	you	do	at	 every	conference.	He	is
number	twelve,	at	a	conference	of	hundreds.	On	the	first	day	of	the	conference,
you	notice	him	coming	down	the	convention	center	escalator	as	you	ride	up.	You
try	to	guess	which	letter	of	the	acronym	he	is	there	to	represent.	His	face	and
baby	dreads	give	you	equal	parts	“poet”	and	“high	school	math	teacher.”
    On	the	second	day	of	the	conference,	you	see	him	again	at	a	breakout	session,
“Arts	 Integration	and	Global	Citizenry.”	 He’s	chatting	with	 the	presenter—a
sista,	number	thirteen—before	the	session	begins.	From	what	you	overhear,	you
glean	that	they	know	each	other	from	their	under-grad	days	in	Atlanta	in	the
early	nineties.	They	have	a	lot	of	people	in	 common	at	their	respective	alma
maters.	They	promise	to	catch	up	again	before	the	 conference	is	over.	You
notice	she’s	wearing	a	wedding	ring,	and	he	is	not.
    As	 you’re	leaving	the	 breakout	session,	he	notices	you	noticing	him.	His
smile	is	brilliant;	you	smile	back.	He	falls	in	step	with	you,	extends	his	hand,	and
introduces	himself.	He	says	“Eric	Turman,”	but	you	hear	“Erick	Sermon.”	And
your	eyes	widen	and	then	narrow	because	you	think	he’s	joking,	in	a	weirdly
esoteric	way.
    “No,	Eric	Turman,”	he	says	again,	laughing.	“Not	the	guy	from	EPMD.”
    “Got	it,”	 you	say.	“I’m	Lyra	James.	Not	to	be	confused	with	Rick	James.”
    Eric	chuckles.	“But	often	confused	with	Lyra,	home	to	one	of	the	brightest
stars	in	the	night	sky.”
    The	compliment	takes	you	by	surprise,	and	you’re	probably	doing	a	shitty	job
of	hiding	it.	“So	you’re	.	.	.	a	science	teacher?”
    He	is	not	a	science	teacher,	nor	is	he	a	poet.	He’s	a	physicist	and	chair	of	the
education	programs	committee	for	the	American	Physics	Society.
    You	make	small	talk	about	“Arts	Integration	and	Global	Citizenry.”	He	asks
what	brings	you	to	the	conference	and	you	tell	him	you	teach	middle	school	art

59
—sculpting,	 printmaking,	 painting,	 fiber	 arts,	ceramics.	He	asks	if	 you	will	  tell
him	more	 over	 lunch.	 And	 you	do.	 And	 then	the	 conversation	continues	 over
dinner—you	 learn	what	 the	chair	 of	the	 education	programs	committee	 for	 the
American	 Physics	Society	 does—and	then	 in	 the	bar	 of	 the	conference	hotel,
over	drinks.	And	 then	on	a	sofa	in	the	lobby.	You	 each	share	your	top	five	MCs.
You	debate	Scarface	vs.	Rakim	for	number	one.
    You	 notice	 his	thick	 eyelashes,	large	hands,	and	a	little	scar	next	to	 his	right
eyebrow.	When	he	lifts	 his	newsboy	cap	a	few	times	to	scratch	his	head,	you	see
the	baby	dreads	are	neat	and	well	moisturized.
    He	 tells	 you	 about	his	 job,	 the	 one	that	 pays	the	 bills,	 where	 he	develops
astrophysics	 and	 cosmology	  theories,	 and	 conducts	  research	 to	 test	 those
theories.	“I	 aspire	to	be	an	astronaut	as	a	side	hustle,	but	 NASA	 won’t	 return	 a
brotha’s	calls.”	He	shrugs.	“What	 about	you?”
    “Me?”	  you	say.	“Oh,	I	 just	have	the	one	job.”
    “And	  your	aspirations?”
    You	 take	a	deep	breath	and	spill	your	dreams.	“You	know	 that	school	LeBron
James	started?	I	want	to	start	 one	like	 that.	A	 bunch	of	 them,	actually,	 all	over
the	country.	But	I’ll	  start	with	 one,	serving	entire	families.	 That’s	really	 the	key,
you	know?”
    He	 knows.	And	 then	before	you	know	 it,	 it’s	 after	midnight,	 and	you’re	 both
still	 wearing	 your	  conference	lanyards,	 and	 together,	 you	 are	 solving	 all	  of
public	 education’s	  problems,	 but	  for	  want	 of	  an	 end	 to	  systemic	 racism,
abolishment	of	 the	current	system	of	 school	 funding,	 and	a	few	 billion	 dollars.
Eric	  has	 pulled	   out	  his	 phone,	  made	  a	 few	   calculations,	  recorded	 the
recommendations	you’ve	  given	 him—of	  artists,	 works	  of	 art,	 books,	 public
school	advocacy	programs.	He	is	curious	and	he’s	listening.
    At	 2:13	a.m.,	he	says,	“Well,	 you	 are	refreshing.”	And	 you	feel	 anything	but,
because	those	French	 75s	 you	 had	at	 the	 bar	 have	 made	you	 drowsy.	  And
because	it’s	2:13.	 But	 you	want	 him	 to	keep	talking,	  to	keep	listening.	 Maybe
invite	him	 to	come	up?	No,	too	 soon.	You	 don’t	think	 he’s	 a	serial	killer;	 that’s
not	it.	It’s	 that	you	don’t	 want	him	 to	think	 you’re	that	kind	 of	woman.	 The	kind
your	mother	warned	you	not	to	be,	so	you	have	not	been.	You	are	forty-two.
    Maybe	  ask	 him	  to	  meet	 for	  breakfast	 in	  the	 morning,	  then?	  No,	 too
presumptuous.
    Your	 eyes	must’ve	 glazed	over	as	you	 debated	yourself,	because	he	says,	“I
better	let	you	get	some	rest.	I’ve	really	enjoyed	talking	 to	you.”
    And	 you	both	stand	and	stretch.	But	then	you	just	stand	there,	looking	 at	each
other,	not	leaving.
    “I	  hope	I’m	 not	being	 too	presumptuous,”	he	 begins,	“but	 would	you	 like	 to

60
meet	for	breakfast?”

How	do	 you	make	 love	to	a	physicist?	 On	the	flight	 home	from	 the	conference,
you	tally	all	 the	things	you	have	in	common:
	
•	You’re	 tired	of	people	asking	why	you’re	 still	 single.
•	You	care	about	children,	but	don’t	 want	any	of	your	own.
•	Fall	is	your	favorite	 season.
•	 You’re	 not	 a	 fan	 of	 Tyler	  Perry,	 and	you’re	  tired	 of	 people	 insisting	 you
  become	one.
•	You	both	have	terrible	 vision	 and	had	to	navigate	your	childhood	being	 teased.
  (“Your	 glasses	so	thick,	you	can	see	the	future”	was	a	perennial	favorite.)
•	The	first	Aunt	 Viv	 is	your	favorite.
•	In	the	case	of	Prince	vs.	Michael	Jackson,	you	got	Prince.
	
    You	 took	all	 your	meals	with	 him	for	 the	rest	of	the	conference	and	talked	for
hours	and	hours	but	left	so	many	things	 unsaid.	Like	how	 you	had	a	high	school
sweetheart	and	a	 college	sweetheart	 and	a	grad	 school	 sweetheart.	How	 men
chose	you,	and	 you	 devoted	years	to	 the	 relationships,	but	 never	 quite	felt	  at
home	in	your	 body	with	 them—an	 understanding	your	therapist	has	helped	you
to	articulate.	 You	 didn’t	  tell	 him	 how	 you	 stayed	until	  those	men	decided	 to
leave	you	 for	 women	more	 at	home	 in	 their	bodies,	 more	sure	of	 themselves,
prettier.
    You	  didn’t	  tell	 him	 that,	 as	corny	 and	 clichéd	 as	 it	 sounds,	you’re	  more
accustomed	to	speaking	through	your	art.	Paintings	and	sketches	you	framed	and
gave	as	gifts,	or	framed	and	hung	in	your	own	house.	But	these	days,	you	mostly
just	pour	yourself	into	 your	students.	It’s	safer	that	way.
    You	 didn’t	  tell	 him	 how,	 one	by	 one	over	 the	decades,	you’d	 lost	 all	 your
good	 girlfriends	  to	  marriage	 and	 motherhood,	 your	  friendships	  reduced	 to
children’s	birthday	 parties	and	the	rare	Girls’	Night	 Out.
    You	 didn’t	  tell	 him	 that	aside	from	 the	 occasional	online	 dating	 fling,	 plus
some	fumbling	 around	 with	 a	childhood	 friend	 when	 he’s	 between	women	he
would	actually	date,	you’re	 celibate	for	months	at	a	time.
    Later	 your	 therapist	will	 ask	 why	any	 of	those	things	 needed	to	be	said	to	a
man	you	just	met.	You	 know	she	has	a	point,	but	you	have	no	answer	other	than
that	maybe	 you’re	  the	kind	  of	 woman	 who	 should	 come	 with	 a	 warning,	 a
disclaimer.
    If	 Eric	 had	withheld	even	a	fraction	 of	the	things	you	 withheld,	 that	would	be
a	lot	 of	stuff.	 By	 the	 time	 your	plane	 touches	down,	you’ve	  resolved	that	you

61
will	 never	know	the	real	him,	or	 if	he	was	even	sincere.	At	baggage	claim,	you’ll
decide	that	it	had	just	 been	the	excitement	of	 the	moment,	that	he’d	 get	back	to
his	life	 and	 forget	 all	 about	you.	 And	 you	 should	try	 to	 do	the	 same.	So	you
delete	his	number	from	your	phone.
    That	  night,	 when	 you	  are	back	  home	in	  your	 own	  bed,	 you	 send	 your
colleagues	in	 the	 math	 and	science	 departments	a	 long	 email	 detailing	  your
desire	to	collaborate	with	them	in	the	coming	 school	year.

How	 do	you	 make	love	 to	a	 physicist?	 You	 take	out	your	 charcoal	and	sketch
his	face	 from	 memory.	 You	 tell	 your	 therapist	 about	 him	 and	how	 he	 didn’t
forget	you,	but	you’re	 allowing	 his	phone	calls	to	go	unanswered	and	leaving	his
texts	on	“read.”	Because	you’re	not	good	at	stuff	like	 this.
    “Stuff	  like	what?”	 your	therapist	asks.
    “Men.	 It	 never	works	out.”
    “But	 you’ve	 sketched	his	face.	And	told	me	about	him.	Why?”
    “Because	we	had	a	great	moment.	But	that’s	all	 it	was.”
    “Then	 why	is	 he	still	texting	 you?”
    “Just	 being	nice.”
    She	tilts	 her	head	in	that	Girl,	please	way	she	does	right	before	she	challenges
you.	She	asks,	“Is	this	another	example	of	you	talking	 yourself	 out	of	potentially
good	things?”

How	do	 you	make	 love	to	a	physicist?	 You	 continue	reading	his	text	messages,
even	though	you	don’t	respond	to	them.	He’s	been	texting	 for	weeks,	undaunted.
He	asks	how	you’re	 doing,	tells	 you	how	 he’s	doing	 and	what	he’s	 doing.	He’s
presented	his	proposal	to	 his	board	for	 an	arts	 and	sciences	summer	camp	and
family	retreat.	He	thanks	you	for	 the	inspiration.
    One	 Sunday	after	church	while	 you	 are	at	your	mother’s	 for	 dinner,	he	texts
you	a	picture	of	a	deep	orange	and	red	sunset	with	the	caption,	Best	scattering	of
light	 rays	ever.	You	 don’t	 realize	you’re	 smiling	 until	 your	 mother	asks,	“Why
are	you	smiling?”	  She	sounds	more	 suspicious	than	curious.	 And	 you	 wonder
when	she	last	saw	 you	smiling,	  this	woman	 who	 insists	on	 sending	you	 home
every	week	with	 enough	leftovers	for	ten	people	then	asks	when	you’re	 going	to
lose	some	weight	so	you	can	meet	a	man.
    When	 you	go	back	to	school	 to	set	up	your	classroom	for	 the	new	year,	there
is	a	package	from	Eric	in	your	 box	in	the	faculty	 mail	room.	You	 wonder	how	he
knew	 where	 to	 find	 you,	 then	 you	 remember	 the	name	 of	 your	  school	was
printed	 on	  your	  conference	 lanyard.	  He	 has	 sent	 you	  Overview:	  A	  New
Perspective	of	 Earth,	 a	 collection	 of	 more	 than	 two	 hundred	 stunning,	 high-

62
definition	 satellite	 photos	 of	 Earth	that	 focus	on	 how	 people	have	 altered	the
planet.	The	  collection	 is	 named	 for	  the	 “overview	  effect,”	  the	 sensation	of
overwhelm,	 awe,	and	new	 perspective	astronauts	report	upon	 looking	 down	 at
Earth	as	a	whole.	An	aerial	view	 of	 a	planned	community	in	 suburban	Florida	is
a	colorful	  mosaic.	 A	 shot	 of	 retired	 military	  and	 government	 aircraft	 in	  the
aircraft	 boneyard	at	 Davis-Monthan	 Air	  Force	Base	resembles	a	 collection	 of
Native	American	arrowheads.	Tulip	 fields	in	 the	Netherlands	look	like	fiber	 art.
    You	 display	the	book	 prominently	 in	your	classroom	library.	 You	 send	Eric	a
text	message:	Thank	you	for	the	book.	It’s	wonderful.
    Then	 you	respond	to	 his	last	 text,	which	 was	about	 his	board	approving	 his
summer	camp	proposal	 with	 full	 funding.	 Congratulations	  on	getting	 funding!
you	write.	And	 he	replies,	You’re	welcome!	And	thank	you.
    That	 night,	 you	read	Overview	 cover	to	 cover.	And	 the	next	 night,	you	 start
painting	again.	You	stay	up	late,	getting	your	 rhythm	back.
    The	 weekend	comes,	 and	you	 call	 him,	 because	you’re	 really	 not	a	 fan	 of
texting	anyway,	and	because	maybe	it’s	time.	He	answers	right	away.	He	doesn’t
ask	what	 took	 you	 so	 long.	 He’s	 happy	 to	 hear	from	 you.	 And	  you’re	 both
breathless.
    You	 talk.	 About	 his	summer	camp	proposal,	about	what	 you’re	 each	making
for	 dinner	 and	 what	 your	 weekend	 plans	are.	 You	 talk	 about	 the	 new	 Toni
Morrison	documentary	and	what	she	meant	to	each	of	you.	You	talk	about	loss.
    You	 continue	 to	talk	 daily,	 to	 have	virtual	 dates,	thanks	to	video	 calls.	 And
they’re	 better	than	any	 real	date	 you’ve	 been	on.	You	 binge-watch	 TV	 shows
together,	cook	together,	drink	 wine,	 and	watch	each	other	do	 laundry.	You	 talk
for	days	and	nights,	and	nights	that	turn	into	mornings.
    Sometimes	 you	 wake	 before	 dawn,	 and	he’s	 still	  there,	 his	 sleeping	face
filling	 your	phone	screen.	Then	you	settle	again,	your	breathing	in	 sync	with	his,
and	you	drift	off.

How	do	 you	make	 love	to	a	 physicist?	 Ask	him	 if	he	believes	in	 God.	Ask	him
if	he	thinks	it’s	 possible	to	reconcile	science	and	religion.
    “Physics	 principles	 support	 the	notion	 of	 God	because	they	tell	 us	that	 you
can’t	create	something	from	nothing,”	 he	says.	“Something	must	have	created	all
of	this,	unless	you	believe	that	 we	have	always	existed,	that	there’s	no	big	 bang,
no	beginning	point	 to	the	universe.	I	don’t	 know	 what	the	mechanism	is,	but	it’s
some	higher	power.	All	 that	energy	had	to	come	from	somewhere.”
    “Oh.	 I	assumed	you	were	an	atheist.”
    “Even	 Einstein	wasn’t	 an	atheist,”	he	says.	“He	talked	about	God	all	 the	time.
Now,	he	didn’t	 believe	in	 a	god	that	was	concerned	with	human	behavior,	which

63
is	the	 church’s	 obsession	 and	the	 reason	it	 uses	 guilt	 and	 shame	to	 enforce
Christianity.”
    “You	  don’t	think	 God	cares	how	we	treat	each	other	and	the	planet?”
    “I	  think	 that’s	 the	 most	important	 thing.	 But	 human	 beings	are	 capable	of
doing	that	outside	 of	the	purview	 of	 the	church.	 I’ve	 studied	the	Bible	 cover	to
cover.	So	much	hinges	on	translation	and	interpretation.	 I	grew	 up	Catholic,	and
I	love	 the	ritual	 of	 it	 all.	 But	I’ve	  come	to	understand	that	 belief	 in	a	 personal
god	is	not	essential.	Not	for	me.”
    You	  ask,	“What	 about	 heaven?”	But	 what	 you	 really	 want	 to	 ask	is	 What
about	hell?
    “What	 about	it?”
    Heaven—getting	 into	it,	 avoiding	the	alternative—is	 the	whole	point	 of	living
right,	 isn’t	 it?	 Your	  mother	speaks	longingly	  of	 Judgment	 Day	 and	the	 final
accounting	of	who’s	 allowed	past	the	pearly	gates,	certain	that	God’s	accounting
will	 mirror	 hers.	“It	  will	 be	a	very	 small	 number,”	she’s	 fond	of	 saying.	“Only
those	who	walk	the	straight	and	narrow	path	shall	see	the	face	of	God.”
    And	  you	realize	 that	 if	 God	 were	 to	welcome	 everyone	 into	 heaven,	your
mother	would	abandon	Christianity	 immediately.
    You	  don’t	  know	  how	  to	 answer	 Eric’s	  question	  about	 heaven	 without
sounding	 like	 you’re	  quoting	 a	 fairy	  tale	 about	 good	 and	 evil,	  reward	 and
punishment.
    You	 take	a	moment	to	 soak	it	all	 in.	You	 think	 of	your	 mother	and	the	small
version	of	 God	she	clings	 to,	the	 only	 version	you’ve	 ever	 known	and	 the	one
you’re	afraid	 to	let	go	of.	 Then	you	think	 of	how	 your	daily	 calls	with	 Eric	are	a
kind	of	 ritual,	 and	 how	when	 you	 finally	 meet	up	 again,	it	 could	 be	a	kind	 of
consecration.	You	are	thrilled	 and	terrified	 at	the	prospect.	Terrified	  because	all
you’ve	ever	known	of	 religion	 is	that	it	demands	more	than	you	can	ever	give.
    “I	 guess	a	person	could	have	heaven	right	here	on	earth,”	you	say.
    “I	  do,”	 Eric	 says.	“Every	 time	 I	see	you	 smile,	or	 hear	you	 talk	about	 your
students.	And	even	when	you’re	quiet	and	painting	or	just	.	.	.	folding	 towels.”
    “Heaven	 is	me	folding	 towels?”
    “Okay	 .	.	.	maybe	it’s	 you	folding	 fitted	sheets.	Miracles	abound.”

How	do	 you	make	 love	to	 a	physicist?	 You	 invite	him	 to	visit	 in	the	spring	 for
your	 first	 solo	 art	show	 at	 a	local	  gallery.	 It	 will	  be	a	 collection	 of	 colorful
abstract	paintings	  influenced	 by	  your	 reading	  of	 Overview,	  Rumi,	 and	 the
Qur’an,	and	your	 rereading	of	 Morrison’s	 Song	of	Solomon.	 You	title	 the	show
Whatever	I	 Say	about	Love,	a	 line	from	 Rumi’s	  The	Masnavi.	You’re	  painting
now	more	than	you	ever	have.

64
    The	 show	 is	 still	  three	 months	away,	 and	 already	 you’re	 imagining	  your
mother	wandering	around	 the	gallery	 muttering	 under	her	breath,	“What	 is	 that
supposed	to	be?”	the	way	she	did	 when	you	lived	 at	home	and	she’d	 barge	into
your	bedroom/studio	 unannounced.	You	never	gave	 her	your	framed	 work	 as	a
gift.	You	 stuck	with	perfume	and	jewelry.
    You	 ask	your	 therapist	if	 it	 would	be	wrong	 not	to	 invite	 your	mother	 to	the
show.	She	answers	your	question	with	a	question:	“Do	you	want	her	there?”
    “If	  I’m	 honest,	the	answer	is	no.”
    “Then	 don’t	 invite	her.”
    You’re	 silent,	 and	after	a	moment,	she	asks,	“How	do	you	feel	when	you	 hear
me	say	that?”
    “Frightened.”
    “What	 are	you	afraid	of?”
    “Everything.”

How	do	 you	make	 love	to	a	physicist?	 You	 start	to	have	sex	dreams	about	him,
very,	very	detailed	sex	dreams.	For	the	first	 time	in	 your	life,	 you	crave	sex.	For
the	first	 time,	 you	 are	 curious	 about	a	 man’s	 body,	 about	how	 you	 will	  feel
above	and	beneath	him.
    But	 then	 you	remember	 the	sex	you’ve	 had,	and	 how	you	 had	to	 disappear
into	yourself	 to	endure	it.	How	 you	thought	 about	your	stomach	and	your	thighs
the	whole	time,	 wishing	 you	were	 someone	else,	imagining	he	was	wishing	 the
same.	How	sex,	for	you,	 was	just	a	way	 to	be	touched,	a	means	to	an	end.	How
all	you	ever	really	wanted	was	to	be	touched.	But	men	always	want	more.
    Eric,	 like	 any	man,	 would	 eventually	want	 more,	more	than	 you	could	 give.
And	he	would	be	disappointed,	probably	disgusted,	with	 you	for	leading	him	 on.
    So	 you	 do	one	of	 the	 hardest	things	you’ve	  ever	had	to	 do:	 you	delete	 his
number	from	your	phone	again,	but	this	time,	you	 also	block	it.

How	 do	you	 make	 love	 to	 a	physicist?	  Forget	your	 home	training.	 Ditch	  the
girdles	your	 mother	 taught	you	 to	 wear	to	 harness	your	belly,	  your	butt,	 your
thighs,	your	freedom.	 God	forbid	 something	jiggle.	 God	forbid	 you	 are	soft	and
unbridled.
    Sleep	naked.
    This	 is	 all	 your	 therapist’s	idea.	 At	 first	 you’re	 skeptical	 and	resistant.	But
when	she	asks	you	 to	just	 humor	her,	 because	what’s	the	downside,	 you	 can’t
think	of	one.
    You	 take	long,	 hot,	soapy	showers,	catching	the	water	 in	your	 mouth	until	 it
spills	out	 the	corners.	You	 rinse,	 step	out,	and	 rub	lavender	 oil	 into	 your	still-

65
damp	skin,	 from	  your	 scalp	to	 the	 bottoms	 of	 your	 feet.	 It’s	 winter,	  so	you
bundle	up	beneath	blankets	 and	explore.	Use	 your	hands	to	 study	the	contours
and	curves	 of	 your	  body,	 your	 topography.	 To	 study	 them	 as	 fact,	 without
judgment.	Pleasure	yourself,	 but	slowly,	  to	savor	and	discover.	 Every	 morning
and	every	night.
    On	 the	weekends,	you	sleep	in,	then	wake	up	and	cook	 hearty	comfort	 meals
from	scratch—no	 boxes,	no	cans,	no	 fast	food.	 Crab	and	kale	 omelets,	roasted
red	  potatoes,	  seafood	  linguini,	   ginger	   turmeric	   butternut	  squash	  soup,
caramelized	 Brussels	sprouts,	 roasted	 beet	 salad	 with	  goat	 cheese,	coconut
curries,	beef	Wellington.
    You	 cook	and	paint	and	nap	and	stroke	yourself	to	sleep	at	night.
    And	 as	your	 body	begins	 to	feel	 like	 a	home,	your	 courage	grows.	It	 grows
bigger	than	your	 mother’s	 chastisement	in	the	parking	 lot	 after	service	the	 first
time	you	go	 to	church	unbound.	She	asks	why	you	 aren’t	wearing	 a	girdle,	why
you	aren’t	sucking	 in	the	way	she	taught	you	thirty	 years	ago,	and	how	dare	you
come	into	 the	 house	of	  the	Lord	  that	 way.	 Your	 mother,	 who	 complains	 of
women	 in	 the	 church	  nowadays	committing	   the	 sin	 of	 visible	  panty	 lines,
reminds	you	that	she	raised	you	better	than	this.
    And	 you	say,	“I’m	  tired	of	 holding	 my	breath.”	 Then	you	promise	you	 won’t
come	to	church	that	way	 again.	And	you	 keep	your	word	 because	you	won’t	 go
to	church	again	at	all.

How	do	 you	make	 love	to	a	physicist?	 You	 send	him	an	apology	in	the	form	 of
one	of	the	many	 sketches	of	him	 you	have	 made,	in	a	silver	 frame.	 He	doesn’t
respond	right	 away.	 And	 you’re	  okay	 with	 that;	 you	 knew	 the	 risk	 you	 ran,
disappearing	the	way	you	did.	 But	when	he	does	reach	out,	you’re	both	 quiet	on
the	phone	for	 a	long	time	 before	you	 say,	“It’s	  just	something	I	 had	to	 do.	For
me.	I	didn’t	 have	the	words	for	it	then,	and	I’m	 not	entirely	sure	I	do	now.”
    “I	  need	you	to	use	your	words,	though,”	 he	says.	“If	 we’re	going	 to	do	this,	 I
need	you	to	 try.	 And	 I	 promise	 I	 won’t	 ever	 do	anything	 to	 make	you	 regret
trying.”
    You	 try	 to	remember	the	last	time	 a	man	made	you	a	promise.	You	 decide	it
doesn’t	even	matter.	This	man	is	making	you	one	now.	That’s	what	 matters.

How	do	 you	make	love	 to	a	physicist?	 On	March	 13,	the	night	before	he	comes
to	town,	 you	 stay	 up	 late,	taking	 turns	 playing	 old-school	 hip	 hop	 and	 R&B
music	videos,	talking	 smack	about	who’s	 going	to	 get	served	at	your	dance-off,
Googling	  your	  astrological	   compatibility—your	    Virgo	  to	  his	  Aquarius—
laughing,	giddy.

66
    Then	 Pi	Day	arrives	 and	you	shower	while	 he’s	en	route	to	 the	airport.	Once
he’s	in	the	air,	his	six-hour	flight	 (including	 layover)	 feels	to	you	like	 an	eternity.
His	walk	 from	 the	 plane	to	your	 car	at	 curbside	takes	as	long	 as	a	pilgrimage.
You	imagine	 him	kissing	 the	western	wall	 of	 Sbarro,	weeping	at	 the	Cinnabon,
leaving	an	offering	at	the	feet	of	Auntie	 Anne.
    After	  he	drops	his	luggage	into	 your	trunk	 and	closes	it,	 he	turns	to	you	 and
says,	“Finally.”	  And	 you	 say,	“Finally.”	   And	 he	draws	 you	into	 his	 arms	and
kisses	you.	His	lips	are	as	soft	as	you	thought	they	would	be.
    At	  your	 place,	 you	 make	omelets	 and	home	 fries,	 which	 he	 devours.	 His
appetite	is	 magnificent.	  Then,	 even	though	 you’re	  both	 exhausted	and	 sleep
deprived,	adrenaline	 kicks	 in	 and	you	 win	 the	dance-off	 by	 a	mile.	 This	 man
cannot	dance	to	save	his	life,	despite	talking	much	shit.
    “What’s	  my	prize?”	you	 ask.
    Eric	 pulls	you	 down	to	the	couch	and	kisses	you	again.	“Oh,	so	we	both	win,”
you	say.	 “Here’s	 a	participation	  trophy.”	 You	 go	 in	 for	 more	kisses,	 and	you
think,	God,	let	him	be	forever.
    You	 both	 begin	to	 doze.	At	 some	point	you	 wake	up,	 with	 your	head	in	 his
lap	 and	 your	 mind	  in	  overdrive.	 You	  think	  about	 your	  art	 show	 opening
tomorrow.	You	 imagine	looking	 at	him	 from	across	the	gallery	 floor	as	he	looks
at	your	work;	introducing	 him	 to	your	girlfriends,	 your	colleagues,	your	students.
And	your	mother.	 You	think	 that	even	if	today	and	tomorrow	 were	all	there	was,
that	would	 be	okay.	 But	 then	you	 hear	your	therapist’s	 voice	 asking	what	 you
feel,	not	 think,	 right	 now.	 And	  you	struggle	 at	 first	 to	 find	 the	 words	 before
settling	on	warm,	hopeful,	joyous,	full.
    Eric	  strokes	your	 furrowed	 brows	 until	 your	 face	relaxes.	 You	 say,	“Rumi
said,	‘Lovers	don’t	 finally	 meet	somewhere.	They’re	in	 each	other	all	along.’	Do
you	believe	that?”
    “I	  don’t	 know,”	 he	says,	then	 yawns.	“Sounds	 like	 a	mystic’s	 take	on	fated
love,	and	I	don’t	believe	 in	fate.”
    You	 deflate	a	little.	 You	 want	him	to	 be	the	one	you’ve	been	waiting	 for,	and
you	want	him	 to	feel	the	inevitability	  of	you	 as	well.	You	want	 to	be	his	default,
not	an	option.	You	want	the	promises	of	a	new	religion.
    You	  chide	yourself	 for	 walking	  too	far	 ahead—for	 regressing	into	 eighties
song	lyrics	territory	 so	soon.
    But	 then	 he	says,	“The	 supermassive	black	 hole	at	 the	center	of	 the	 Milky
Way	recently	 sparked	seventy-five	times	brighter	 over	the	 course	of	a	two-hour
period,	and	twice	as	bright	as	it’s	ever	been	in	the	twenty	years	astronomers	have
been	monitoring	it.”
    By	 now,	 you’re	 used	to	him	 talking	 science,	but	you’re	 not	 sure	where	he’s

67
going	with	this.
    “One	  theory,”	 he	continues,	 “is	 that	 the	 event	was	 caused	by	a	 star	about
fifteen	 times	bigger	 than	 the	Sun	 getting	 close	to	 the	edge	of	 the	 black	 hole,
disturbing	 some	 gases,	 heating	 things	 up,	  increasing	 the	 infrared	  radiation
coming	from	 the	 edge.	But	 get	this:	 we	observed	that	 star	getting	 close	to	 the
black	hole	about	a	year	before	we	observed	the	effects	on	the	black	hole.”
    “That	 shows	just	 how	vast	the	 universe	is,	how	 enormous	the	distance,”	you
say.
    “Exactly.	  Distances,	plural.	The	distance	between	the	star	and	the	edge	of	the
black	hole,	and	the	distance	between	the	black	hole	and	Earth.	So	.	.	.	I	say	all	of
this	to	 say	 that	sometimes	 wheels	are	 set	in	 motion	 long	 before	 the	 spark	is
manifest.	Is	that	 the	same	thing	as	fate?	I	 don’t	 know,	 but	I	 do	know	 that	rare,
brilliant	 events	take	time.”
    He	  sighs.	 “Which	  is	 why	  I	 didn’t	  trip	  when	 you	 didn’t	  respond	 to	 my
messages	at	first.	I	figured	if	 you’d	 wanted	me	to	leave	you	alone	you	 would’ve
said	so.	But	you	 didn’t.	 Now	 I	 did	trip	 a	little	  when	you	ghosted	me,	 but”—he
shrugs	and	pulls	you	closer—“I	 figured	you	had	your	reasons.”

How	 do	 you	 make	 love	to	 a	 physicist?	  When	he	 unbuttons	your	 blouse	and
asks,	“Are	we	going	 to	be	the	type	of	 people	who	sit	around	talking	 about	Rumi
and	black	holes,	or	are	we	going	to	get	naked?”	you	answer,	“Both.”
    You	  stand	up	 and	 pull	  down	 your	 skirt	 and	 panties.	 “Rumi	  wrote	 of	 an
intuitive	 love	of	 God,	and	he	was	a	Muslim,”	  you	 say.	“But	 people	like	 to	strip
away	the	Islam	from	his	work.”
    He	 runs	his	hands	over	your	thighs,	your	breasts,	your	free	stomach.

How	 do	you	 make	 love	to	 a	physicist?	  With	 your	whole	 self,	quivering,	 lush,
unafraid.

68
                                                     JAEL






I	THINK	 the	pastor’s	wife	was	a	freak	before	she	got	into	the	church.	She	real
dark-skin	with	long,	thick	hair	that	she	wear	in	a	bun	under	a	black	church	hat,
the	wide	kind	with	 the	feathers.	Sometimes	the	hat	is	dark	blue,	or	white	on
Easter.	But	I	bet	when	she	was	14	like	me,	she	used	to	have	a	big	Afro	and	wear
tight	bellbottoms,	like	Thelma	on	Good	Times.	It’s	something	about	the	way	her
eyes	sparkle	 and	 dance,	instead	of	  trying	  to	 look	  all	 holy.	  Like	 she’s
remembering	something	fun	from	a	long	time	ago.	And	that	half-smile	of	hers.
Like	her	secrets	got	secrets.	And	she	got	them	big	dick-sucking	lips.	Twan	said
that	I	got	them	too.	But	fuck	him.	Anyway.	Everyone	calls	the	preacher’s	wife
“Sister	Sadie.”	In	my	head,	I	call	her	“Sweet	Sadie,”	like	that	song	Kachelle’s
mama	used	to	play	all	the	time	when	we	were	little.	But	there	ain’t	nothing	sweet
about	that	lady.	She	dress	all	proper	in	a	buttoned-up	suit	when	she	standing	up
there	with	the	old	as	dirt	 Reverend	collecting	that	love	offering.	Sweet	Sadie
ain’t	old-old.	Her	husband	probably	105.	She	probably	40.	Her	body	reminds	me
of	the	album	covers	Kachelle	uncle	have	in	his	room.	Ohio	Players,	Lakeside,
The	Gap	Band,	Parliament-Funkadelic.	They	got	all	these	ladies,	some	real,
some	cartoons,	with	big	titties,	big	booties,	and	dick-sucking	lips.	Sweet	Sadie
try	to	hide	all	that	under	them	churchy	suits.	But	I	bet	she	used	to	wear	coochie-
cutter	shorts	before	she	met	Old	Reverend.	She	might	be	fooling	the	church
people,	but	she	ain’t	fooling	me.	I	know	her	body	is	beautiful	underneath	them
suits.	I	wish	I	could	see	it.



MY	MAMA	used	to	say,	“Careful	you	go	looking	for	something.	You	just	might
find	 it.”	  But	 I	 wasn’t	 looking	 for	  anything	when	 I	  went	into	  my	 great-
grandbaby’s	room	not	too	 long	 ago	to	 change	her	bed	linens	 and	flip	 her
mattress.	I	really	wasn’t.	I	just	wanted	to	air	her	room	out	and	whatnot,	and	I
always	flip	 the	mattresses	twice	a	year,	at	the	same	time	we	turn	the	clocks
forward	or	back	and	change	the	batteries	in	the	smoke	detector	like	they	tell	you
to	do.	So	I	flipped	the	mattress	and	found	her	diary.	It	wasn’t	too	much	in	the
beginning.	Just	who	she	didn’t	like	at	school,	and	who	didn’t	like	her.	Which
teachers	was	mean,	and	which	ones	she	could	charm.	I	didn’t	approve	of	some	of

69
her	language.	But	 that	 ain’t	 nothing	 compared	 to	 things	I	 saw	 about	midway
through	it.	 Unnatural	 things.	Things	 that	just	 break	my	 heart.	God	 ain’t	 in	this
child,	even	though	 I	 trained	her	up	 in	the	way	 that	she	should	 go	in	 hopes	that
she	would	not	depart	from	it	 when	she	is	old.	But	from	the	looks	 of	things	in	that
diary,	she	done	departed	a	long	time	ago.



KACHELLE	  TOLD	  him	we’re	 16.	That’s	 a	bigger	lie	 for	 me	than	it	 is	for	 her.
She	just	turned	15	last	week.	I	still	 have	to	wait	6	 more	months.	But	he	probably
don’t	care	how	old	 we	really	are.	He	claim	 he	want	us	to	come	over	to	his	house
for	a	crab	boil	in	 his	backyard.	Just	the	3	of	us.	Kachelle	said	she	kind	of	 scared.
Cause	he	35.	But	she	gonna	go	because	he	cute.	She	say	he	look	like	Morris	Day
from	The	Time	who	 she	been	in	love	with	ever	since	“Purple	Rain.”	 She	dragged
me	to	that	movie	 four	 times	since	it	 came	out.	I	 like	 Prince,	but	Kachelle	 is	IN
LOVE	 with	 him	 and	Morris	  Day	too.	 She	say	she	horny	 for	 light-skin	 niggas.
Don’t	 matter	either	way	 to	me.	Niggas	 is	niggas.	Light-skin,	  dark-skin.	Fifteen,
twenty-five,	  thirty-five.	  All	   the	 same	and	 none	 of	 ’em	  worth	 a	 damn.	 But
Kachelle	 the	type	 that	have	 to	 learn	the	 hard	way.	 She	 all	 excited	about	 this
nigga	and	a	crab	boil.	And	he	say	he	gon	take	us	to	the	beach,	and	she	all	excited
about	that	too,	knowing	 good	and	well	 I	 don’t	 like	 the	beach.	I	just	 want	to	see
the	inside	of	that	big	house	of	his.	See	what	he	got	in	there.
    I	  wish	 I	 could	 go	to	 Sweet	 Sadie’s	house	 .	.	 .	 without	 Old	 Rev	 there,	 of
course.



I	DON’T	know	how	 to	 talk	 to	this	 child.	 These	kids	today	 .	.	 .	they	 is	different
than	how	we	 was,	coming	 up.	What	 do	I	 say	to	 her	that	won’t	 get	 her	face	all
crumpled	up	 out	of	 shape?	Littlest	 thing	 I	say	set	 her	off.	 I	 tell	 her	to	 pick	up
behind	herself,	put	her	dishes	in	the	sink	 at	least,	make	up	her	bed,	put	her	dirty
clothes	in	 the	hamper.	And	 she	get	mad.	Just	get	 all	bent	 out	of	 shape	if	 I	say
anything	to	her.	Sucking	her	teeth,	or	 acting	like	she	don’t	 even	hear	me	half	the
time.
    The	 only	 way	 I	know	 how	 to	 fight	 the	battle	 for	this	 child’s	 salvation	 is	 to
give	it	to	the	Lord.	 I	pray	for	 her.	I	do.
    Every	 time	she	write	 in	that	diary,	 it	gets	worser	and	worser.	I	 wish	I	 had	the
right	words	 to	say.	I	pray	 to	God	to	 touch	my	mouth	 so	that	I	 can	speak,	and	to
touch	her	ears,	heart,	and	mind	so	that	she	can	hear.
    Because	God	knows	I	don’t	 want	no	abomination	living	 under	my	 roof.

70
    No,	 these	kids	today	not	like	 we	was.	We	 respected	our	elders.	We	ain’t	sass
and	talk	back.	We	did	what	 we	were	told	to	do,	and	you	 only	had	to	tell	 us	once.
None	of	this,	 “In	 a	minute	.	.	 .”	We	 didn’t	 have	to	be	told	 twice.	And	 if	 we	did,
we	got	the	back	of	my	mama’s	hand	for	our	troubles.
    But	 I	 don’t	 hit	 this	 child	 no	 more.	I	 can	count	 on	one	 hand	the	number	 of
times	I	 whupped	her	in	 her	fourteen	years	on	 this	earth	and	in	 my	 home,	and	I
made	sure	that	nobody	 else	hit	 her	 either.	There	 was	enough	hitting	  going	on
between	her	mama	 and	her	trifling	  daddy	 when	 she	was	just	 a	lil	  bitty	 thing,
which	is	how	 she	come	to	live	with	 me.	So	I	didn’t	  want	to	do	it	 if	I	 didn’t	 have
to,	but	she	just	has	this	 way	about	her	.	 .	.	Like	 she	don’t	 respond	to	words	 she
don’t	like.	 She	didn’t	even	respond	the	way	I	 wanted	her	to	when	I	braided	them
switches	and	tore	up	them	skinny,	yella	 legs	of	hers	when	she	was	little.	It’s	 like
she	didn’t	even	feel	 it.	Didn’t	  cry	a	lick.	 One	time,	when	 she	was	six	and	I	took
the	switch	 to	them	 legs,	she	just	 looked	at	 me	.	 .	.	 just	give	 me	this	 look	 that
froze	my	  blood	 and	sent	me	 straight	 to	 my	 Bible.	 “Behold,	  I	 give	 unto	 you
power	to	tread	on	 serpents	and	scorpions,	and	over	all	the	 power	of	 the	enemy:
and	nothing	shall	by	any	means	hurt	you.”	Luke	 10:19.
    And	 I	 stay	in	 my	Bible,	 I	 stay	on	my	 knees	and	prayed	up	over	 this	child.	 I
thank	the	Lord	 that	she	not	fast	in	the	behind	 like	that	 lil	 friend	of	 hers,	chasing
after	grown	 men.	 But	 she	still	 ain’t	  right,	 sitting	 up	 there	with	 me	 in	 service
every	Sunday	after	 Sunday	School	 and	then	Bible	  study	on	 Wednesday	night.
Every	 week.	 Sit	 right	 there	 and	don’t	  say	a	 word.	 And	  to	 look	 at	 her,	 you
wouldn’t	 know.	She	look	 sweet	in	the	face.	Folks	think	 she	just	quiet.	But	in	 her
heart,	her	spirit,	  her	mind	 .	 .	.	 That	 ain’t	 of	 God.	 There	is	 a	battle	 going	 on,
saints.	I	stay	 in	my	 Bible	 and	on	 my	knees	as	a	prayer	 warrior	 for	 this	child’s
soul.	“For	  we	 wrestle	 not	 against	flesh	 and	 blood,	 but	 against	principalities,
against	powers,	against	the	rulers	of	the	darkness	of	 this	world,	 against	spiritual
wickedness	in	high	places.”	Ephesians	6:12.



SWEET	 SADIE	 talked	 to	me	at	 church	today!	 She	asked	me	how	I	 was	doing
and	how	Granny’s	doing.	I	 told	her	we’re	 doing	fine,	and	I	 didn’t	 even	mind	that
she	kind	of	 had	that	look	 on	 her	face	that	people	 get	when	they	 talking	 to	The
Girl	 With	 The	 Dead	Parents.	Pity.	  I	 hate	that	shit.	 But	 it	 wasn’t	 so	 bad	with
Sweet	Sadie.	I	feel	like	she	really	care.



ONE	THING	I	can	say	good	about	her:	she	ain’t	 letting	 none	of	them	 boys	mess

71
with	 her,	far	 as	I	 can	tell.	 They	don’t	 come	 sniffing	 around	 here	like	 they	did
with	her	mama	and	her	mama’s	mama,	my	 daughter,	God	rest	their	souls.	And	 I
was	up	 at	the	 corner	store	 the	other	 day	getting	 some	Goody	 powders,	 and	I
overheard	two	fellas	in	the	checkout	line	 talking	about	her.	Either	they	 didn’t	 see
me,	or	didn’t	 know	 I’m	 her	grandmama.	And	 the	one	fella	say	to	 the	other	one,
“My	 man	told	me	some	girl	kicked	 that	nigga	Jay’s	ass.”
    And	  the	other	 one	say,	“Naw,	  man.	It	 was	 Jay’s	lil	  brother,	 Twan.	 And	 it
didn’t	 happen	 like	 that,	 but	 it	 was	 some	 wild	  shit.	 That	 Jael,	man.	 That	 lil
redbone	that	live	 over	on	 Perkins?	That	bitch	 crazy.	Twan	 said	ever	since	they
were	in	grade	school,	she’d	fight	dudes	for	trying	 to	grab	her	ass.	She	been	going
toe-to-toe	with	  dudes	around	the	 block	 for	 years.	So	 he	figure,	 she	must	 like
girls,	right?”
    “Like	  what?	A	bulldagger,”	 the	other	one	say.
    “Yeah,	 man!”	 And	then	he	lowered	 his	voice,	but	I	could	 still	 hear	him.	“You
know	I	hollered	 at	her	a	couple	of	times	around	here.	Cause	she	fine.”
    Now	 these	fellas	had	to	be	thirty,	thirty-five	  years	old.	Just	filthy.
    “So	 me	and	Jay	and	Twan	 were	standing	outside	the	 store	that	day,”	 he	say,
“and	here	she	come	down	the	sidewalk	with	her	friend.	 Twan	figure	she	not	gon’
try	to	kick	 his	ass	with	us	standing	there	too,	right?”
    “Right,	  right	.	.	.”
    “Twan	  called	her	name,	and	 she	ignored	him.	 Just	kept	walking	 past.	So	he
called	her	a	bulldagger	 and	ran	up	behind	 her	and	grabbed	her	ass.	Maaan,	she
swung	around	 with	  a	bottle,	  smashed	it	 against	 the	wall,	  and	 had	it	 at	 that
nigga’s	throat!”
    “Redbones	is	crazy,	man.”	 That’s	what	the	other	one	said.
    Then	 the	 first	 fella	  say,	“I	  didn’t	  even	see	that	 bottle!	  It	 just	 came	outta
nowhere!	She	ain’t	stab	him,	 but	that’s	just	 cuz	her	friend—the	 one	with	 the	big
titties?	Lachelle?	 Kachelle!—she	 just	started	screaming,	‘He	 ain’t	  worth	it!	  He
ain’t	worth	 it!’	 But	man,	she	was	gonna	do	it.	Jael	crazy.”
    That’s	 right,	 baby.	 Let	 ’em	 think	 you	 crazy.	Let	 them	think	  you	don’t	 like
boys,	even	though	 that	 is	unnatural	 in	 the	eyes	of	 God.	 Least	 they	leave	 you
alone	that	way.
    But	 maybe	she	really	is	crazy.
    They	 say	bad	seeds	skip	a	generation.	My	daughter	Timna	 was	just	like	 Jael.
Just	looked	right	through	 you.	Her	best	friend,	 a	sweet,	pretty	girl	 named	Gloria
Mae,	got	killed	  by	a	train,	 and	Timna	 never	shed	a	tear.	Not	 a	single	 one.	The
two	of	them	 was	playing	around	on	the	tracks—after	 I	told	 them	a	million	 times
to	stay	off	 them	tracks—and	poor	Gloria	 Mae	 didn’t	 get	out	of	 the	way	in	 time.
Sixteen	years	old	.	.	.	Lord,	rest	her	soul.	And	 you’d	think	 a	person	would	be	sad

72
to	lose	a	friend,	 to	see	’em	 die	like	 that.	But	 not	 Timna.	She	just	 wasn’t	fazed.
Just	floated	through	life	 for	years	all	closed	up	in	 herself	until	 the	Lord	just	 took
her	one	 day.	 Walking	 home	 in	 the	 rain	 from	 her	 job	 down	 at	 Woolworth’s,
struck	by	lightning,	 twenty-four	  years	old.	I	told	 her	a	million	  times	not	to	walk
out	in	 them	thunderstorms,	to	 get	a	gypsy	 cab	and	I’d	 pay	 the	carfare,	but	 she
was	hardheaded.	And	a	decade	after	she	died,	here	comes	Jael,	just	like	her.
    And	 Jael’s	mother,	Keturah,	that	child	 wasn’t	 built	for	 this	world.	 I	raised	her
from	the	 time	she	was	six,	 when	Timna	 died.	 I	did	 the	best	I	 could.	But	 in	 the
end,	she	let	that	nigga,	Jael’s	daddy,	beat	on	her	until	he	killed	 her.	Wasn’t	 even
her	husband,	just	some	no	’count	Negro.
    But	 here	comes	this	fat	 yella	baby,	head	full	 of	 good,	curly	 hair.	Eyes	bright
as	buttons.	But	just	 like	my	 Timna,	 she	looked	right	 through	you.	 And	just	 like
my	Timna,	I	 give	her	everything	 I	have.	I	have	spared	her	the	ugliness	about	her
daddy	and	 what	 happened	to	 her	mama.	 I	 am	 the	only	  mother	 she	has	ever
known.	And	she	has	wanted	for	nothing.
    I	 tried,	with	 Keturah	 and	Jael,	to	do	the	things	my	mother	did	 for	us.	Tried	 to
teach	them	things,	like	 how	 to	cook	a	pot	 of	rice	 just	right,	 how	 to	frost	 a	cake
without	 tearing	it	up,	 how	to	 wash	and	fold	laundry,	 how	to	 make	the	bed,	how
to	keep	theyself	 clean.	Keturah	 took	 to	it	 all,	 loved	 baking	and	 frying	 chicken
and	helping	me	out	in	 the	kitchen.	She	laughed	easy	and	never	talked	back.	She
was	a	good	girl.	But	then	that	nigga	came	along	and	took	her	away	from	here.
    Jael	 is	different.	 She’ll	 cook	 and	clean	and	 do	whatever	 I	ask,	for	 the	 most
part.	But	 there	is	no	joy	 in	 those	bright	 eyes,	not	even	when	she	was	little.	  It’s
like	 her	body	 is	in	 one	 place,	but	 her	spirit	 is	 somewhere	else	altogether.	 It’s
always	been	that	way.	Now	sometimes	she	will	 come	in	my	 room	and	watch	my
stories	with	me.	She	likes	 The	Young	and	the	Restless.	And	some	Friday	nights,
she’ll	 watch	 my	 TV	  programs	with	  me.	Dallas	  and	 Falcon	 Crest.	 But	 most
nights?	I	have	to	make	her	sit	down	 and	eat	dinner	with	 me.	She	live	in	her	own
world	and	keep	me	shut	out	of	it.
    Well,	 at	least	she	don’t	 give	none	of	these	boys	the	time-a	day.	Unlike	 her	 lil
fast-tail	 friend	 Kachelle.	 Jael	not	 impressed	by	this	 high-yella	  nigga	what	 she
call	“Morris	 Day,”	 come	sniffing	 ’round	 these	young	girls.	I	know	 his	type.	Lord
Jesus,	I	know	 that	type	 too	well.	 One	 thing	 always	lead	to	 another	with	 them.
Make	you	 feel	 like	 the	Queen	of	 Sheba,	like	 you	 the	only	 one.	You	 say	 stop,
they	act	like	you	said	go.
    My	  old	 neighbor	 Miss	 Maybelle	  used	to	 yell	 at	 us	 from	 her	 front	 porch,
“Don’t	 let	the	boys	fool	 ya.”	We	just	thought	 she	was	a	crazy	old	lady	tryna	keep
us	from	 having	 our	 fun,	 you	know.	 But	 she	knew.	 She	 knew.	And	 we	 didn’t
listen.	I	  think	 sometimes	how	 things	 mighta	 been	if	  I	 had	listened.	 Probably

73
wouldn’t	 be	no	Timna,	 no	Keturah,	no	Jael.	Just	me	in	the	world.	 Doing	 what,	I
don’t	know.	 Something.
    Anyway.	  Jael	ain’t	 said	a	word	 to	me	 ’bout	 Twan	or	 that	crab	boil	 that	 this
Morris	Day	 is	supposed	to	be	having.	But	she	don’t	tell	me	nothing.	Just	do	what
she	want	to	do.



CAN	YOU	 suck	dicks	and	still	 be	saved?	I’m	 just	wondering.	 I	don’t	 care	about
dicks	or	being	saved.	Tracy	round	the	corner	suck	dick	all	 the	time.	But	she’ll	 do
anything,	so	you	 can’t	 go	by	 her.	Kachelle	 uncle	had	this	 white	 girlfriend,	 and
Kachelle	 used	 to	 see	her	 doing	  it	 on	  their	 back	 porch	 when	 they	  thought
everybody	 was	sleep.	 Kachelle	 says	that	 sucking	 dick	 is	 nasty,	 and	she	will
never	do	 it.	 Kachelle	 is	always	 talking	 about	 what	she’s	 never	going	 to	 do.	I
asked	her	if	she	like	 girls.	Maybe	 she	want	to	do	 things	with	 girls.	She	got	 mad
and	said	that	that	wasn’t	funny.	I	said	I	 wasn’t	trying	 to	be	funny.	And	 if	 she	like
girls	that	 wouldn’t	 bother	me.	But	 she	wouldn’t	 listen.	 Just	shook	her	head	and
started	crying	about	how	she’s	a	good	girl.	 Kachelle	is	a	big	 crybaby.	If	 I	wasn’t
around,	people	would	 mess	with	 her	even	more	than	they	 already	do.	Anyway.
Today	at	church,	Old	 Rev	was	talking	about	how	 you	have	to	be	saved	and	give
up	the	sinful	pleasures	of	the	flesh	if	 you	want	to	 get	to	heaven.	Seem	like	saved
folks	don’t	 like	 to	 do	anything	 but	talk	 about	being	 saved,	complain	 about	sin,
and	go	to	church.	And	 church	be	boring	as	hell,	so	I	 just	watch	Sweet	Sadie	and
think	about	her	sexy	body	and	her	secret	past.



I	NEED	the	Lord	to	give	me	a	sign.	I	want	to	 stay	in	His	will.	  But	what	is	 worse?
Jael	not	coming	 to	church,	 or	 coming	with	  a	reprobate	mind?	That’s	 what	 our
Bible	study	was	about	this	week:	 “And	 even	as	they	did	not	like	to	 retain	God	in
their	knowledge,	 God	 gave	them	 over	to	 a	reprobate	mind,	 to	 do	those	things
which	 are	 not	 convenient;	 being	 filled	  with	  all	 unrighteousness,	fornication,
wickedness,	covetousness,	maliciousness;	full	 of	 envy,	 murder,	 debate,	deceit,
malignity;	  whisperers,	backbiters,	 haters	 of	 God,	 despiteful,	  proud,	 boasters,
inventors	of	evil	 things,	disobedient	to	parents,	without	understanding,	covenant-
breakers,	without	 natural	 affection,	 implacable,	 unmerciful:	  who	 knowing	  the
judgment	of	 God,	that	they	 which	 commit	 such	things	are	worthy	 of	 death,	not
only	do	the	same,	but	have	pleasure	in	them	that	do	them.”	Romans	1:28–32.
    That	 is	Jael	to	a	T.	Full	 of	debate,	deceit,	and	malignity.	 And	 disobedient!	At
a	certain	point,	 if	 you	 just	willful	   about	your	 sin,	God	 will	 give	 you	 over	to	 a

74
reprobate	mind.	As	Deacon	Sharpe	explained	this	Scripture	on	Wednesday	night,
I	looked	at	Jael	out	the	corner	 of	my	 eye.	She	had	that	blank	look	on	her	 face	at
first,	but	then	she	smiled	a	little.	 And	 for	a	second,	I	thought	Jesus	had	heard	my
cry	and	 worked	a	 miracle	in	 her	 heart.	But	 then	I	 followed	 her	 eyes.	She	was
smiling	 at	 Sister	 Sadie!	 And	 it	  was	just	  like	 the	 Scripture	 say:	 wickedness,
without	natural	 affection.	 I	could	 see	it!	But	 I	don’t	 think	 anyone	else	could	see
it.	Probably	just	 looked	like	 an	innocent	smile	to	them,	because	they	don’t	know
the	things	I	 know,	 the	 unspeakable	things	she	wrote	 about	Sister	Sadie	in	 that
diary.
    Sister	Sadie	happened	to	look	up	at	that	moment	 and	smiled	back	at	Jael.	Not
that	I	 blame	 Sister	Sadie	for	 just	 being	 polite	 and	kind	 to	 an	 orphaned	child.
Jesus	said	to	feed	the	orphans	and	the	widows.	But	I	know	 my	Savior	would	 not
approve	of	the	thoughts	of	this	particular	orphan.
    Well.	 I	 made	up	my	mind	right	 then	and	there.	I	am	not	going	 to	wake	her	up
for	church	 come	Sunday	 morning,	 and	no	 more	Wednesday	night	 Bible	 study
either.	She	will	 not	 do	her	wickedness	in	 Greater	Holiness	Baptist	 Church.	Not
as	long	as	I	draw	breath	in	my	body.
    I	 just	hope	the	Lord	understands	why	I’m	 keeping	her	out	of	His	house.



I	DON’T	  like	 Morris	 Day.	 Turns	out	his	 real	name	is	Jamie,	a	girl	 name.	But	 I
don’t	 know	 which	 name	 is	 worse	because	“Morris	  Day”	  makes	me	 think	  of
Morris	 the	picky	cat	 in	the	commercial.	 And	come	to	 think	of	 it,	 he	kinda	looks
like	a	yellow	 tabby	cat.	 Gray	cat	eyes,	whiskers.	I’ve	 seen	thicker	mustaches	on
boys	in	my	 grade.	He’s	not	even	as	cute	as	the	real	Morris	 Day.	And	 he	smokes
cigarettes,	so	 his	breath	 smells	 horrible.	 And	 his	 house	 ain’t	 nothing	 special
either.	It’s	 got	two	 floors,	 but	the	rooms	 are	tiny.	 He’s	got	 one	room	he	calls	 a
Florida	room.	 It	just	look	 like	 a	living	 room	to	 me.	And	the	rooms	 are	crammed
full	 of	shit	that	belonged	to	 his	dead	mother.	She	had	terrible	taste	and	she	liked
to	make	ceramic	cats.	I	counted	50	fucking	cats	before	I	gave	up.	The	crabs	were
good	though.	Real	 hot	and	salty,	 big	 chunks	of	 meat,	like	 I	 like	 them.	Granny
makes	shitty	crabs.	Watery	with	 no	taste.	Not	worth	 all	 the	hassle	it	takes	to	get
at	the	stringy	meat.	She	buys	the	teeny-weeny	ones.
    Morris	  Day/Jamie	bought	 the	big	 crabs	that	cost	 $8	a	dozen.	 When	he	was
dropping	them	 in	the	 pot,	Kachelle	 was	hiding	 behind	me	 like	 she	was	scared.
He	grabbed	one	of	the	crabs	with	some	tongs	and	played	like	he	was	going	to	put
it	on	 her.	She	started	screaming	and	ran	upstairs.	Morris/Jamie	 ran	up	 after	her
still	 holding	the	crab.	 After	 a	minute,	I	 thought	Kachelle	 was	going	to	 run	back

75
down,	but	 she	didn’t.	 So	I	 went	 upstairs.	The	 crab	was	at	the	 top	of	 the	stairs
crawling	toward	 me.	I	 kicked	it	 down	the	 stairs	back	to	the	first	 floor.	 I	 heard	a
crack	when	it	landed.	When	I	 turned	around,	Kachelle	was	coming	 out	of	one	of
the	bedrooms,	grinning	  like	 an	 idiot.	 Morris/Jamie	 was	 right	 behind	 her,	still
holding	the	stupid	 tongs,	sweating	like	 a	crackhead.	And	the	 whole	time	 we	ate
the	crabs	in	 the	backyard,	 he	was	sweating.	So	 greasy	and	disgusting.	 And	 he
kept	cracking	 jokes	that	wasn’t	 even	funny.	 But	 Kachelle	 laughed	all	 loud	like
he	was	Eddie	Murphy.
    When	 we	walked	 home	after,	 I	waited	 for	 her	to	tell	 me	 something,	but	she
didn’t.	 So	I	 said,	He	sweat	like	 a	pig,	 and	he	ain’t	 even	cute.	And	 his	 house	is
full	 of	 junk.	Kachelle	 just	 rolled	 her	eyes	and	told	 me	I	 don’t	 like	 nobody	and
she’ll	talk	 to	me	later.	That	was	four	 days	ago.	I	called	her	a	couple	of	times	and
Miss	Debra	said	she	wasn’t	home.	And	she	still	hasn’t	called	me	back.
    I	  took	 the	long	  way	 back	from	  the	 store	yesterday,	 cut	 through	 the	field
behind	the	high	school,	and	walked	 past	Jamie’s	house.	He	was	in	the	driveway
washing	his	 Cadillac,	 which	 is	 really	 his	 dead	mother’s	 Cadillac.	  A	 cigarette
dangled	between	his	lips	like	it	 was	gonna	fall	any	second.	And	he	was	sweating
like	a	pig,	 as	usual,	even	though	he	was	wearing	 an	undershirt	with	 no	 sleeves.
His	arms	 were	soft	 and	pale.	No	 muscles	in	 sight.	 Soft-ass	nigga.	 I	 pretended
like	I	 didn’t	 see	him,	but	 he	hollered	Hey,	 Pretty	Girl	  at	me.	I	 ignored	him	 and
kept	walking.	 Then	he	said,	 You	just	 missed	your	friend.	 She	just	 left.	He	 kept
on	talking	and	I	kept	on	walking.
    Fuck	 Kachelle	and	her	bad	taste	in	men.



NEVER	IN	all	my	days	have	I	known	a	child	 so	ungrateful.	She	has	never	known
a	hungry	 day	in	 her	 life,	 not	in	 my	 house.	I	 bet	 she	wouldn’t	 be	 so	high	 and
mighty	in	 somebody’s	foster	care,	which	is	where	her	behind	would’ve	 ended	up
if	 I	hadn’t	 taken	her	 in	out	 of	the	 goodness	of	my	 heart.	I	 raised	my	child	 and
outlived	her.	 My	 grandchild	too.	 I	believe	 I	have	earned	some	rest	on	this	earth
and	my	crown	 in	heaven.	But	 where	else	was	she	going	 to	go?	I	 do	my	 best	to
make	ends	meet,	and	this	lil	heffa	says	I	make	shitty	crabs?
    Well.	  When	she	brings	 her	tail	 back	here	from	 wherever	 she	run	off	 to	 this
afternoon,	I	got	something	for	her.	It’s	 time	for	 her	to	get	a	job.



ME	 AND	  Kachelle	 went	 to	 the	 beach	 with	 Jamie.	 Kachelle	 called	 him	  her
goddaddy	and	she	had	on	a	new	yellow	bathing	suit	 he	bought	her.	He	lifted	 her

76
up	high	in	 the	air	and	she	screamed	and	laughed	as	he	threw	her	into	the	waves
over	and	over	again.	 Kachelle	is	 not	a	small	 girl.	 So	I	 guess	he’s	stronger	than
those	weak-ass	arms	of	his	look.	Then	they	 got	tired	of	 that	game,	and	Kachelle
climbed	 up	and	 rode	 on	Jamie’s	 shoulders	 as	he	walked	  farther	 out	into	  the
ocean.	I	 couldn’t	  see,	but	 I	 imagined	 his	 hands	 clutching	 Kachelle’s	  thighs.
Every	now	 and	then,	her	body	would	 shake.	From	 laughing	probably.	 They	got
so	far	away,	I	couldn’t	 hear	her	anymore.
    It	 was	hot,	but	not	too	 bad	under	the	umbrella	Jamie	rented.	I	sat	on	a	blanket
with	 a	People	magazine	I	picked	 up	when	 we	had	stopped	at	7–11	to	 get	soda,
ice,	sunflower	  seeds,	and	potato	 chips.	 I	 had	 already	told	  Kachelle	 I	 wasn’t
getting	in	the	water	because	I	didn’t	have	a	bathing	suit.	She	said,	You	can	get	in
with	your	 shorts	on.	They’ll	 dry.	I	just	 rolled	my	eyes.	She’s	so	dumb.	But	Jamie
stood	next	to	 her	nodding	like	 she	was	just	 the	smartest	girl	 in	 the	whole	 wide
world.
    When	 we	 walked	 down	 the	 boardwalk	 heading	to	 the	 beach,	we	 passed	a
shop	selling	 beach	 stuff.	 Kachelle	 grabbed	 a	pair	 of	  white	 sunglasses,	some
yellow	 flip-flops,	  and	a	huge	towel	 with	 different	  color	fish	 on	 it.	 She	handed
everything	to	 Jamie	and	he	paid	for	 it.	They	 had	bathing	suits	too,	 right	 next	to
the	cash	register.	Jamie	didn’t	offer	to	buy	me	one.	Not	that	I	would’ve	  taken	it.
    The	 water	 came	up	 to	Jamie’s	 neck	at	 one	point	 because	I	 could	 only	 see
Kachelle.	It	 looked	 like	she	was	 sitting	on	 top	of	 the	waves.	Then	 she	tumbled
backward	off	Jamie’s	shoulders	and	waves	covered	them	both.	When	I	could	 see
their	 heads	again,	 they	 were	 facing	  each	other	 and	 Kachelle	  had	 her	arms
wrapped	around	 Jamie’s	 shoulders.	 How	 could	 she	 stand	his	 nasty	 cigarette
breath	that	close	up?	UGH.	 I	couldn’t	  see	for	the	water,	but	 I	bet	her	 legs	were
probably	wrapped	 around	his	back.	 Then	they	 both	looked	 back	at	me.	 I	lifted
the	People	magazine	to	cover	my	face.
    To	 hell	with	 them.
    I	 started	daydreaming	about	Sweet	Sadie.	I	bet	she	had	come	to	the	beach	lots
of	times	 before	 she	became	a	preacher’s	 wife.	 I	 imagine	 her	riding	 down	 the
shoreline	on	the	 back	of	 some	big	 dude’s	motorcycle.	 Wearing	 a	white	 bikini,
which	looks	so	good	against	her	brown,	 brown	skin.	And	 the	dude,	I	picture	him
wearing	 dark	 shades	and	a	 denim	 jacket	 with	 no	 sleeves	that	 shows	 off	 his
muscles.	But	when	they	 start	to	pass	me,	Sadie	tells	 him	to	 stop	and	let	her	 off
the	motorcycle.	 She	stomps	 through	 the	sand	toward	 me	 and	reaches	out	 her
hands.	I	try	 not	to	stare	at	her	 titties	falling	  out	of	 the	top	of	 the	bikini,	 but	 she
notices	and	just	laughs.	She	pulls	me	up	off	the	blanket	and	hugs	me.	She	smells
like	vanilla	 and	roses.	And	she	keeps	hugging	me	and	we	start	walking,	walking,
walking	down	 the	shore.

77
    And	 then	I	feel	the	water	on	my	feet	and	pull	 away.
    I	 run	 back	to	the	 blanket	I	 brought	from	 home.	 Sweet	Sadie	sits	next	to	 me
and	says,	 What’s	 wrong?	 And	  I	 tell	 her	 about	 the	 water.	 About	 how	 I	  run
showers	and	baths	that	I	never	get	into	to	make	Granny	 think	 I’m	 bathing.	I	just
do	what	Granny	call	a	birdbath,	at	the	sink.	 I	get	clean	from	head	to	toe	like	 that.
Just	takes	a	lot	of	scrubbing	 and	rinsing.	And	 I	 tell	her	about	the	 day	my	mama
died	and	how	 I	saw	it	 all	 underwater.	We	 were	all	 under	the	water.	My	  mama,
my	daddy,	and	me.	We	were	in	our	house,	in	the	bedroom,	and	I	 was	in	my	crib.
Underwater.	Sweet	Sadie	 says,	How	 can	you	 remember	so	much	 as	a	baby?	I
say,	I	don’t	 know	 how.	I	 just	do.	And	 I	 saw	what	he	did.	 And	 I	tried	 to	scream
but	the	water	 filled	 my	 mouth	 and	then	everything	 went	 black.	Granny	 lied	 to
me.	She	said	they	 were	killed	 in	 a	car	 accident.	But	 one	time	 when	I	 was	8,	 I
heard	Auntie	 Vashti	tell	 Granny	 that	somebody	 slit	his	 throat	in	 prison	 and	let
him	bleed	 out	like	 the	 animal	 he	was.	Auntie	 sighed	 real	sad	and	said	 he	had
seemed	like	such	 a	nice	 boy.	Granny	 said	 she	knew	 from	 jump	 he	wasn’t	 no
good,	but	my	mama	didn’t	know	 it	because	he	had	her	nose	wide	open	.	.	.
    I	  remember	 his	 face	 that	 day	 in	  our	 house.	 Tight	  and	mean.	 We	  were
underwater	that	day,	but	I	remember	it.
    Sweet	 Sadie	rubs	my	arm	 and	calls	me	 Baby	Girl.	 Baby	 Girl,	 she	says,	you
weren’t	underwater.	Those	were	your	tears.
    I	 looked	up	 over	the	top	of	 the	magazine,	and	the	daydream	was	over.	Jamie
was	walking	back	to	shore	with	 Kachelle	on	his	back.	When	 they	got	back	to	me
and	the	umbrella,	  Kachelle’s	 head	still	  rested	on	his	 shoulder,	 like	 she	never
wanted	to	let	go.
    On	 the	ride	home,	Kachelle	 sat	in	the	back	seat	with	 me.	I	was	still	 mad	that
she	had	sat	in	the	front	 seat	on	the	ride	to	 the	beach.	Jamie	lit	up	 another	damn
cigarette	and	I	 rolled	 the	 window	 down	 and	let	 the	 wind	 hit	 my	 face.	Then	 I
heard	Kachelle	call	my	 name	real	soft.	WHAT?	  I	asked	her,	real	loud.	 She	kept
whispering.	Telling	  me	to	 remember	what	she	told	 me	when	 she	woke	 me	up,
calling	 from	 Jamie’s	house	early	 in	 the	morning.	 That	 if	 her	mama	 asked,	we
took	the	bus	to	the	beach	at	8:00	in	the	morning.
    The	 truth	was,	 she	didn’t	 call	me	 back	to	ask	me	 to	come	to	 the	beach	with
them	until	1:00.
    I	 turned	my	back	on	her	and	pretended	I	was	sleep.



IT’S	TIME	to	toss	out	that	old	throw	rug	in	my	living	  room.	I	been	meaning	to	get
rid	of	 it.	 I	got	 myself	 so	worked	up	 fussing	with	 Jael	about	getting	 a	job	 that	I

78
must’ve	tripped	over	 that	rug.	Yeah,	that	had	to	be	it.	 I	must’ve	 lost	my	balance.
I	was	fussing,	then	I	 just	felt	 myself	 falling,	 and	the	next	thing	 you	know,	 I	was
on	my	hands	and	knees.	I	must’ve	 tripped	on	that	 old	rug.	Or	 maybe	it	was	that
vertigo,	I	think	 they	call	it.	 My	 friend	Alma	 gets	it	from	time	 to	time.	That	had	to
be	it.
    I	 was	there	on	the	floor,	and	Jael	just	looked	down	 at	me.	Didn’t	 offer	 to	help
me	up	or	nothing!	And	 I	can’t	 even	repeat	what	she	said	to	me	when	I	told	her	to
start	looking	for	 a	job.
    I	 crawled	 over	 to	 the	settee	and	pulled	 myself	 up.	 And	 that	girl	  just	stood
there	and	watched	me	struggle.
    And	 ever	 since	then,	she	stay	 holed	up	 in	her	 room.	She	came	out	 to	 get	a
plate	of	food	a	few	times	and	to	wash	up,	but	that’s	it.
    Yes,	 I	lied	 to	her	about	her	mama	and	her	daddy.	 But	Lord	 knows	I	 was	just
trying	to	protect	her	from	 the	ugliness.	He	knows	my	heart.
    Maybe	 I	 could	 try	 and	talk	 to	her	 about	that,	now	 that	she’s	 older.	But	 she
won’t	 come	out	 of	the	 room.	She	wouldn’t	  even	come	to	 the	phone	when	 that
Kachelle	 called.	Just	 kept	calling	  and	calling,	 till	  the	 girl	 finally	  came	to	 the
house.	Jael	wouldn’t	even	talk	 to	her	through	 the	bedroom	door.	Kachelle	 came
in	here	talking	all	 sweet	to	me	like	butter	 wouldn’t	 melt	in	 her	mouth.	Granny	D
this,	Granny	D	that.	 I	started	to	tell	her,	“If	 I	 was	ya	granny,	you	wouldn’t	 be	the
hussy	you	are.”	But	I	asked	Jesus	to	bind	my	tongue	and	He	answered.



KACHELLE	  SWORE	 on	Miss	Debra’s	 Bible	 that	all	that	time	 she	was	alone	at
Jamie’s	house	before	we	 went	 to	the	 beach,	all	she	let	 him	 do	 was	kiss	her.	 I
said,	Yeah,	kiss	you	WHERE?	 And	 she	got	all	 mad.	I	didn’t	 want	 to	talk	 to	her
for	a	long	 time	 after	that	day	at	 the	beach.	I	couldn’t	 shake	the	feeling	 that	 she
was	lying	 to	me.	And	 I’m	 sick	 and	tired	of	 people	lying	 to	 me.	But	 I	guess	me
and	Kachelle	are	friends	again.	I	worry	 about	her	more	than	I’m	 mad	at	her.	But
when	she	does	stuff	to	make	me	worry,	 that	makes	me	mad!	 Being	friends	 with
someone	who	can’t	 look	out	 for	 themselves	is	a	lot	 of	work	 and	 I’m	 tired.	But
Kachelle	would	 just	 say,	I	 can	look	 out	 for	 myself!	 But	 she	can’t.	I	 know	 she
can’t.	She	ain’t	built	 for	it.
    So	I	 finally	 said	yes	when	she	asked	me	for	the	fifty-leventh	time	 to	spend	the
night	at	her	 house.	She	called	Jamie	a	couple	 of	times	 while	 I	was	 there.	They
talked	about	him	 taking	her	 shopping	for	 school	clothes	next	 week.	I	 asked	her
how	she	was	going	 to	 explain	new	 clothes	to	 Miss	 Debra	and	she	covered	the
phone	receiver	and	shushed	me.	Then	I	asked	her	does	she	make	Jamie	brush	his

79
filthy	 cigarette	mouth	before	they	kiss,	and	she	dragged	the	phone	into	the	closet
and	shut	the	 door.	I	 guess	I	 was	just	 supposed	to	 entertain	myself	 while	 they
gabbed	away.
    We	 laid	in	 Kachelle’s	 bed	later,	talking,	 but	I	didn’t	 say	half	 the	things	I	 was
thinking.	 She	kept	going	on	about	Jamie	this	 and	Jamie	that.	And	how	 boys	her
age	just	want	 to	fuck	 her,	and	 have	the	nerve	to	 not	even	 be	cute.	How	 Jamie
was	happy	just	to	kiss	her	and	spend	time	with	her	and	spend	money	on	her.	And
how	he	didn’t	 make	her	do	anything	she	didn’t	 want	to	do.	I	wondered	how	 long
that	was	going	to	last,	not	making	 her	do	things.	How	 long	before	he	turned	into
someone	else	and	hurt	her?	But	I	kept	all	that	to	myself.
    Then	 she	said,	Why	you	being	so	quiet?	You	 jealous?	And	I	 said,	OF	WHO?
No	answer.	Then	 I	 asked	her	a	question.	I	 said,	Do	 you	 think	 heaven	is	a	real
place?	She	said,	Of	course	it	is.	Then	 I	said,	I	 think	heaven	is	a	lie.	 And	 she	sat
up	in	the	bed	and	said,	God	is	going	to	strike	you	down	for	 talking	like	 that,	Jael!
I	just	 laughed	and	told	her	God	 is	just	 a	white	man	stupid	 niggas	made	up,	like
Santa	Claus.	Well,	 she	didn’t	 like	 that	 one	bit.	 She	folded	her	 arms	across	her
chest	and	said,	Well	if	there	ain’t	 no	God,	then	answer	me	this.	Where	do	people
go	when	they	.	.	.
    She	couldn’t	  even	say	the	word	“die,”	  with	 her	scary	ass.	I	just	 laughed	and
turned	over	in	the	bed.	And	then	we	were	just	quiet	until	 we	fell	asleep.
    The	 next	 evening,	I	 was	 walking	 back	 home	and	 went	 past	Jamie’s	 house
again.	He	was	 in	his	 front	 yard	watering	 the	grass	with	 the	 hose.	The	sun	had
went	down	so	it	 was	kinda	cool	 and	he	wasn’t	sweating	 for	once.	He	said,	Hey,
Pretty	Girl.	  And	 I	said	 hey	back.	 He	said,	 You	 always	going	 somewhere	in	 a
hurry.	Stop	by	and	see	me	sometime.
    I	 said,	Okay.



THIS	IS	all	my	fault.	 I	 picked	the	child’s	 name	from	 the	Bible,	 at	random,	 but	I
was	the	one	that	picked	it.	My	 mother	and	her	mother	before	her	and	her	mother
before	her,	my	sisters	and	my	aunts	and	their	 children	.	.	.	 we	all	had	our	 names
chose	out	the	Bible.	The	 oldest	woman	in	 the	family	 would	 open	the	big	family
Bible	and	point	 her	finger	 on	the	page.	Whatever	woman’s	 name	was	closest	to
her	finger	 that	was	the	 name	of	the	 girl-child	  to	be	born.	 And	 we	kept	 turning
pages	and	pointing	until	we	found	a	woman’s	 name.	All	we	ever	birth	 were	girls.
For	seven	generations,	nothing	but	girls.	If	I	 believed	in	luck,	and	if	 our	lives	had
turned	out	better	 than	how	 they	did,	 I’d	 say	it	 was	a	 lucky	 seven.	Even	still,	 I
sometimes	play	a	 bunch	of	 sevens	in	 the	lotto.	 Just	every	 once	in	 a	while,	 no

80
regular	thing.	Because	maybe	the	sevens	is	a	message	from	the	Lord.	Folks	 like
to	say,	“God	moves	in	 mysterious	ways,	His	wonders	to	 perform.”	 But	that	ain’t
Scripture.	That’s	a	hymn.	It’s	 Romans	11:33	that	says,	“O	the	depth	of	the	riches
both	 of	  the	  wisdom	  and	 knowledge	  of	  God!	  How	  unsearchable	 are	 his
judgments,	and	his	ways	past	finding	out!”
    Playing	 them	 sevens	helped	keep	my	lights	 on	a	time	 or	two.	 Lord	 can’t	 be
mad	at	that.	Seven	generations	of	us.	Dorcas	in	1871.	Adah	in	1890.	Adah’s	 five
daughters:	Chloe,	Mara,	 Shelomith,	 Salome,	and	in	 1906,	 my	mother,	 Matred.
Damaris,	me,	 1922,	 and	my	  younger	sisters,	 Vashti,	 Euodia,	 and	Cozbi.	  My
daughter,	Timna,	 in	 1937.	 Jael’s	 mother,	 Keturah,	 in	 1955.	 And	 a	 bunch	 of
nieces,	great-nieces,	and	cousins,	I	forget.	I	used-ta	could	name	us	all.
    I	 named	her	Jael.	My	finger	 landed	right	on	top	 of	the	name.	Usually	I	 had	to
look	 around	the	page	until	  I	found	 a	 name	for	 a	girl,	 or	 start	over	 on	another
page.	But	that	time,	I	 landed	right	on	it.	 I	was	so	excited	by	 that,	thinking	 it	was
a	sign	that	this	child	would	 be	blessed.	That	she	would	be	different.	 I	didn’t	 stop
to	read	the	story	of	Jael	in	the	Bible,	not	till	 much	later.
    Maybe	 if	 I	 had	 read	it,	 I	 mighta	chose	a	 different	 name.	But	 probably	 not.
What	I	 look	  like	 going	 against	six	 generations	 of	 tradition?	 We	 never	talked
about	the	stories	behind	the	names.	The	name	picked	was	the	name	given.
    When	 Jael	was	first	 taking	 the	bus	 to	school,	 some	of	the	 kids	would	 tease
her,	call	 her	“Jailbird,”	  especially	 that	 Twan.	He	 one	of	 Verdine	 Russell’s	 ill-
mannered	grandsons.	He’d	follow	 her	home	from	 the	bus	stop,	and	I’d	hear	him
out	front	 there,	calling	 her	“Jailbird!	  Jailbird!”	  And	 the	other	kids	 would	 laugh
and	join	 in.	 And	 that	Kachelle	 told	 them	 time	 and	time	 again,	“It’s	  JAH-ell.”
They	kept	on.	 But	Jael	didn’t	 pay	 ’em	no	 mind.	At	 the	time,	 I	 thought	she	was
just	doing	a	 good	job	of	 ignoring	 them	and	leaving	 them	to	the	 Lord	like	 I	 told
her	to.	But	 now	 I	know	 that	 their	teasing	just	 watered	that	 bad	seed	planted	in
her.
    We	 would	 come	together	for	 the	naming.	 My	 mother	and	 her	mother,	when
they	were	living;	 my	 sisters	and	me;	our	children	 and	then	their	children	 and	so
on.	We’d	 cook	and	 eat.	We’d	 ask	Father	God	to	 bless	the	mother	and	 the	girl-
child	yet	to	be	born.	We’d	 laugh	and	tell	stories.	And	 someone,	usually	whatever
man	was	around	at	 the	time,	 would	 always	ask,	“But	  what	if	 it’s	 a	boy?”	 And
we’d	just	laugh	some	more.
    Even	 if	 we	 was	arguing,	 fussing,	 and	fighting	 with	  each	other	just	 the	day
before,	the	tradition	 brought	us	together.	 We	honored	tradition.	 What	 else	were
we	 going	 to	 cling	  to?	 We	 had	five	  living	  generations	 when	 Jael	was	 born
because	we	 had	 our	 babies	 young,	  at	 fifteen,	 sixteen,	  seventeen,	eighteen,
nineteen.	Ain’t	 no	shame	or	pride.	Just	the	way	 it	was.	A	 family	 full	 of	 women,

81
and	we	had	the	worst	time	with	 men.	The	good	men	died	young,	and	the	terrible
ones	stayed	just	long	enough	to	make	you	wish	they	would	die.	God	forgive	 me.
    Some	 years	 back,	 the	 news	people	 came	 and	 did	 a	 story	 on	 our	 family
reunion.	It	was	on	a	national	 program.	But	now	 my	mama,	my	aunts,	my	sisters,
my	 daughter,	Jael’s	 mother	.	 .	 .	 all	 gone,	’cept	 my	 baby	 sister	 Vashti,	 some
cousins,	and	the	 nieces	and	great-nieces.	I	 guess	the	rest	of	 them	 just	naming
their	babies	any	old	 thing	now	 because	I	don’t	 hear	from	’em.	 Maybe	even	had
some	sons.	Who	knows?
    Jael	was	the	last	one	I	named.	And	she	is	my	cross	to	bear.
    And	 I	 named	the	ones	I	didn’t	 give	 birth	 to,	the	ones	I	drank	 the	tea	and	got
rid	of,	Lord	 Jesus,	forgive	me.	Anah.	Shimeath.	Ruth.	Baara.



CIGARETTE	  MOUTH	   didn’t	 taste	 as	bad	 as	I	 thought	 it	 would.	 Or	 maybe
because	I	had	something	else	on	my	mind,	 I	didn’t	 care.	In	 the	end,	it	would	 be
worth	it.	 The	cigarettes	Jamie	kept	smoking	made	me	want	to	gag,	though.	But	 I
didn’t.	I	 just	smiled	at	him	through	 the	smoke.
    We	 had	been	on	the	couch	kissing	for	a	while.	Then	Jamie	said	it	was	starting
to	get	dark	and	maybe	I	 should	leave	before	Granny	got	worried.	 Plus	he	had	to
get	up	at	3	in	the	morning	 for	 work.	 He	worked	at	the	Sunbeam	bread	factory.	 I
told	him	 that	 Granny	 wouldn’t	 be	 home	from	 Bible	  study	for	 at	 least	another
hour.	And	that	we	could	 do	more	than	just	kiss.	He	asked	me	if	I	had	done	more,
with	somebody	else.	I	said	no,	which	 is	the	truth.	 Jamie	asked	me	if	I	was	going
to	tell	 Kachelle.	 I	said	 I	don’t	  tell	her	 my	business.	He	 gave	a	tiny	 little	 smile
like	he	really	 liked	that	answer	but	didn’t	 want	 to	let	on.	And	 I	told	 him	that.	He
laughed	and	said,	You	don’t	miss	anything,	do	you?
    He	 started	to	push	me	back	on	the	couch.	I	 asked	him	if	 he	had	a	rubber.	He
looked	all	 disappointed	and	said,	Yeah.	He	got	 up	to	go	and	I	 told	him	 to	brush
his	teeth	while	he	was	at	it.	He	laughed	and	said,	Girl,	you	a	trip.
    By	  the	 time	 he	finished	  brushing	 and	 came	back	 with	  the	rubber,	 I	 was
standing	in	 his	front	 yard.	It	 was	dark	 out	there	 and	quiet.	Jamie	 came	outside
and	asked	me,	What’s	 the	 matter?	He	 didn’t	 say	it	 in	 a	 mad	way.	 Kinda	 in	 a
whisper.	I	told	 him	 nothing	was	the	matter.	I	 just	changed	my	mind	 and	I	 better
get	home.	He	nodded	real	slow	and	said	okay	and	that	I	was	welcome	anytime.
    When	 I	walked	home,	it	 was	like	all	 the	thoughts	in	my	 head	were	competing
to	be	first.	I	 couldn’t	 hold	on	to	one	at	a	time.	When	 I	turned	the	corner	onto	my
street,	one	thought	 finally	 won	 out:	 Sweet	Sadie.	I	 hadn’t	 seen	her	in	 a	 while
ever	since	Granny	started	leaving	for	church	 without	me.	But	 I	think	 about	her	a

82
lot	and	I	miss	her.



I	SLEPT	through	it.	I	hadn’t	been	sleeping	too	well	these	last	couple	of	weeks,	but
I	took	a	pill	 as	soon	as	I	got	home	from	Bible	study,	 and	it	knocked	me	right	out.
But	Barbara	next	door	said	she	heard	it,	woke	her	out	of	a	dead	sleep,	just	a	little
after	three	this	 morning.	 She	said	 it	 was	a	big	 boom!	 And	 she	thought	 it	 was
thunder	and	 then	rolled	 over	 and	went	 back	 to	 sleep.	But	 then	she	 heard	the
sirens.
    Some	kind	 of	gas	leak	is	what	 the	police	said,	from	 a	gas	stove.	It	was	on	the
news	this	 morning.	 They	 said	his	 name	was	 Jamie	McWhite,	  but	 they	 didn’t
have	no	picture.	My	 mother	 was	friends	 with	some	McWhites	  long	ago	when	 I
was	a	 girl.	 Barbara	 said	 he	was	 that	 light-skin	  one	drive	 the	 white	 Cadillac
around	here.	Said	his	mother—rest	 her	soul—her	last	name	was	Porter	 and	that
was	her	house	he	was	living	in.	Now	 I	remember	her	from	 way	back	when,	but	I
didn’t	know	 her	to	have	no	kids.	Barbara	said	Jamie’s	daddy	raised	him,	over	 on
the	east	side.	That’s	why	 I	 didn’t	 know	 him.	 But	Barbara	know	 a	woman	 what
live	down	the	street	from	 him,	and	she	told	Barbara	that	every	time	she	saw	him,
he	had	a	cigarette	in	his	mouth.	And	cigarettes	and	gas	don’t	mix.	 Good	thing	he
lived	at	 a	dead	end	and	the	 property	next	 to	his	 was	vacant.	Barbara	 say	there
was	a	little	damage	to	the	houses	behind	his,	but	“no	 other	fatalities”	 is	what	the
news	said.
    Jael	did	 something	this	 morning	 she	ain’t	 done	in	years.	She	climbed	 in	 my
bed	with	me	and	went	back	to	sleep.
    A	  little	  while	  later	 that	  Kachelle	 started	 calling	  on	 the	 phone	 for	  Jael,
sounding	sad.	Just	calling	and	calling	all	 day.	But	Jael	shook	her	head	no	when	I
tried	to	hand	 her	the	phone.	Finally,	 about	the	tenth	 time	that	 lil	 hussy	called,	I
just	told	 her,	“God	  don’t	 like	 ugly,”	 and	hung	 up	the	 phone.	She	ain’t	 call	 no
more	after	that.
    But	 I	want	 to	talk	to	 Jael	too.	I	still	 don’t	 know	what	 to	say	to	her.	This	child
thought	she	was	doing	the	right	 thing.	 And	 yes,	he	was	a	nasty,	nasty	man.	But
the	Bible	 clearly	say,	“Thou	  shalt	not	kill”	  and	“Vengeance	 is	mine,	sayeth	the
Lord.”	  And	 what	 if	  the	woman	 Barbara	 knows	 saw	 Jael	leaving	  that	 house
yesterday?	What	if	she	tells	the	police?
    Maybe	 Jael	can	tell	the	 police	how	 he	was	messing	around	with	 her	and	that
Kachelle.	People	would	understand	what	kind	of	person	he	was.
    But	 what	if	 they	don’t?	What	if	 they	say	Jael	is	a	fast-tail	girl	who	 .	.	.	?
    Lord	 Jesus,	give	me	the	 right	words	 to	say	to	 this	child	 and	give	 her	ears	to

83
hear!
    And	 watch	over	me,	Father	God.



I’M	 GOING	  to	set	my	alarm	 clock	to	 get	up	Sunday	morning	 and	go	to	church
with	Granny.	Wanna	see	Sister	Sadie	again.	For	real	and	not	just	in	my	dreams.
    Granny	 always	say,	Every	 shut	eye	ain’t	 sleep.	And	that’s	 how	I	 am.	I	 don’t
tell	 everything	  I	  know.	  I	  keep	 some	 stuff	  to	 myself.	  Sometimes	 forever,
sometimes	till	the	time	 is	right.	 I	just	let	 people	think	I	 don’t	know	 what’s	 going
on.	And	then,	when	they	least	expect	it	.	.	.	I	strike.
    But	 it	 doesn’t	have	to	be	that	way.	As	 long	as	people	keep	their	mouths	shut,
leave	me	alone,	and	mind	their	business,	it	doesn’t	have	to	be	that	way	at	all.



Extolled	above	women	be	Jael,
The	wife	of	Heber	the	Kenite,
Extolled	above	women	in	the	tent.
He	asked	for	water,	she	gave	him	milk;
She	brought	him	cream	in	a	lordly	dish.
She	stretched	forth	her	hand	to	the	nail,
Her	right	hand	to	the	workman’s	 hammer,
And	she	smote	Sisera;	she	crushed	his	head,
She	crashed	through	and	transfixed	his	temples.
At	her	feet	he	curled	himself,	he	fell,	 he	lay	still;
At	her	feet	he	curled	himself,	he	fell;
And	where	he	curled	himself,	let	 it	be,	there	he	fell	dead.
                                                                       —Song	of	Deborah,	Judges	5:24–27

84
       INSTRUCTIONS	           FOR	    MARRIED	        CHRISTIAN
                                              HUSBANDS






THE	BASICS
You,	the	infantilized	 husbands	of	accomplished	godly	women,	are	especially
low-hanging	fruit.	Ripe	for	the	picking	with	little	effort	on	my	part.	Buttery	soft
laughter	at	your	attempts	at	humor,	or	eye	contact	that	lasts	a	beat	too	long	but
subtle	enough	that	it	leaves	you	wondering	if	maybe	you	just	imagined	it	was	a
beat	too	long.	Maybe	it	was	just	wishful	thinking	on	your	part	that	I	leaned	in
closer	each	time	you	spoke,	that	I	was	really	tuned	in	to	and	turned	on	by	your
monologues	on	fantasy	football	and	barbecue.	Or	maybe	you	just	want	a	woman
to	treat	you	like	a	man	for	a	change,	and	not	like	one	of	her	children.

Despite	your	frustrations,	you	may	not	want	to	stray.	Perhaps	this	is	your	first
time.	And	you	 didn’t	imagine	it	 would	be	 with	someone	like	me—dark	with
short,	kinky	hair.	Someone	so	different	from	your	wife.	But	it	was	my	eyes,	my
lips,	my	teeth,	my	smile,	my	intellect,	my	breasts,	my	easy	laughter	that	got	you.
I	understand	you	feel	the	need	to	offer	some	explanation	for	stepping	out	with
someone	like	me,	some	reason	for	why	I	turn	you	on.

Why	do	you	turn	me	on?	It’s	that	you	want	me	when	there	are	so	many	reasons
you	shouldn’t.	That	turns	me	on.	Your	hunger,	your	deprivation	turn	me	on.	I
don’t	care	why	 your	 wife	 won’t	 fuck	you	 properly;	it’s	 satisfaction	enough
simply	knowing	she	won’t.	All	 the	risk	is	yours,	but	I’ll	 wade	out	into	it	 with
you.	I’ve	always	enjoyed	playing	in	the	deep	end.

PARKING
There	is	on-street	parking	in	my	neighborhood.	I	recommend	you	park	at	least
one	block	away.	The	nearby	business	district	provides	a	convenient	alibi.

SOCIAL	MEDIA	AND	TECHNOLOGY
Facebook:	Continue	to	post	Scripture	memes	about	God’s	faithfulness	and	how
Jesus	is	your	all	in	all,	if	you	do	that	sort	of	thing.	If	you	don’t,	don’t	start	now.
See	also	“Your	Religion”	below.

Because	this	town	is	small,	Facebook	may	recommend	me	as	a	Person	You	May

85
Know.	I	 hope	it	goes	without	saying	that	you	should	delete	this.

Post	a	picture	of	your	 wife	 on	Woman	Crush	Wednesdays	#wcw,	 but	be	sure	to
caption	it	 that	she	is	your	crush	every	 day.	Also	 post	pictures	of	 the	two	of	 you
on	your	 anniversary,	her	 birthday,	 and	at	other	 random	times,	 just	 to	say	how
amazing	she	is.	Your	profile	picture	 should	be	a	picture	of	the	two	of	you.

Communication:	 We	will	  not	 exchange	phone	numbers.	We	 will	 communicate
exclusively	via	 the	texting	app	I	asked	you	to	download.

Your	phone:	Lock	 it.	 Require	a	passcode	or	finger-swipe	combination	 to	unlock
it.

Photos:	Don’t	 send	them.	Don’t	ask	for	them.

Note:	If	 you	want	 to	get	caught,	as	some	of	 you	do	because	you	don’t	 have	the
courage	to	pull	the	plug	 on	your	marriage	directly,	 ignore	these	precautions.	See
also	“Your	Conscience.”

ABOUT	ME
The	 less	you	 know,	  the	 better.	 And	 that	 works	  both	 ways.	 Boundaries	 are
crucial.	Here’s	what	I	 can	tell	you:

I	have	 no	children,	 and	I’ve	  never	been	married.	 My	 life	 is	 my	 own.	I	 own	 a
bakery,	which	 is	probably	where	 we	met.	Maybe	 I	baked	your	 wedding	cake	or
your	daughter’s	birthday	cake.	I	make	the	best	peach	cobbler	in	the	city.

I	grew	 up	 watching	 my	 mother	 eating	the	 crumbs	and	 leftovers	 from	 another
woman’s	table.	I	swore	I	never	would.	 But	here	I	am	grubbing,	licking	 the	edges.

HEALTH	AND	WELLNESS
Bring	original	 copies	only	of	 your	STI	test	results	from	 tests	taken	within	the	last
thirty	days.	No	exceptions.	No,	not	 even	if	you	haven’t	been	with	 anyone	besides
your	wife	 in	decades.	Surely	you	understand	why	 I	can’t	 take	you	at	your	word.
No	honor	among	thieves.	Or	something	like	that.

If	 you	 aren’t	 capable	of	 making	 an	 appointment	 for	 yourself	 and	 getting	 the
testing	done,	you	don’t	deserve	to	fuck.

You	will	 wear	a	condom	at	all	 times.	This	is	non-negotiable.	If	 you	are	unable	to
get	an	erection	while	wearing	a	condom,	go	home	to	your	wife.

Note:	 My	 baby	 factory	 has	 been	closed,	 surgically,	 for	  some	time	 now.	  No
worries	there.

YOUR	RELIGION

86
By	all	 means,	continue	 teaching	Sunday	 School,	leading	 the	Boy	 Scout	 troop,
and	serving	on	the	deacon	board	at	church.

If	 guilt	 gets	the	 best	of	 you,	 do	not	 attempt	to	 witness	 to	me	 or	 invite	 me	to
church.	Don’t	ask	me	to	repent,	because	I	regret	nothing.

You	can’t	save	me,	because	I’m	not	in	peril.

YOUR	WIFE
Don’t	 speak	ill	 of	her	 to	me.	I	 don’t	 want	to	 hear	about	how	 she	just	lies	there
like	 a	 starfish	during	  sex	or	 how	 she	 emasculates	you	 in	 front	 of	 company.
That’s	a	slippery	slope	to	justifying	 why	 you’re	here,	and	we’re	not	doing	 that.

You	 know	  her,	 but	  I	 know	  women.	 You	  assume	 she	would	  be	 angry	  or
disappointed	to	learn	you’re	 cheating.	 But	you	 may	be	surprised	to	 know	 some
wives	are	actually	 relieved.	Your	 wife	 probably	 appreciates	the	peace	and	quiet
of	you	 taking	your	 needs	elsewhere.	She	may	actually	 desire	sex,	just	not	 with
you,	not	anymore.	You	 may	want	to	explore	 with	a	marriage	counselor	why	 that
is.	See	also	“Therapist.”

MONEY
Gifts	are	welcome,	 but	do	not	offer	 me	money	or	 to	pay	my	 bills.	 I’m	 not	a	sex
worker.

SEX
You	may	spank	me	and	dress	me	up	in	trashy	lingerie.	I	find	 those	things	tedious
and	terribly	unoriginal,	 but	I	will	  oblige.	See	also	“Fantasies.”

I	am	 easily	 and	multiply	  orgasmic.	 Understand	this	 has	very	 little	 to	 do	 with
your	sexual	 prowess.	Physical	 arousal	is	 easy;	I	 crave	 mental	and	 intellectual
stimulation.	Get	inside	my	 head.	Surprise	me.	Challenge	me.

I’m	 not	overly	 concerned	with	 your	 dick,	though	 it	 is	important.	 I	like	 hands.	I
really,	 really	 like	 hands.	 The	 bigger,	 the	better.	 I	 want	 to	 be	held,	 caressed,
cupped,	and	grabbed.

I	also	 like	 lips	 and	tongues	and	kissing.	 Deep,	 passionate	kisses,	and	biting.	 I
will	 come	if	you	 kiss	me	right.	If	 you	discover	my	 secret	place	and	kiss	me	there
and	touch	me	there	just	right,	I	will	 drown	us	both.

Note:	Do	you	know	 what	your	wife	 likes	and	doesn’t	like?	You	 should.

YOUR	CONSCIENCE
If	 you	decide	to	 confess	to	your	 wife,	 make	sure	she	doesn’t	 come	over	to	 my

87
house.	She	will	  get	 her	feelings	 hurt.	 Our	 arrangement	is	 nonbinding;	 if	  you
want	to	leave,	go.	But	don’t	bring	 your	mess	into	my	yard.

And	 when	 you’re	  here,	don’t	  dawdle.	 I	 hate	 small	 talk.	 Leave	 your	  nerves
outside	my	door.	Do	or	don’t	 do;	there	is	no	try.

See	also	“Therapist.”

SUBSTANCES
Don’t	 come	to	me	under	the	 influence	of	 anything.	 You	will	  be	fully	 in	 control
of	your	faculties	and	responsible	for	your	 actions	at	all	times.

Don’t	 ask	me	to	 score	drugs	 either.	Not	 even	weed.	Ask	 your	 cousin,	 the	one
everybody	in	your	family	 says	should	be	more	like	you.

TRAVEL
I	am	available	to	travel	with	 sufficient	 notice	and	at	your	expense.

THERAPIST
I	am	not	 yours.	I	 don’t	 want	 to	hear	about	your	 fears	of	 failure	 or	inadequacy,
childhood	traumas,	midlife	  regrets,	children,	 or	frustrations	 with	 your	 job.	This
is	one	 of	 the	 safeguards	that	keeps	feelings	 at	 bay,	 and	more	 importantly,	  it
keeps	me	from	resenting	you	the	way	your	wife	does.

YOUR	ARRIVAL
Place	your	 wedding	 band	on	 my	nightstand.	 Your	 hands	may	 be	immaculate,
nails	tapered.	Or	they	may	 be	rough	and	dry	 from	the	cold,	 lack	of	 attention,	or
both.	 But	  they	 must	 be	  large,	 and	 your	  grip	 should	  always	 be	 firm	   and
aggressive.

Remove	your	cuff	 links	 and	unbutton	your	 monogrammed	shirt.	 Pull	your	 alma
mater	or	fraternity	sweatshirt	over	 your	head.	Take	off	the	striped	polo	shirt	 your
kids	gave	you	for	Father’s	Day.

Take	off	your	 undershirt.	Your	 chest	may	be	hairy	or	 smooth;	your	manscaping,
or	lack	thereof,	 is	your	business.	Your	 abs	may	be	taut	and	defined,	or	you	 may
have	dad	bod,	soft	and	rounded	in	places	that	used	to	be	taut.	Or	your	belly	 may
tell	 the	 story	 of	 the	 nightly	 cognac,	 gin,	 or	 beer	 you	 drink	 to	 forget.	 Or	  to
remember.

Slip	off	 your	 Cole	Haan	 loafers	or	 your	Adidas.	 Take	off	 your	 socks.	Or	leave
them	on.

Toss	your	jeans,	your	 sweats,	your	tailored	 Armani	 suit	 pants	onto	the	 back	of

88
my	chair,	the	foot	of	 my	bed,	or	the	floor.

Pull	down	 your	boxers	or	boxer	 briefs	and	step	out	of	 them.	(If	 you	are	wearing
regular	briefs,	you	 will	 be	asked	to	 leave.)	Show	me	that	 you	are	ready	for	 me,
or	that	you	are	not	yet	ready	and	would	like	my	 assistance.

Silence	your	phone,	or	don’t.

Regardless	of	the	options	you	 choose	above,	you	will	 remove	the	 reminder	that
you	don’t	 belong	 here.	Your	 wedding	 band	must	 remain	on	 my	 nightstand,	in
view	at	all	times.	It	 is	your	lifesaver.	 It	will	 keep	you	from	 floating	 away	into	me
for	more	than	a	few	hours.

FOREPLAY
I	understand	that	sex	with	your	 wife	 is	an	orchestrated	event	you	prep	for,	much
like	surgery.	 She	requires	coaxing,	 compliments,	massages,	and	other	romantic
gestures	to	get	her	in	the	 mood	to	have	sex	with	 you.	 I	require	 no	such	thing.	 I
build	monuments	to	my	impulses	and	desires	on	the	backs	of	men	like	you.

FANTASIES
We	all	have	a	dark	 side.	I	invite	 you	to	 explore	yours	with	 me.	I	 won’t	 judge	or
shame	you,	and	it	goes	without	 saying	 that	all	 your	secrets	are	safe	with	 me.	If
you	propose	something	I	 can’t	oblige,	 I’ll	  simply	say	no,	 and	we’ll	 never	speak
of	it	again.

I	understand	that	some	fantasies	aren’t	dark.	They	just	.	.	.	are.	Same	rules	apply.
No	judgment,	no	shame.	Role-playing	 is	a	good	way	to	discover	what	you	 like.	I
have	some	favorites	I	can	share	with	you,	upon	request.

FEELINGS
I	hate	to	break	it	 to	your	 ego,	but	good	dick	 won’t	 cause	me	to	develop	feelings
for	you.	If	 you	develop	feelings	for	 me,	don’t	worry;	 the	moment	will	 pass.

Under	no	circumstances	should	you	 even	think	 about	leaving	your	 marriage	for
me.	You	can	leave	the	 marriage	if	 you	want,	but	 not	for	 me.	I’m	 not	 waiting	 in
the	wings	 for	 you	 to	 be	 single.	 Remember:	My	  reasons	for	 wanting	 you	 are
predicated	on	your	hunger	and	the	fact	that	you	are	off	 limits.	 Don’t	 ruin	this	for
me	by	acting	like	a	lovelorn	 teenager.

Note:	In	 the	 event	I	 do	 start	 to	fall	  for	 you,	 you	will	  know	 because	I’ll	  stop
responding	to	your	text	messages.	This	is	for	the	best.

The	austere	tone	of	these	instructions	aside,	I	actually	 like	you	 and	can’t	wait	 to
fuck	you.	 If	I	 didn’t	 like	 you,	if	 the	thought	of	 you	didn’t	 make	my	 panties	wet,

89
we	wouldn’t	 be	here.

YOUR	DEPARTURE
You	will	  leave	beyond	satisfied.	 I	will	  treat	every	time	 we’re	 together	as	if	 it’s
our	last.	So	many	wild	cards	with	 men	like	you,	I’ve	 learned.

Shower	or	don’t.	Gather	your	 things.	Leave	nothing	behind.	Slide	your	 ring	back
onto	your	finger.	Tread	until	 you	are	back	on	dry	land.

90
                      WHEN	      EDDIE	     LEVERT	       COMES






“TODAY	IS	 the	day,”	Mama	announced,	as	she	did	every	day	when	Daughter
came	to	her	room	with	the	breakfast	tray.
    “Good	morning,	Mama.”	Daughter	set	the	tray	on	the	padded	bench	in	front
of	Mama’s	vanity.	She	squinted	at	the	early	morning	sun	shining	through	the
thin	curtains.	Mama’s	vanity	was	covered	with	powders	and	bottles	of	fragrances
that	hadn’t	been	touched	in	months.
    Mama	 brushed	past	Daughter	without	a	 word.	 She	opened	a	chifforobe
drawer	and	took	out	a	navy-and-white-striped	short-sleeved	blouse.	She	carried
the	blouse	over	to	her	bed	and	placed	it	above	a	light-blue	cotton	skirt	with	an
elastic	waistband,	smoothing	down	the	fabric	of	both	items	with	her	hands,	as	if
ironing.	She	frowned.
    “Where	did	all	 my	beautiful	things	go?”	she	asked	Daughter,	the	room,	the
air.	“My	beautiful	wrap	dresses	and	my	pencil	skirts?	I	want	to	look	my	best	for
him.	He’s	coming	today,	you	know.	Where	are	my	lovely	sheer	blouses	and	my
pant-suits?	Have	you	seen	them?	Did	you	move	them	from	my	closet?	Are	you
stealing	from	me?”
    “No,	Mama,”	Daughter	said.
    “I	 bought	all	of	those	things	with	my	employee	discount	at	Marshall	Field’s
department	store.	You	have	no	right	to	take	them	from	me.”
    Daughter	didn’t	 remind	Mama	that	Marshall	Field’s	didn’t	 exist	 anymore,
and	that	she	hadn’t	worked	there	since	the	eighties.	Instead	she	gently	led	Mama
away	from	the	bed	and	into	her	recliner	so	she	could	eat.	Mama’s	appetite	was
still	solid.	The	doctor	said	that	was	a	good	thing,	relatively	speaking.
    Mama	chattered	on	as	she	busied	herself	buttering	toast	and	adding	ketchup
to	her	eggs,	something	Daughter	had	always	thought	gross	even	though	she	liked
both	ketchup	and	eggs.
    “He’s	coming	today,”	Mama	said	between	chews.	Droplets	of	ketchup	dotted
the	white	ribbon	on	the	front	of	her	nightgown.	Irrationally,	this	irked	Daughter,
and	she	made	a	mental	note	to	put	some	stain	remover	on	it	before	throwing	it	in
the	wash.	Easily	irked	and	forever	trying	to	make	order	out	of	chaos,	she	was
indeed	her	mother’s	daughter—the	mother	before	this	current	mother.	In	some
ways,	Daughter	preferred	this	current	mother.	In	the	oblivion	of	her	mind,	Mama

91
was	kinder—accusations	of	theft	notwithstanding—and	 her	needs	were	simpler.
    Mama	 dabbed	at	her	mouth	with	 a	paper	towel.	 “Delicious.	 Thank	 you,”	 she
said	in	Daughter’s	general	direction.
    “You’re	  welcome,	 Mama.”	 Daughter	was	still	 getting	 used	to	such	courtesy.
She	headed	for	the	door.	 It	 was	almost	time	 for	 her	first	 house	showing	 of	the
day	and	for	the	home	nurse	to	arrive	and	relieve	her.
    “You	  can	come	right	back	 for	this	 tray,”	 Mama	called	after	 her.	“I	 got	to	get
ready.	He’ll	 be	here	shortly.	Make	 sure	you	let	 me	know	when	 he’s	at	the	door,
hear?”
    Daughter	 heard,	but	she	stood	silent	with	her	hand	on	the	doorknob,	 her	back
to	Mama.
    “Did	  you	hear	me?”	Mama’s	voice	 took	on	an	edge	of	pleading.	“Today’s	 the
day.”
    Daughter	 left	the	room	and	shut	the	door	tight	behind	her.



As	a	kid	during	summer	breaks	from	school,	Daughter	would	 sometimes	whisper
her	real	 name	 to	 herself,	 just	 so	she	 wouldn’t	  go	months	 at	 a	 time	 without
hearing	it.	Everyone	except	her	teachers	followed	 Mama’s	lead	and	never	called
her	by	 her	name,	always	 “Daughter,”	  as	if	 she	existed	 only	 in	 relation	 to	 her
mother,	to	her	function	 in	the	family.	  Daughter.	Housekeeper.	Cook.	Babysitter.
Nurse.	Slave.	That’s	what	 she	felt	like.	 Daughter,	 could	you	do	 this?	Daughter,
could	you	 do	 that?	Which	  translated	into:	 You	 will	 do	 this.	 You	will	  do	that.
Without	 question	or	complaint,	 or	else	she	got	slapped.	Meanwhile	 her	brothers
Rico	and	 Bruce	had	been	called	 by	 their	 given	names	and	 did	only	 what	 they
pleased.
    Not	 much	changed	in	their	adulthood,	only	 that	Bruce	was	dead.	Drugs.	Rico,
his	wife,	 and	kids	 lived	 on	the	other	 side	of	 town.	Daughter	 had	to	shame	him
into	coming	 over	on	occasion	to	 give	her	a	break	at	least,	even	if	 he	didn’t	 care
about	spending	time	with	Mama.
    “Yo,	  she’s	gotta	 stop	saying,	‘Today	  is	the	day,’	 ”	 Rico	 had	complained	 to
Daughter	the	first	time	Mama	 told	him	about	Eddie	Levert.	 “I	 don’t	want	 to	keep
hearing	that	crazy	shit	over	and	over	again.”
    “I	  listen	 to	 it	 day	in	 and	 day	out,”	  Daughter	snapped.	“You	  want	 to	trade
places?”
    “You	  could	hire	someone	full-time—”
    “Or	 you	could	 act	like	a	son	who	gives	a	damn.”
    Rico	 crossed	his	 arms	and	 sighed.	At	 forty,	 he	 still	 had	a	 baby	face	 and	a

92
perpetual	pout.
    “I	  shouldn’t	 have	 to	pay	 someone	to	sit	 with	 her	 when	 you’re	 right	 here,”
Daughter	had	said.	“I	know	she	wasn’t	a	perfect	mother.	But	 she	is	our	mother.”
    “Don’t	  lecture	 me	about	 her,”	 Rico	 said.	Daughter	 knew	that	 Mama	 didn’t
like	Rico’s	 wife,	 and	the	feeling	 was	mutual,	so	she’d	never	 gotten	to	know	 her
grandkids.	But	 Daughter	 had	never	asked	Rico	 what	 it	 was	like	 for	 him	 those
two	years	between	when	she’d	 left	 home	and	when	he	left	 to	join	 the	air	 force.
They	had	all	 been	grieving	 Bruce’s	 death	in	 their	 own	 way.	But	 whatever	 life
with	Mama	 was	like	for	 Rico	 after	Daughter	moved	out,	she	couldn’t	 imagine	 it
being	worse	 than	what	 she	endured:	Mama	 had	never	 laid	 a	hand	on	 Rico	 or
Bruce.
    “Fine.	  I	won’t	 lecture,”	 Daughter	 had	said.	“Just	 .	.	.	 if	 Mama	wants	 to	talk
about	Eddie	Levert,	let	her.	She	ain’t	hurtin’	 nobody,	Rico.”
    At	 least	not	the	way	she	used	to.



The	Bible	says,	“Train	 up	a	child	in	 the	way	he	should	go,	and	when	he	is	old	he
will	 not	depart	from	 it.”	 In	 Mama’s	 case,	in	her	old	age,	she	never	spoke	of	the
Bible.	 Instead	 she	preached	the	 gospel	 of	 the	 coming	 of	 Eddie	 Levert,	 lead
singer	of	her	favorite	group	back	in	 the	day,	the	O’Jays.
    Both	 Eddie	and	Mama,	 son	and	daughter	of	the	 South,	had	had	to	bury	 their
children,	 something	 even	 Daughter,	 who	 had	never	 had	 kids,	 understood	 as
especially	cruel.	 Perhaps	Mama	had	 followed	 Eddie’s	 life	 and	 career	over	the
years	and	felt	a	special,	unshakable	bond	with	him.
    In	  one	of	  the	 family	  photo	 albums	in	  Daughter’s	 basement,	there	 was	 a
Polaroid	picture	 of	 Mama	 with	 Eddie,	 taken	in	 the	seventies	when	 the	O’Jays
came	 to	 town.	  Mama	 had	  somehow	 gotten	 backstage	 after	  the	 concert—
Daughter	had	 never	been	told	 the	 details—and	 took	 the	picture,	 which	 Eddie
signed.	In	the	 picture,	Mama	 wore	a	low-cut,	  fire-red	 dress	that	hugged	all	 her
curves.	Her	hair,	 dyed	a	 brassy	reddish	brown,	 had	been	hot	 combed	and	then
curled	into	 Farrah	Fawcett	 flips.	 If	 not	for	 her	 full	 nose	and	lips,	 she	could’ve
passed	as	a	Farrah	look-alike,	 as	she	was	barely	 darker.	 Eddie	was	 as	dark	as
Mama	was	light.	 He	wore	a	white	 suit,	his	chest	bare,	lapels	wide.	With	 his	arm
wrapped	tight	  around	 Mama’s	 tiny	  waist,	 Eddie	 grinned	 big	  at	the	 camera.
Mama	grinned	big	 at	him.	 As	a	 child,	Daughter	 would	 pull	out	 the	album	from
time	to	time	and	stare	at	the	photo,	proof	that	Mama	had	once	been	happy.
    When	  Daughter	 moved	out	  at	eighteen,	 it	 was	 partly	 because	she	 feared
Mama’s	unhappiness	was	contagious	and	partly	 because	she	was	tired	of	 being

93
everyone’s	maid.	 Once	she	was	 out	 of	the	 house,	Daughter	 didn’t	 walk	 away
completely.	There	were	 no	more	slaps,	no	more	 wounding	words,	 and	from	 the
outside	looking	in,	Mama	 and	Daughter	could’ve	been	mistaken	for	close.



One	Friday	 evening,	 Daughter	and	 Mama	 sat	at	the	 kitchen	 table	 waiting	 for
Rico	to	 arrive.	Daughter	 had	shamed	him	 into	coming	 over	 for	a	 few	hours	 so
she	could	 go	out	 to	 dinner	 with	 Tony,	 an	 old	 friend	 from	 high	 school.	 Tony
stopped	by	from	 time	to	time	 to	take	care	of	 things	Daughter	needed	taken	care
of	around	 the	house.	 Including	 Daughter.	 The	year	 before,	 after	Mama	 had	a
second	stroke	and	the	doctor	diagnosed	her	with	vascular	dementia,	it	was	Tony,
not	Rico,	 who	had	helped	Daughter	 pack	up	Mama’s	 belongings	 and	move	her
into	Daughter’s	house.
    When	 Tony	arrived,	Mama	told	 him,	“Today	 is	the	day.	Eddie	is	coming.”
    Tony	 smiled	at	Mama	and	said,	“Okay,	 young	lady.	I	see	you!”
    Mama	 beamed	and	stood	up	to	show	Tony	her	outfit.	 “This	 is	all	 I	could	 find
in	that	 chifforobe	 to	 wear.”	 She	cut	her	 eyes	at	Daughter,	 who	 just	shook	 her
head.	“Do	you	think	 he	will	 like	it?”
    “Oh,	  yes,	ma’am!”	 Tony	 said,	 “If	 I	 was	a	 few	 years	younger,	Eddie	 would
have	some	competition	on	his	hands.”
    “Oh,	 go	on!”	 Mama	said,	blushing.
    “It’s	  been	so	long	since	I	 seen	him,”	 Mama	said.	With	 one	hand,	she	tapped
her	tapered	nails	 against	the	 tabletop.	With	  the	other,	 she	scratched	her	head.
Daughter	felt	negligent;	 Mama	was	overdue	for	 a	wash	and	condition.	 Daughter
would	call	 her	friend	 Tami	in	 the	morning	 to	see	if	 she	could	squeeze	Mama	in
at	her	salon.
    When	 Rico	 finally	 arrived,	 forty-five	  minutes	 late,	Mama	 clapped	and	said,
“There’s	my	 baby	boy!”
    Rico	 kissed	Mama	on	the	cheek,	but	rolled	 his	eyes	when	she	told	him	 Eddie
was	coming.	“Why	 is	she	scratching	her	head	like	that?”	he	asked	Daughter	with
entirely	too	much	bass	and	accusation	in	his	voice.
    “Don’t.”	   Daughter	hissed	at	 him	in	 response.	She	turned	to	 Mama.	“Mama,
Tony	and	I	are	going	out.	Rico	is	going	 to	stay	with	you.	I’ll	  see	you	later.”
    “Okay,”	  Mama	 said	to	the	air.	 And	 to	Tony:	 “You	 have	a	good	time,	 young
man.”
    Inside	 Tony’s	car,	Daughter	wept	openly,	 and	he	rubbed	her	back	and	let	her.
    Once	she	had	calmed	to	just	sniffling,	 she	said,	“I’m	 sorry.”
    “For	 what?”	 Tony	asked.

94
    “For	.	.	.	all	of	that.	I	don’t	know	where	that	came	from.”
    “Maybe	 it	came	from	the	fact	 that	you	taking	care	of	your	mama	and	she
doesn’t	even	know	who	you	are.	But	then	Rico	comes	in,	doesn’t	lift	a	finger	to
help	without	you	asking,	and	it’s	all	love	from	your	mama.	I’m	just	surprised	it
took	you	this	long.”
    Daughter	sobbed	again.	Tony	started	the	car	and	began	driving.	“Dinner	can
wait,”	he	said.	“We	can	just	drive,	if	you	want.”
    Daughter	nodded.	“You	know,	even	after	I	moved	out,	I	was	still	there	for
her.	After	Bruce	died,	she	threw	herself	into	everything—children’s	church,	Girl
Scouts,	Sunday	School.	And	I	drove	her	anytime	she	needed	a	ride.	I	took	her	to
the	grocery	store	every	other	week.	I	made	sure	she	didn’t	spend	Christmas,
Easter,	or	Thanksgiving	alone.	Me!	Not	Rico.	And	now	I’m	taking	care	of	her.
Even	after	.	.	.	 even	after	how	things	were	for	me	 growing	up.	Trying	to	 let
bygones	be	bygones.	I	was	there	for	her.	And	I	still	am.	But	for	all	she	knows,
I’m	just	another	home	nurse.
    “And	 I	try	not	to	be	an	asshole	like	Rico	about	the	whole	Eddie	Levert	thing,
but	she	cares	more	about	that	man	than	she	does	me!	Every	single	day,	it’s	the
same	thing.	Sometimes	I	just	 want	 to	 scream,	‘He’s	not	 coming!	 Ever!’	 ”
Daughter	exhaled.	“Is	that	terrible?”
    Tony	 stroked	his	beard	and	tilted	his	head	from	side	to	 side,	like	he	was
working	out	a	kink	in	his	neck.
    “What?”	Daughter	asked.
    “I	 don’t	want	to	speak	out	of	turn	.	.	.”
    “Just	say	it.”
    “First,	you	need	a	break.	And	I	don’t	mean	this,	us	going	out	for	dinner.	You
need	a	real	break.	A	vacation.	But	more	than	that	.	.	.”	Tony	sighed.	“Look,	I
don’t	know	what	all	went	down	when	you	were	growing	up.	But	you	gotta	make
peace	with	it.	I	know	that’s	easier	said	than	done.	But	I	think	you	have	to	find	a
way.”
    That’s	all	I’ve	ever	done,	Daughter	thought	but	didn’t	say.	Find	a	way	to	keep
from	upsetting	Mama,	find	a	way	to	keep	Rico	out	of	Mama’s	hair,	find	a	way	to
get	away	from	Mama,	find	 a	way	 to	take	care	of	 herself	with	no	 help	from
Mama.	Work	low-wage	job	after	low-wage	job	until	she	became	a	Realtor	and
found	she	had	a	knack	for	 selling,	buying,	 and	flipping	 houses.	And	now	a
second	job:	take	care	of	Mama.	Daughter	cursed	under	her	breath.
    “Like	 I	said,	I	don’t	know	what	all	went	down	.	.	.”	Tony	said.
    “I’ll	  tell	you,”	Daughter	said.	“But	let’s	go	eat.	I’m	starving.”

95
People	in	the	neighborhood	used	to	say	that	Mama	kept	pushing	out	 babies	until
she	got	the	color	 right.	 Daughter,	her	middle	 child,	 was	darker	 than	Bruce,	 the
oldest,	despite	Daughter’s	 father	being	 lighter	 than	Bruce’s.	 Mama’s	 third	 and
last	child,	Ricardo,	called	 Rico,	fathered	by	a	Puerto	Rican	musician	who	 passed
through	one	summer,	was	a	buttery	yellow	 baby	 boy	with	 green	eyes	and	sandy
hair.	His	 tight	 curls,	thick	 lips,	 and	broad	nose	meant	that	he	could	 never	pass.
But	passing	wasn’t	the	point.	 From	what	Daughter	could	 piece	together	between
her	own	observations	and	what	she	overheard	Mama	telling	her	friends,	the	point
was	that	Rico	had	Mama’s	color.	 So	for	once	the	genetic	dice	had	rolled	in	favor
of	 the	light-bright	  girl	  who	 believed	 dark	 niggas	fucked	 the	 best	 of	 all.	 She
played	a	kind	of	DNA	 roulette	every	time	 she	brought	one	into	her	bed.
    And	 then	Mama	 got	saved.	It	 happened	one	Easter	Sunday—they	only	 went
to	church	on	Mother’s	Day,	 Christmas	Eve,	and	Easter.	On	Mother’s	Day,	Mama
would	wear	a	white	flower	 pinned	to	her	dress—Bruce	called	 it	The	Dead	Mama
flower—and	 spend	all	day	before	 and	after	church	 in	her	bedroom	 sobbing	and
missing	her	mother.
    Daughter,	 Bruce,	and	 Rico	had	 few	memories	 of	their	 grandmother,	a	 well-
dressed,	white-looking	Black	 woman	who	 had	disowned	their	mother	for	 having
children	out	 of	wedlock.	 But	 she	did	come	to	visit	 a	few	 times	when	 they	were
growing	up,	always	bearing	bundles	of	toys,	 a	crisp	twenty-dollar	 bill	 for	each	of
them,	and	for	Mama,	withering	 words	 about	how	she	was	living	 outside	the	will
of	God.	 Even	 as	a	child,	  Daughter	understood	 her	mama’s	 tears	on	 Mother’s
Day.	She	understood	how	your	 heart	was	still	 connected	to	your	 mama,	even	if
she	hurt	you	sometimes.
    At	  first	 Daughter	 and	her	 brothers	felt	  joyful	 after	 Mama	 got	 saved,	even
though	they	didn’t	 fully	 understand	why.	They	 were	twelve,	ten,	and	eight	 years
old,	and	the	best	they	could	figure	 is	that	the	church	ladies	who	surrounded	their
mother	as	the	pastor	prayed	had	done	some	sort	of	magic.	Mama	 had	walked	to
the	front	of	 the	church	weeping	during	 the	altar	call,	but	left	 the	service	smiling,
her	arms	wrapped	around	her	children,	holding	them	close	as	they	walked	home.
Mama’s	 mama	 had	died	 suddenly	 the	 year	 before—Daughter	 had	 overheard
Mama	 say	 the	word	  aneurysm,	 but	 didn’t	  know	 what	 it	  meant.	 She’d	 also
overheard	Mama	tell	her	friend	 Miss	Lajene	that	she’d	 wished	she’d	gotten	right
with	God	before	her	mama	died.
    Unfortunately	  the	zeal	of	 the	newly	 converted	is	bewildering	  to	the	children
of	 the	newly	 converted.	 One	Saturday	 night,	 you’ve	 got	 every	 blanket	 in	 the
house	draped	over	your	head	to	drown	out	the	sound	of	your	mother’s	headboard
banging	against	your	bedroom	wall	as	she	hollers	her	soon-to-be-ex-best	friend’s
husband’s	name.	And	the	next	Saturday	night,	she’s	snatching	the	softened	deck

96
of	playing	cards	from	 your	hands	because	“Games	of	chance	are	from	the	devil!”
    Daughter,	 with	the	logic	 of	 a	ten-year-old,	thought	she	could	understand	how
gin	rummy	might	 be	from	the	devil,	 seeing	as	how	the	name	of	the	game	had	gin
in	it.	  But	 what	was	 wrong	 with	 “Knuckles”	  or	 “I	  Declare	War,”	  her	 and	her
brothers’	other	favorite	games?
    Some	things	 changed	about	Mama	A.C.	 (After	 Church,	 as	Daughter	thought
of	her).	 Like	 banning	 cards	and	 men	from	 the	 house.	But	 some	things	 didn’t
change.	She	still	told	Bruce	and	Rico	to	shut	their	mouths—and	Daughter	to	 shut
her	Black	mouth—if	 they	talked	too	loudly	 when	her	stories	were	on.
    And	  the	 church	 was	 no	 match	 for	  Eddie	 Levert.	  The	 O’Jays	 were	 still
Mama’s	 favorite	 group,	 and	Eddie	 Levert	 was	 still	 her	 favorite	 in	 the	 group.
Mama	B.C.	 (Before	 Church)	 would	  tell	 her	girlfriends	  Miss	 Nancy	 and	Miss
Lajene,	“Eddie	 Levert	can	 have	me	anytime,	anywhere,	and	anyway	 he	want	it,
honey!	You	hear	me?”	And	 they	would	all	 fall	out	laughing.
    Mama	 B.C.	played	O’Jays	 albums	on	Friday	 nights	after	dinner,	if	 she	didn’t
have	a	date	or	a	card	 party	to	 go	to.	 She’d	close	her	 eyes,	swing	her	hips,	 and
sing	along	with	 the	music.	 Her	dance	partners—a	Kool	 cigarette	 and	a	glass	of
whisky,	on	the	rocks.	Johnnie	Walker	Red	was	her	drink	of	 choice.
    On	 those	 Friday	 nights,	 Rico	 played	 DJ,	 changing	the	 albums	 for	 Mama,
while	Daughter	 played	bartender,	adding	ice	 and	more	liquor	 as	needed,	before
Mama	could	ask	for	it.	 It	was	like	 a	nightclub	 for	one,	with	 Mama	getting	lost	 in
love	 songs	 and	 crying	  by	 night’s	  end.	 Bruce	 would	  be	 out	  in	 the	 streets
somewhere,	staying	out	long	 enough	to	sneak	in	 after	Mama	 passed	out	on	the
couch,	but	before	she	woke	up	in	the	middle	 of	the	night	 to	check	on	all	of	 them
and	drag	herself	to	bed.
    As	  they	 entered	their	  teen	years,	 Bruce	 was	 the	 one	 out	 smoking	 dope,
stealing,	and	 brawling	  over	 crap	 games.	But	  it	 was	 Daughter	 whom	 Mama
warned,	 “Don’t	   be	 out	 there	 showing	  your	  color!”	   on	 the	 rare	 occasions
Daughter	went	out	in	the	evenings.

Mama	 A.C.	 still	  spent	her	 Friday	 nights	 with	 Eddie	 Levert,	  and	she	 needed
Daughter	around	to	 entertain	Rico.	 Without	  a	cigarette	and	 a	glass	of	 whisky,
Mama	was	free	 to	wave	 her	hands	in	the	 air	as	she	sang,	much	 like	 she	did	at
church.	In	both	places,	Mama’s	nightclub	 for	 one	and	church,	she	was	moved	by
the	spirit	to	sway	and	eventually	cry.
    But	  over	 time,	 Daughter	 couldn’t	 discern	 any	 joy	 in	 those	 tears.	Mama’s
friends,	Miss	Nancy	 and	Miss	Lajene,	remained	“in	 the	world,”	  as	Mama	would
say.	So	Mama	 distanced	herself	and	 soon	lost	touch.	 And	 the	ladies	 at	church
who	had	surrounded	Mama	 at	the	altar	that	 Easter	Sunday	stopped	calling	after

97
Mama	finished	the	new	 member’s	class.	Their	work	 was	done.	They	had	led	the
poor	unwed	mother	of	three	to	the	Living	 Water,	as	church	folk	 referred	to	Jesus.
But	she	wasn’t	their	kind	 of	people.
    Years	 later	Daughter	 wanted	no	part	 of	 the	church	or	 brown	 liquor	 because
they	had	both	made	her	mama	cry.



When	Daughter	and	Tony	returned	home	 from	Red	Lobster,	 Daughter	paused	at
Mama’s	bedroom	 door	and	 motioned	for	 Tony	 to	keep	 going	down	 the	hall	 to
her	bedroom.	 She	cracked	the	 door	open	 just	 enough	to	 see	Mama	curled	 up
beneath	her	thin	 blanket	and	hear	her	 snoring	lightly.	  She	closed	the	 door	and
stopped	to	 wash	her	 hands	in	  the	bathroom	 once	 again,	convinced	 they	 still
smelled	like	crab.
    In	  her	  bedroom,	 she	  found	 Tony	   already	 beneath	 her	  comforter.	  She
undressed	and	slid	in	beside	him.	They	had	fallen	 into	an	easy	groove	with	 each
other	when	Tony	first	 started	coming	around,	a	decade	earlier.	He	was	thirty-two
then,	 had	 been	 twice	 divorced,	  and	 was	 lonely.	  Daughter	 had	 never	  seen
marriage	or	children	 in	 her	future,	 had	always	been	independent,	and	preferred
her	own	 company.	 Still,	 she	 had	needs.	Tony	 made	 her	laugh	 and	 made	her
think.	 He	 was	 a	generous	 lover	 and	 he	was	 handy.	 For	 Daughter,	 that	 was
enough.
    Daughter	 tried	to	stay	in	the	moment,	 to	savor	how	alive	her	body	 felt	next	to
Tony’s.	But	 her	thoughts	wandered	to	Mama.	 Always,	Mama.	 Tony	gripped	 her
tighter	and	 stroked	her	faster,	as	if	 he	 knew	he	 was	losing	 her.	The	headboard
banged	against	the	wall,	and	Daughter	remembered	how	Mama	B.C.	didn’t	 seem
to	care	 if	 her	 children	 heard	her	 having	 sex.	But	 the	 headboard	banging	 had
stopped	when	Mama	found	Jesus.
    There’s	 an	old	saying:	 mothers	raise	their	daughters	and	love	 their	sons.	But
who	had	 ever	loved	 Mama,	 besides	her	children?	 Despite	 her	devotion	 to	 the
church	 and	 chaste	living,	   Mama	 had	 never	 had	 that	 peace	 that	 passes	all
understanding	that	was	supposed	to	be	yours	 when	you	 invited	 Jesus	into	your
heart.	Nor	 did	 she	have	that	joy,	  unspeakable	joy,	promised	 in	 the	Scriptures.
What	Mama	 had	was	the	love	of	 Jesus—whose	touch,	Daughter	imagined,	 was
too	ephemeral	to	quench	anything—a	 quieter,	 more	passive	lover	 than	the	men
she	brought	into	her	bed,	but	who	nevertheless	demanded	everything.



The	next	morning	 after	breakfast,	 Daughter	asked	Tony	to	 sit	with	 Mama	 for	 a

98
little	 while.	  Instead	 of	 calling	  the	hair	  salon,	she	 ran	 to	 Target	 and	bought
tearless	baby	shampoo	and	conditioner	and	everything	else	she	would	need	to	do
Mama’s	hair	herself.
    After	 Tony	 left,	 Daughter	explained	to	Mama	 that	she	was	going	to	wash	her
hair.	Mama	 could	still	 shower	 alone	and	dress	herself,	so	Daughter,	wanting	 to
respect	her	privacy,	  asked	whether	 she	would	 mind	  leaning	over	 the	 kitchen
sink.
    “Well	  .	.	.	I	 don’t	know.”	 Mama	 patted	her	hair.	It	was	mostly	white	 now,	too
thin	for	 the	Farrah	Fawcett	 flips,	 but	still	 hung	to	 her	shoulders.	“Do	 you	 think
Eddie	would	like	 it?	He’s	coming	 today,	you	know.”
    “Yes,	  Mama.	I	 know.”	  Daughter	swallowed	 the	lump	 in	 her	 throat.	“And	  I
think	Eddie	would	 want	you	to	let	me	wash	your	hair	over	 the	sink.”
    “Well,	  all	right	 then.”
    It	 took	a	few	 tries	to	get	the	water	temperature	just	right.	Daughter	had	lots	of
towels	on	hand	so	Mama	could	pause	and	wipe	her	face	whenever	she	needed	to.
    When	  they	 finished	  washing	 and	 conditioning,	  she	 took	 Mama	  back	 to
Mama’s	room	 to	change	into	a	dry	 shirt.	Then	Daughter	 sat	Mama	at	her	vanity
table	and	stood	behind	her	to	blow-dry	her	hair.	Mama	smiled	 into	the	mirror.
    As	 Daughter	 parted	Mama’s	 hair	 into	 sections,	taking	 her	 time	 to	 oil	 each
section	and	massage	the	scalp,	Mama	 sighed	and	 leaned	back	into	 Daughter’s
middle.
    “You	  know,	 Mama,”	 Daughter	began.	“Eddie	 called	and	told	 me	he’s	 going
to	be	late.”
    “Oh,	 no!”	 Mama	said.
    “But	  he	doesn’t	 want	you	 to	 worry.	 He	wants	 you	to	 know	 you’re	 in	 good
hands	with	 me.	 He	 said,	 ‘Now	  you	 take	good	 care	 of	 her	 until	 I	  get	there,
Daughter.’	”
    “Daughter?”
    “Yes,	 Mama.	It’s	 me.	Daughter.”
    “And	  what	else	did	Eddie	say?”
    “He	 said	.	.	.	‘You	 tell	 her	I’m	 coming	and	take	good	care	of	her.’	 And	I	 said,
‘Yes,	sir.	I	 will	 tell	her.’	 ”
    “You	  always	were	such	a	polite	 girl,”	 Mama	said.	She	reached	up	and	patted
Daughter’s	hand.
    “You	  remember	me,	Mama?”
    “Sure	 I	do!”
    Daughter	 began	to	tear	up,	but	also	couldn’t	 help	but	 smile.	She	didn’t	 know
whether	Mama	remembered	her.	But	 it	was	enough	to	 know	that	 Mama	wanted
her	to	believe	she	did.

99
    She	continued	massaging	Mama’s	scalp.	“Does	that	feel	good?”
    “Mmm-hmmm,”	   Mama	 said,	over	 and	over	 until	 it	 turned	into	 humming,	 a
random	tune	Daughter	didn’t	recognize.
    Daughter	 looked	 at	 the	two	 of	 them	 in	 the	mirror.	  Light	 and	 dark,	 but	an
otherwise	matching	 set	of	 round	faces	and	big,	 brown	 eyes	stared	back	at	 her.
Mama’s	scalp	was	still	 pale,	but	the	rest	of	her	had	darkened	over	time.	She	was
still	 lighter	 than	a	paper	bag,	she	might’ve	 bragged,	if	 her	mind	 still	 fixated	 on
such	things.
    “Mama,	  a	long	time	 ago,	you	 were	real	hard	on	 me.	Real	hard.	 And	I	 don’t
know	if	 you	 remember	any	of	 that.	Part	of	 me	hopes	you	 remember,	because	I
can’t	forget.	 But	then,	if	 you	 remember,	I	wish	 you	would	 apologize,	or	at	 least
recognize	.	.	.”
    Mama	 kept	 humming.	 Then	 she	said,	 “You	 know	  when	Eddie	 sang	about
having	a	lot	of	 loves,	I	 was	one	of	them	loves.”	 Mama	poked	 at	her	chest.	“Me.
Lil	 nobody	me.”	 Mama	chuckled	 to	herself.	“Eddie	 loved	me	once	upon	 a	time.
That	one	night.”
    “You’re	  not	a	nobody,	Mama.”
    “Oh,	  yeah?	 Well,	 who	  am	 I,	 then?”	 Mama	  sounded	so	 lucid,	 it	  startled
Daughter.	As	if	someone	else	had	come	into	the	room	with	them.
    “You’re	   .	 .	 .	 someone	 who	 can’t	 give	  me	 what	 I	 need.	 But	 you’re	  not
nobody.”
    “Yeah?”
    “Yeah.”
    Daughter	 twisted	 Mama’s	 hair	into	 a	 single	braid.	 Then	she	laid	 out	 a	new
turquoise	sundress	on	the	bed	for	her	to	put	on.
    “I’ll	   step	out	and	let	you	 get	dressed.	And	I’ll	 bring	 your	lunch	 when	I	 come
back.”
    “That	  would	 be	nice,”	 Mama	 said.	“I	 want	 to	be	 ready	when	 Eddie	comes.
Today’s	the	day.”
    When	 Daughter	returned	with	 Mama’s	 lunch	tray,	Mama	 was	in	her	recliner,
smoothing	her	hands	over	the	sundress,	smiling.	“I	look	beautiful,”	 she	said.
    “Yes,	 you	do,”	 Daughter	said.	She	placed	the	tray	on	Mama’s	lap.
    Mama	 picked	up	the	Polaroid	next	to	her	sandwich	plate.	She	stared	at	it	for	a
moment	before	putting	it	down	 and	picking	up	her	sandwich.
    Daughter	 sighed	and	played	the	song	she’d	cued	up	on	her	cell	phone.	As	the
opening	chords	 of	 the	O’Jays’	  “Forever	 Mine”	  filled	  the	room,	 she	expected
some	flicker	 of	 recognition	 from	 Mama,	 a	 smile	or	 something.	 But	 there	was
nothing.	Even	when	 Eddie	came	in	 on	the	third	 verse,	it	didn’t	  seem	to	register
with	Mama	 that	this	was	the	same	song	she	had	quoted	earlier.	The	song	played

100
on.	Daughter	 wasn’t	  sure	whether	 Mama	 was	 even	 listening.	 Mama	 ate	 her
sandwich	and	fruit	salad,	the	Polaroid	forgotten.
    And	 then,	as	Eddie	 begged	his	lover	to	 stay,	Mama	picked	 up	the	photo	and
began	to	sing	along	with	him,	her	voice	strong	and	certain.

101
                                   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS







THIS	 COLLECTION	   took	shape	over	the	course	of	many	 years	and	twists	and
turns,	and	I	 appreciate	 everyone	who	 has	been	along	 for	 the	ride.	 Thanks	 for
your	 love,	 friendship,	  support,	 pep	 talks,	 advice,	 meals,	 late-night	  laughter,
technical	help,	 feedback,	 dance	breaks,	and	 unwavering	 belief	 in	 me	and	 my
stories:	Chris	 Ivey,	 Tyrese	Coleman,	 Fran	 and	Alan	 Edmunds,	 Renee	Simms,
Bassey	Ikpi,	 Faith	 Adiele,	 Lonnae	O’Neal,	  Stanley	Love	 Tate,	 James	Bernard
Short,	Diana	 Veiga,	Khaliah	  Williams,	 Danielle	 Evans,	 David	 Haynes	and	the
whole	 Kimbilio	   Center	 for	 African	  American	  Fiction	  family,	  Teresa	Foley,
Aaliyah	 Thomas,	Melanie	Dione,	 Adam	 Smyer,	Dr.	 DeMarquis	 Clarke,	Damon
Young,	Chanie	Infante	Louisma,	Doug	 Anthony,	Tony	 Burroughs,	Wade	Carver,
Quake	 Pletcher,	 Eyan	 Spaulding,	  Harry	 Weaver	  III,	  Daniel	  Henry,	 Alison
Kinney,	 Mark	  Sequeira,	 Rev.	 Maxwell	  Grant,	 Bomani	  Jones,	Mat	 Johnson,
Amber	Edmunds,	Renelle	Carrington,	 Toya	Smith,	 Celeste	C.	Smith,	Bernadette
Adams	 Davis,	 Swati	 Khurana,	  Meredith	 Driscoll,	  Carolyn	  Edgar,	 Lawrence
Wagner,	and	Sekou	Campbell.
    Big	  thanks	 to	 Derek	 Krissoff,	  Sara	 Georgi,	 Jeremy	 Wang-Iverson,	 Sarah
Munroe,	Charlotte	Vester,	and	the	whole	 team	at	West	Virginia	 University	 Press
for	giving	 this	collection	 so	much	enthusiastic	support	and	care.
    Shout	 out	to	my	 Day	Ones:	Tamara	Winfrey	  Harris,	Yona	 Harvey,	Taneshia
Nash	Laird,	Rebecca	Lusolo,	Genie	Maples,	and	Issa	Mas	(my	 Celie!).	Y’all	  got
me	this	far.	Thank	you	and	I	love	you!
    Special	  thanks	 and	  love	 to	  my	  thoughtful	  readers,	 cheerleading	 squad
supreme,	and	 dear	friends:	 Brian	  Broome,	 Asha	 Rajan,	Abeer	 Hoque,	 Mimi
Watkins,	George	Kevin	Jordan,	Samantha	Irby,	and	Kiese	Laymon.
    Dennis	 Norris	 II,	thank	 you	for	 all	the	 tea	and	friendship,	and	for	 loving	 and
publishing	the	very	first	 story	(“Eula”)	  in	what	would	 become	this	collection.
    Many	  thanks	also	to	 the	editors	 of	 Cheat	River	 Review,	Baltimore	  Review,
and	Barrelhouse	 Magazine	 for	 publishing	 previous	 versions	of	 some	 of	 these
stories.
    And	 thanks	to	 Ansel	Elkins	 for	 the	“Autobiography	  of	Eve.”	 This	 poem	is	a
treasure.
    Love	  and	gratitude	 to	 Vanessa	German	for	  countless	gifts	 and	 graces	and

102
encouragements.	You	make	the	world	better.
    Thank	 you	for	 the	love	and	the	laughs:	Dr.	Tyffani	  Dent,	DeShong	Perry,	Dr.
Carolyn	Strong,	and	Dr.	LaTasha	Sturdivant.
    Thank	 you	to	 my	agent	extraordinaire,	 Danielle	 Chiotti,	 for	 first	 envisioning
this	collection	and	guiding	 me	every	step	of	the	way	to	the	finish	line.
    Thank	  you,	 Laura	  Szabo-Cohen	and	 Tony	  Norman,	 for	  being	 awesome
mentors	and	friends.	Twenty-plus	years,	that’s	a	mighty	long	 time	.	.	.
    To	 my	 sisters—Donnette,	 Shalawn,	 Tiffany,	  and	Felicia—our	  story	 is	just
beginning.
    Thank	 you,	Taylor	 and	Peyton,	for	your	patience	and	for	being	proud	of	 me.	I
love	you!
    Finally,	  thank	you	 to	my	 mama	and	Nay-Nay	 for	 sending	me	to	church	 and
Sunday	School	all	those	years.	I	miss	you	every	day.

