3
The
Viscount
Who
Loved
Me


                                Julia	 Quinn

4
                                                                        Contents







E-Book	Extras:
The	Bridgerton	Basics:	Ms.	Quinn	Fills	You	In
Behind	the	Novel:	The	Viscount	Who	Loved	Me	by	Julia	Quinn


Opening	Announcement


Prologue
Anthony	Bridgerton	had	always	known	he	would	die	young.


Chapter	1
The	topic	of	rakes	has,	of	course,	been	previously	discussed…


Chapter	2
At	the	Hartside	ball	Wednesday	night,	Viscount	Bridgerton	was	seen…


Chapter	3
Viscount	Bridgerton	was	also	seen	dancing	with	Miss	Katharine	Sheffield…


Chapter	4
This	Author	was,	sadly,	unable	to	determine	all	the	details…


Chapter	5
It	has	come	to	This	Author’s	attention	that	Miss	Katharine…


Chapter	6
Lady	Bridgerton’s	musicale	proved	to	be	a	decidedly	musical	affair…


Chapter	7

5
Also	in	attendance	at	Lady	Bridgerton’s	musicale:	Mrs.	Featherington	and…


Chapter	8
As	any	regular	reader	of	this	column	knows,	there	are…


Chapter	9
Men	are	contrary	creatures.	Their	heads	and	their	hearts	are…


Chapter	10
The	country	house	party	is	a	very	dangerous	event.	Married…


Chapter	11
There	is	nothing	like	a	spot	of	competition	to	bring…


Chapter	12
A	man	with	charm	is	an	entertaining	thing,	and	a…


Chapter	13
There	is	little	to	report	in	London	with	so	many…


Chapter	14
And	indeed,	if	a	scandal	does	erupt	at	Lady	Bridgerton’s…


Chapter	15
Once	again,	This	Author	has	been	proven	correct.	Country…


Chapter	16
It	has	come	to	This	Author’s	attention	that	the	wedding…


Chapter	17
The	deed	is	done!	Miss	Sheffield	is	now	Katharine,	Viscountess…


Chapter	18
Although	gossip	still	surrounds	the	hasty	marriage	of	Lord	and…


Chapter	19
Lady	Mottram’s	annual	ball	was	a	crush,	as	always,	but…


Chapter	20

6
Has	anyone	besides	This	Author	noticed	that	Miss	Edwina	Sheffield…


Chapter	21
It	has	been	whispered	that	Lord	and	Lady	Bridgerton	were…


Chapter	22
Contrary	to	popular	opinion,	This	Author	is	aware	that	she…


Epilogue
Lord	Bridgerton	celebrated	his	birthday—This	Author	believes	that	it…


Author’s	Note


About	the	Author
Avon	Books	by	Julia	Quinn
Copyright
About	the	Publisher

7
E-Book	      Extra

The	Bridgerton	Basics:	Ms.	Quinn	 Fills	You	 In




What	is	the	order	of	the	Bridgerton	books?

Julia	Quinn:	Book	1:	The	Duke	and	I

Book	2:	The	Viscount	Who	Loved	Me

Book	3:	An	Offer	From	 A	Gentleman

Book	4:	Romancing	Mr.	 Bridgerton

Book	5:	To	Sir	Phillip,	  With	Love

      Book	6:	 When	He	Was	Wicked	(coming	 summer	2004)

Will	you	write	books	for	all	eight	Bridgerton	siblings?

Julia	Quinn:	Yes.

Will	you	write	books	about	their	children?

Julia	Quinn:	I	don’t	know.

Why	was	there	no	mention	of	Lady	Whistledown	in	To	Sir	Phillip,	With	Love?	I	thought	for	sure	there
would	be	a	scene	where	Eloise	learned	the	truth!

Julia	Quinn:	Because	Lady	Whistledown	had	nothing	to	do	with	the	plot	for	To	Sir	Phillip,	With	Love.	The
introduction	of	Lady	Whistledown	and	“the	big	secret”	would	have	been	irrelevant,	not	to	mention
confusing	for	readers	who	have	not	read	the	previous	Bridgerton	books.

      I	do	like	 to	refer	to	items	from	 previous	books	(Anthony’s	 fear	of	bees,	for
example,	or	Colin’s	ravenous	appetite),	but	only	 when	they	make	sense	within
the	framework	of	the	story	I’m	 currently	 telling.	 While	the	Bridgerton	 books	are
a	loosely	connected	series,	each	title,	first	and	foremost,	must	stand	on	its	own	as
an	individual	novel.

      I	did	 think	about	this,	however,	while	 I	was	writing	 the	novel,	so	my	answer
is:	Colin	didn’t	 tell	 Eloise	because	he	was	so	furious	with	her	for	running	off.

8
is:	 Colin	  didn’t	   tell	 Eloise	   because	 he	 was	 so	furious	   with	  her	 for	  running	  off.
Keeping	  her	 (a	 woman	  who	  likes	  to	 know	  everything!)	     out	 of	 the	 loop	  would	  be,
to	him,	  the	 perfect	  revenge.

Will	you	ever	write	a	story	for	Violet	Bridgerton?

Julia	Quinn:	The	answer,	I	think,	is	no.	Her	love	for	Edmund	was	so	strong	and	deep	that	I	have	difficulty
imagining	her	ever	remarrying.	I	have	received	requests	to	write	their	story,	but	I	wonder	if	it	would	be	too
bittersweet,	since	so	many	readers	would	already	know	that	he	would	die	young.

What	about	Francesca	Bridgerton?	She	was	a	widow	in	Romancing	Mr.	Bridgerton.	What	happened
to	her?

Julia	Quinn:	I’m	still	figuring	that	out.	Look	for	her	story	(in	which	she	finds	love	with	her	second
husband)	in	summer	2004.

Who	will	get	a	story	after	Francesca?

Julia	Quinn:	Hyacinth.

Will	you	ever	write	a	story	for	Violet	Bridgerton?

Julia	Quinn:	The	answer,	I	think,	is	no.	Her	love	for	Edmund	was	so	strong	and	deep	that	I	have	difficulty
imagining	her	ever	remarrying.	I	have	received	requests	to	write	their	story,	but	I	wonder	if	it	would	be	too
bittersweet,	since	so	many	readers	would	already	know	that	he	would	die	young.

What	happened	to	Posy	Reiling	(from	An	Offer	from	A	Gentleman)?

Julia	Quinn:	Posy	married	a	vicar	and	now	lives	a	few	miles	away	from	Benedict	and	Sophie	in	Wiltshire.
Check	out	To	Sir	Phillip,	With	Love	for	a	little	update	on	her.

In	Romancing	Mr.	Bridgerton,	you	thank	Lisa	Kleypas	and	Stephanie	Laurens	for	the	gracious	use	of
their	characters.	Which	characters	were	those?

Julia	Quinn:	I	thought	it	would	be	fun	to	pay	a	little	homage	to	my	friends	and	colleagues,	so	in	chapter
one	of	Romancing	Mr.	Bridgerton,	Penelope	is	reading	a	book	called	Mathilda	by	S.R.	Fielding.	This	book
played	a	big	role	in	Dreaming	of	You	by	Lisa	Kleypas	(S.R.	is	actually	Sara,	the	heroine).	And	in	the	Lady
Whistledown	column	opening	chapter	nine,	I	mention	Michael	Anstruther-Wetherby,	who	is	the	brother	of
Honoria	Anstruther-Wetherby,	heroine	of	Devil’s	Bride,	the	first	book	of	Stephanie	Laurens’s	Cynster
series.	(I	think	he’s	supposed	to	get	his	own	book	one	of	these	days.)

Copyright	©	2004	by	Julia	Quinn

9
E-Book	          Extra


Behind	   the	 Novel:	   The	  Viscount	    Who	  Loved	  Me	 by	 Julia	   Quinn




                 I	went	through	three	outlines	for	this	book	before	I	found	a	plot	and	premise	that	I	felt
                 worked.	The	story	required	Anthony’s	father	to	have	died	about	ten	years	before	the	book
                 began,	but	in	The	Duke	and	I,	which	was	completely	edited	(but	not	yet	published),	his
                 father	had	died	two	years	earlier.	I	had	to	go	back	and	make	all	the	changes	while	doing
                 the	final	proofread	of	Duke.	I	was	terrified	that	I	would	miss	a	mention!


                 Regular	readers	know	that	I	love	to	include	animals	in	my	books.	Newton,	the	overweight
                 corgi,	is	modeled	after	Homer,	a	very	friendly	corgi	who	lives	on	my	street.	Corgis,	while
                 not	an	officially	recognized	breed	in	Britain	until	the	1920s,	originated	in	Wales	during
                 the	Middle	Ages.	Corgis	are	also	very	popular	with	the	royal	family.	Queen	Elizabeth’s
                 dogs	are	“dorgis,”	which	are	corgi-dachsund	mixes.


                 The	Viscount	Who	Loved	Me	is	second	in	the	Bridgerton	series.	#1	is	The	Duke	and	I,	#3
                 is	An	Offer	from	a	Gentleman,	#4	is	Romancing	Mr.	Bridgerton,	and	#5	is	To	Sir	Phillip,
                 With	Love.


                 Lady	Whistledown,	the	gossip	columnist	featured	in,	The	Viscount	Who	Loved	Me
                 “narrates”	her	own	anthology	in	The	Further	Observations	of	Lady	Whistledown.	This
                 book	is	not,	however,	a	part	of	the	Bridgerton	series.


Copyright	©	2004	by	Julia	Quinn

10
The	season	has	opened	for	the	year	of	1814,	and	there	is	little	reason	to	hope
that	we	will	see	any	noticeable	change	from	1813.	The	ranks	of	society	are	once
again	filled	 with	Ambitious	Mamas,	whose	only	aim	is	to	see	their	Darling
Daughters	married	off	 to	Determined	Bachelors.	Discussion	amongst	the	Mamas
fingers	Viscount	Bridgerton	 as	this	year’s	most	eligible	catch,	 and	indeed,	if	the
poor	man’s	hair	 looks	ruffled	and	windblown,	 it	is	because	he	cannot	go
anywhere	without	some	young	miss	batting	her	eyelashes	with	such	vigor	and
speed	as	to	create	a	breeze	of	hurricane	force.	Perhaps	the	only	young	lady	not
interested	in	Bridgerton	 is	Miss	Katharine	 Sheffield,	and	in	fact,	her	demeanor
toward	the	viscount	occasionally	borders	 on	the	hostile.

      And	that	is	why,	Dear	 Reader,	This	Author	feels	that	a	match	between
Bridgerton	and	Miss	Sheffield	would	 be	just	the	thing	to	enliven	an	otherwise
ordinary	season.

                                                     LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	13	APRIL	1814

11
           For	 Little	Goose	Twist,
            who	kept	me	company
  throughout	the	writing	of	this	book.
          I	 can’t	wait	to	meet	you!


               And	also	for	Paul,
even	though	he	is	allergic	to	musicals.

12
                                                      Prologue







Anthony	  Bridgerton	had	always	known	 he	would	die	young.

      Oh,	not	as	a	child.	Young	Anthony	 had	never	had	cause	to	ponder	his	own
mortality.	His	 early	years	had	been	a	young	boy’s	perfection,	right	from	 the	very
day	of	his	birth.

      It	was	true	that	Anthony	 was	the	heir	to	an	ancient	and	wealthy	viscountcy,
but	unlike	most	other	aristocratic	couples,	Lord	 and	Lady	Bridgerton	were	very
much	in	love,	and	they	saw	their	son’s	birth	 not	as	the	arrival	of	an	heir,	but
rather	that	of	a	child.

      And	so	there	were	no	parties,	no	fêtes,	no	celebration	other	than	that	of
mother	and	father	staring	in	wonderment	at	their	new	son.

      The	Bridgertons	were	young	parents—Edmund	barely	 twenty	and	Violet	 just
eighteen—but	they	were	sensible	and	they	were	strong,	and	they	loved	their	son
with	a	fierceness	and	devotion	that	was	rarely	seen	in	their	social	circles.	Much
to	her	own	mother’s	horror,	Violet	 insisted	upon	nursing	the	boy	 herself,	and
Edmund	never	subscribed	to	the	prevailing	attitude	that	fathers	should	neither
see	nor	hear	their	children.	He	took	the	infant	on	long	hikes	across	the	fields	of
Kent,	spoke	to	him	of	philosophy	 and	poetry	before	he	could	possibly
understand	the	words,	and	told	him	a	bedtime	story	every	night.

      Because	the	viscount	and	viscountess	were	so	young	and	so	very	much	in
love,	it	came	as	no	surprise	to	anyone	when,	just	two	years	after	Anthony’s	birth,
he	was	joined	by	a	younger	brother,	christened	Benedict.	Edmund	immediately
adjusted	his	daily	routine	to	take	two	sons	on	his	hikes,	and	he	spent	a	week

13
holed	up	in	the	stables,	working	with	 his	leatherworker	to	devise	a	special	pack
that	would	hold	Anthony	 on	his	back	while	 he	held	the	baby	Benedict	in	his
arms.

      They	walked	across	fields	and	streams,	and	he	told	them	of	wondrous	things,
of	perfect	flowers	and	clear	blue	skies,	of	knights	 in	shining	armor	and	damsels
in	distress.	Violet	used	to	laugh	when	they	returned	all	windblown	 and	sun-
kissed,	and	Edmund	would	say,	“See?	Here	is	our	damsel	in	distress.	Clearly	we
must	save	her.”	And	Anthony	 would	throw	 himself	into	 his	mother’s	arms,
giggling	as	he	swore	he’d	protect	her	from	the	fire-breathing	 dragon	they’d	seen
just	two	miles	down	the	road	in	the	village.

      “Two	 miles	down	 the	road	in	the	village?”	Violet	 would	 breathe,	keeping
her	voice	carefully	laden	with	 horror.

      “Heaven	above,	what	would	 I	do	without	 three	strong	men	to	protect	me?”

      “Benedict’s	 a	baby,”	Anthony	 would	 reply.

      “But	 he’ll	 grow	up,”	 she’d	always	say,	tousling	his	hair,	“just	 as	you	did.
And	just	as	you	still	 will.”

      Edmund	always	treated	his	children	with	 equal	affection	and	devotion,	but
late	at	night,	when	Anthony	cradled	the	Bridgerton	 pocket	watch	to	his	chest
(given	to	him	on	his	eighth	 birthday	by	his	father,	who	 had	received	it	on	his
eighth	birthday	from	 his	father),	he	liked	to	think	 that	his	relationship	with	 his
father	was	just	a	little	bit	 special.	Not	because	Edmund	loved	him	best;	by	that
point	the	Bridgerton	siblings	 numbered	four	(Colin	 and	Daphne	had	arrived
fairly	 close	together)	and	Anthony	knew	very	well	 that	all	the	children	 were	well
loved.

      No,	Anthony	 liked	 to	think	that	his	relationship	 with	his	father	was	special
simply	because	he’d	known	him	the	longest.	After	 all,	no	matter	how	long
Benedict	had	known	their	father,	Anthony	 would	 always	have	two	years	on	him.
And	six	on	Colin.	 And	as	for	Daphne,	well,	 besides	the	fact	that	she	was	a	girl
(the	horror!),	she’d	known	 Father	a	full	eight	years	less	than	he	had	and,	he	liked
to	remind	himself,	always	would.

      Edmund	Bridgerton	 was,	quite	simply,	the	very	center	of	 Anthony’s	 world.
He	was	tall,	his	shoulders	were	broad,	and	he	could	ride	a	horse	as	if	he’d	been
born	in	the	saddle.	He	always	knew	the	answers	to	arithmetic	questions	(even

14
born	in	the	saddle.	He	always	knew	the	answers	to	arithmetic	questions	(even
when	the	tutor	didn’t),	 he	saw	no	reason	why	his	sons	should	not	have	a	tree
house	(and	then	he	went	and	built	it	himself),	and	his	laugh	was	the	sort	that
warmed	a	body	from	the	inside	out.

      Edmund	taught	Anthony	 how	to	ride.	He	taught	Anthony	 how	to	shoot.	He
taught	him	to	swim.	He	took	 him	off	 to	Eton	himself,	rather	than	sending	him	in
a	carriage	with	servants,	as	most	of	Anthony’s	future	friends	 arrived,	and	when
he	saw	Anthony	glancing	nervously	about	the	school	that	would	 become	his	new
home,	he	had	a	heart-to-heart	talk	with	his	eldest	son,	assuring	him	that
everything	would	be	all	 right.

      And	it	 was.	Anthony	knew	 it	would	 be.	His	father,	after	all,	never	lied.

      Anthony	 loved	his	mother.	Hell,	 he’d	probably	bite	 off	his	own	arm	if	 it
meant	keeping	her	safe	and	well.	But	growing	up,	everything	 he	did,	every
accomplishment,	every	goal,	every	single	hope	and	dream—it	was	all	for	 his
father.

      And	then	one	day,	everything	changed.	It	was	funny,	 he	reflected	later,	how
one’s	life	could	alter	 in	an	instant,	how	one	minute	everything	could	 be	a	certain
way,	and	the	next	it’s	simply…not.

      It	happened	when	Anthony	was	eighteen,	home	for	the	summer	and
preparing	for	his	first	 year	at	Oxford.	He	was	to	belong	to	All	 Souls	College,	as
his	father	had	before	him,	and	his	life	was	as	bright	and	dazzling	as	any
eighteen-year-old	had	a	right	to	enjoy.	He	had	discovered	women,	and	perhaps
more	splendidly,	they	had	discovered	him.	His	parents	were	still	 happily
reproducing,	having	added	Eloise,	Francesca,	and	Gregory	to	the	family,	and
Anthony	did	 his	best	not	to	roll	his	eyes	when	he	passed	his	mother	in	the	hall—
pregnant	with	her	eighth	child!	 It	was	all	a	bit	 unseemly,	in	Anthony’s	 opinion,
having	children	at	their	age,	but	he	kept	his	opinions	to	himself.

      Who	was	he	to	doubt	Edmund’s	wisdom?	 Maybe	he,	too,	would	want	more
children	at	the	advanced	age	of	thirty-eight.

      When	Anthony	 found	out,	it	 was	late	afternoon.	He	was	returning	from	a
long	and	bruising	ride	with	 Benedict	and	had	just	pushed	through	the	front	door
of	Aubrey	Hall,	 the	ancestral	home	of	the	Bridgertons,	when	he	saw	his	ten-
year-old-sister	sitting	on	the	floor.	 Benedict	was	still	 in	the	stables,	having	lost
some	silly	bet	with	 Anthony,	the	terms	of	which	 required	him	to	rub	down	 both

15
some	silly	bet	with	 Anthony,	the	terms	of	which	 required	him	to	rub	down	 both
horses.

      Anthony	 stopped	short	when	he	saw	Daphne.	It	was	odd	enough	that	his
sister	was	sitting	in	the	middle	of	 the	floor	in	the	main	 hall.	It	was	even	more
odd	that	she	was	crying.

      Daphne	never	cried.

      “Daff,”	  he	said	hesitantly,	too	young	to	know	what	 to	do	with	a	crying
female	and	wondering	if	he’d	 ever	learn,	“what—”

      But	before	he	could	finish	 his	question,	Daphne	lifted	her	head,	and	the
shattering	heartbreak	in	her	large	brown	eyes	cut	through	him	like	a	knife.	 He
stumbled	back	a	step,	knowing	something	was	wrong,	terribly	 wrong.

      “He’d	 dead,”	Daphne	whispered.	“Papa	is	dead.”

      For	a	moment	Anthony	 was	sure	he’d	misheard.	His	father	couldn’t	be	dead.
Other	people	died	young,	like	Uncle	Hugo,	 but	Uncle	Hugo	had	been	small	and
frail.	Well,	 at	least	smaller	and	frailer	than	Edmund.

      “You’re	 wrong,”	 he	told	 Daphne.	“You	must	be	wrong.”

      She	shook	her	head.	“Eloise	told	me.	He	was…it	was…”

      Anthony	 knew	he	shouldn’t	shake	his	sister	while	she	sobbed,	but	he
couldn’t	help	himself.	 “It	 was	what,	Daphne?”

      “A	 bee,”	she	whispered.	“He	was	stung	by	a	bee.”

      For	a	moment	Anthony	 could	do	nothing	but	stare	at	her.	Finally,	 his	voice
hoarse	and	barely	recognizable,	he	said,	“A	man	doesn’t	die	from	a	bee	sting,
Daphne.”

      She	said	nothing,	just	sat	there	on	the	floor,	her	throat	working	 convulsively
as	she	tried	to	control	her	tears.

      “He’s	 been	stung	before,”	Anthony	added,	his	voice	rising	 in	volume.	“I	 was
with	him.	 We	were	both	stung.	We	came	across	a	nest.	I	was	stung	on	the
shoulder.”	Unbidden,	his	hand	rose	to	touch	the	spot	where	he’d	been	stung	so
many	years	before.	In	a	whisper	he	added,	“He	on	his	arm.”

16
many	years	before.	In	a	whisper	he	added,	“He	on	his	arm.”

      Daphne	just	stared	at	him	with	an	eerily	 blank	expression.

      “He	 was	fine,”	Anthony	 insisted.	He	could	hear	the	panic	in	his	voice	and
knew	he	was	frightening	his	sister,	but	he	was	powerless	to	control	it.	“A	 man
can’t	die	from	a	bee	sting!”

      Daphne	shook	her	head,	her	dark	eyes	suddenly	looking	about	a	hundred
years	old.	“It	was	a	bee,”	she	said	in	a	hollow	voice.	 “Eloise	saw	it.	One	minute
he	was	just	standing	there,	and	the	next	he	was…he	was…”

      Anthony	 felt	something	very	strange	building	 within	 him,	as	if	his	muscles
were	about	to	jump	through	his	skin.	“The	 next	he	was	what,	Daphne?”

      “Gone.”	 She	looked	bewildered	by	the	word,	as	bewildered	as	he	felt.

      Anthony	 left	Daphne	sitting	 in	the	hall	and	took	the	stairs	three	at	a	time	up
to	his	parents’	bedchamber.	Surely	his	father	wasn’t	dead.	A	man	couldn’t	 die
from	a	bee	sting.	It	was	impossible.	Utterly	 mad.	Edmund	Bridgerton	was
young,	he	was	strong.	He	was	tall,	his	shoulders	were	broad,	his	muscles	were
powerful,	and	by	God,	no	insignificant	 honeybee	could	have	felled	him.

      But	when	Anthony	 reached	the	upstairs	hall,	he	could	tell	by	the	utter	and
complete	silence	of	the	dozen	or	so	hovering	servants	that	the	situation	was
grim.

      And	their	 pitying	 faces…for	the	rest	of	his	life	 he’d	be	haunted	by	those
pitying	faces.

      He’d	 thought	he’d	have	to	push	his	way	into	his	parents’	room,	but	 the
servants	parted	as	if	they	were	drops	in	the	Red	Sea,	and	when	Anthony	pushed
open	the	door,	he	knew.

      His	mother	was	sitting	 on	the	edge	of	the	bed,	not	weeping,	not	even	making
a	sound,	just	holding	his	father’s	hand	as	she	rocked	slowly	back	and	forth.

      His	father	was	still.	 Still	 as…

      Anthony	 didn’t	 even	want	to	think	the	word.

17
      “Mama?”	 he	choked	out.	He	hadn’t	called	her	that	for	 years;	she’d	been
“Mother”	 since	he’d	left	 for	Eton.

      She	turned,	slowly,	as	if	hearing	his	voice	 through	a	long,	long	tunnel.

      “What	 happened?”	he	whispered.

      She	shook	her	head,	her	eyes	hopelessly	far	away.	“I	don’t	know,”	 she	said.
Her	lips	remained	parted	by	an	inch	or	so,	as	if	she’d	meant	to	say	something
more	but	then	forgotten	to	do	it.

      Anthony	 took	a	step	forward,	his	movements	awkward	and	jerky.

      “He’s	 gone,”	Violet	 finally	 whispered.	“He’s	 gone	and	I…oh,	God,	I…”	  She
placed	a	hand	on	her	belly,	full	and	round	with	 child.	“I	 told	 him—oh,	Anthony,
I	told	him—”

      She	looked	as	if	she	might	shatter	from	the	inside	out.	Anthony	 choked	back
the	tears	that	were	burning	his	eyes	and	stinging	his	throat	and	moved	to	her
side.	“It’s	 all	right,	Mama,”	 he	said.

      But	he	knew	it	 wasn’t	all	 right.

      “I	 told	him	 this	had	to	be	our	last,”	she	gasped,	sobbing	onto	his	shoulder.	“I
told	him	I	 couldn’t	carry	 another,	and	we’d	have	to	be	careful,	and…Oh,	God,
Anthony,	what	I’d	 do	to	have	him	here	and	give	him	another	child.	 I	don’t
understand.	I	just	don’t	understand….”

      Anthony	 held	her	while	she	cried.	He	said	nothing;	it	 seemed	useless	to	try
to	make	any	words	fit	the	devastation	in	his	heart.

      He	didn’t	 understand,	either.
                                                                	

The	doctors	came	later	that	evening	and	pronounced	themselves	baffled.	They’d	heard	of	such	things
before,	but	never	in	one	so	young	and	strong.	He	was	so	vital,	so	powerful;	nobody	could	have	known.	It
was	true	that	the	viscount’s	younger	brother	Hugo	had	died	quite	suddenly	the	year	before,	but	such	things
did	not	necessarily	run	in	families,	and	besides,	even	though	Hugo	had	died	by	himself	out-of-doors,	no	one
had	noticed	a	bee	sting	on	his	skin.

      Then	again,	nobody	had	looked.

18
      Nobody	could	 have	known,	the	doctors	kept	saying,	over	and	over	until
Anthony	wanted	to	strangle	them	all.	Eventually	 he	got	them	out	of	the	house,
and	he	put	his	mother	to	bed.	They	had	to	move	her	into	a	spare	bedroom;	she
grew	agitated	at	the	thought	of	sleeping	in	the	bed	she’d	shared	for	so	many
years	with	Edmund.	Anthony	 managed	to	send	his	six	siblings	to	bed	as	well,
telling	them	that	they’d	 all	talk	 in	the	morning,	that	everything	 would	be	well,
and	he	would	take	care	of	them	as	their	father	would	have	wanted.

      Then	he	walked	into	the	room	where	his	father’s	 body	still	 lay	and	looked	at
him.	He	looked	at	him	and	looked	at	him,	 staring	at	him	for	hours,	barely
blinking.

      And	when	he	left	 the	room,	he	left	with	 a	new	vision	of	his	own	 life,	and
new	knowledge	about	his	own	mortality.

      Edmund	Bridgerton	 had	died	at	the	age	of	thirty-eight.	And	 Anthony	simply
couldn’t	imagine	 ever	surpassing	his	father	in	any	way,	even	in	years.

19
Chapter	     1


The	topic	of	rakes	has,	of	course,	been	previously	discussed	in	this	column,	and
This	Author	has	come	to	the	conclusion	that	there	are	rakes,	and	there	are
Rakes.

      Anthony	Bridgerton	 is	a	Rake.

      A	rake	(lower-case)	is	youthful	 and	immature.	He	flaunts	his	exploits,
behaves	with	utmost	idiocy,	and	thinks	himself	dangerous	to	women.

      A	Rake	(upper-case)	knows	he	is	dangerous	to	women.

      He	doesn’t	flaunt	 his	exploits	because	he	doesn’t	need	to.	He	knows	he	will
be	whispered	about	by	men	and	women	alike,	and	in	fact,	he’d	rather	they	didn’t
whisper	about	him	at	all.	 He	knows	who	he	is	and	what	he	has	done;	further
recountings	are,	to	him,	redundant.

      He	doesn’t	behave	like	an	idiot	 for	the	simple	reason	that	he	isn’t	an	idiot
(any	moreso	than	must	be	expected	among	all	members	of	the	male	gender).	He
has	little	patience	for	the	foibles	 of	society,	and	quite	frankly,	most	of	the	time
This	Author	cannot	say	she	blames	him.

      And	if	that	 doesn’t	describe	Viscount	Bridgerton—surely	 this	season’s	most
eligible	bachelor—to	 perfection,	This	Author	 shall	retire	 Her	quill	 immediately.
The	only	question	is:	Will	 1814	be	the	season	he	finally	succumbs	to	the
exquisite	bliss	of	matrimony?

      This	Author	 Thinks…

      Not.

                                                     LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	20	APRIL	1814



“Please	   don’t	tell	 me,”	Kate	Sheffield	 said	to	the	room	at	large,	“that	she	is
writing	 about	Viscount	Bridgerton	 again.”

20
      Her	half-sister	Edwina,	 younger	by	almost	four	 years,	looked	up	from
behind	the	single-sheet	newspaper.	“How	could	you	tell?”

      “You’re	 giggling	 like	 a	madwoman.”

      Edwina	giggled,	 shaking	the	blue	damask	sofa	on	which	they	both	sat.

      “See?”	Kate	said,	giving	 her	a	little	poke	in	 the	arm.	“You	 always	giggle
when	she	writes	about	some	reprehensible	rogue.”	But	Kate	grinned.	There	was
little	she	liked	better	than	teasing	her	sister.	In	a	good-natured	manner,	of	course.

      Mary	 Sheffield,	Edwina’s	 mother,	and	Kate’s	stepmother	for	nearly	eighteen
years,	glanced	up	from	her	embroidery	and	pushed	her	spectacles	farther	up	the
bridge	of	her	nose.	“What	are	you	two	laughing	 about?”

      “Kate’s	 in	a	snit	because	Lady	Whistledown	is	writing	  about	that	rakish
viscount	again,”	Edwina	 explained.

      “I’m	  not	in	a	snit,”	Kate	said,	even	though	no	one	was	listening.

      “Bridgerton?”	  Mary	asked	absently.

      Edwina	nodded.	“Yes.”

      “She	always	writes	 about	him.”

      “I	 think	she	just	likes	writing	  about	rakes,”	Edwina	commented.

      “Of	 course	she	likes	writing	about	rakes,”	 Kate	retorted.	“If	 she	wrote	about
boring	people,	no	one	would	buy	her	newspaper.”

      “That’s	 not	true,”	 Edwina	replied.	“Just	last	week	she	wrote	about	us,	and
heaven	knows	we’re	not	the	most	interesting	people	in	London.”

      Kate	smiled	at	her	sister’s	naïveté.	Kate	and	Mary	might	 not	be	the	most
interesting	people	in	London,	but	Edwina,	 with	her	buttery-colored	 hair	and
startlingly	pale	blue	eyes,	had	already	been	named	the	Incomparable	of	1814.
Kate,	on	the	other	hand,	with	her	plain	brown	hair	 and	eyes,	was	usually	referred
to	as	“the	Incomparable’s	older	sister.”

      She	supposed	there	were	worse	monikers.	At	least	no	one	had	yet	begun	to

21
      She	supposed	there	were	worse	monikers.	At	least	no	one	had	yet	begun	to
call	her	“the	Incomparable’s	 spinster	sister.”	Which	was	a	great	deal	closer	to	the
truth	than	any	of	the	Sheffields	cared	to	admit.	At	 twenty	(nearly	twenty-one,	 if
one	was	going	to	be	scrupulously	honest	about	it),	Kate	was	a	bit	long	in	the
tooth	to	be	enjoying	her	first	 season	in	London.

      But	there	hadn’t	really	 been	any	other	choice.	The	Sheffields	hadn’t	been
wealthy	even	when	Kate’s	father	had	been	alive,	and	since	he’d	passed	on	five
years	earlier,	they’d	been	forced	to	economize	even	further.	They	certainly
weren’t	ready	for	the	poorhouse,	but	they	had	to	mind	every	penny	and	watch
every	pound.

      With	 their	straitened	finances,	the	Sheffields	could	manage	the	funds	for
only	one	trip	to	London.	 Renting	a	house—and	a	carriage—and	hiring	the	bare
minimum	of	 servants	for	the	season	cost	money.	More	money	than	they	could
afford	to	spend	twice.	As	it	 was,	they’d	had	to	save	for	five	solid	 years	to	be	able
to	afford	this	trip	 to	London.	And	 if	the	girls	 weren’t	successful	on	the	Marriage
Mart…well,	 no	one	was	going	to	clap	them	into	debtor’s	 prison,	but	they	would
have	to	look	forward	to	a	quiet	life	 of	genteel	poverty	 at	some	charmingly	small
cottage	in	Somerset.

      And	so	the	two	girls	 were	forced	to	make	their	debuts	in	the	same	year.	It
had	been	decided	that	the	most	logical	time	would	be	when	Edwina	was	just
seventeen	and	Kate	almost	twenty-one.	Mary	would	have	liked	to	have	waited
until	Edwina	 was	eighteen,	and	a	bit	more	mature,	but	that	would	have	made
Kate	nearly	twenty-two,	 and	heavens,	but	who	would	marry	her	then?

      Kate	smiled	wryly.	 She	hadn’t	even	wanted	a	season.	She’d	known	from	the
outset	that	she	wasn’t	the	sort	who	would	capture	the	attention	of	the	ton.	She
wasn’t	pretty	enough	to	overcome	her	lack	of	dowry,	 and	she’d	never	learned	to
simper	and	mince	and	walk	delicately,	and	do	all	those	things	other	girls	seemed
to	know	how	to	do	in	 the	cradle.	Even	Edwina,	who	didn’t	 have	a	devious	bone
in	her	body,	somehow	knew	how	to	stand	and	walk	and	sigh	so	that	men	came	to
blows	just	for	the	honor	of	 helping	her	cross	the	street.

      Kate,	on	the	other	hand,	always	stood	with	her	shoulders	straight	and	tall,
couldn’t	sit	 still	if	 her	life	 depended	upon	it,	and	walked	as	if	she	were	in	a	race
—and	why	not?	she	always	wondered.	If	one	was	going	somewhere,	what	could
possibly	be	the	point	in	not	getting	there	quickly?

      As	for	 her	current	season	in	London,	she	didn’t	even	like	the	city	very	 much.

22
      As	for	 her	current	season	in	London,	she	didn’t	even	like	the	city	very	 much.
Oh,	she	was	having	a	good	enough	time,	and	she’d	met	quite	a	few	nice	people,
but	a	London	season	seemed	a	horrible	waste	of	money	to	a	girl	who	would	have
been	perfectly	content	to	remain	in	the	country	and	find	 some	sensible	man	to
marry	there.

      But	Mary	 would	 have	none	of	that.	“When	I	married	your	 father,”	she’d
said,	“I	vowed	to	 love	you	and	bring	you	up	with	 all	the	care	and	affection	I’d
give	to	a	child	of	my	 own	blood.”

      Kate	had	managed	to	get	in	a	single,	“But—”	 before	Mary	 carried	on	with,
“I	have	a	responsibility	 to	your	poor	mother,	God	rest	her	soul,	and	part	of	that
responsibility	is	to	 see	you	married	off	happily	and	securely.”

      “I	 could	be	happy	and	secure	in	the	country,”	Kate	had	replied.

      Mary	 had	countered,	“There	are	more	men	from	which	to	choose	in
London.”

      After	 which	Edwina	 had	joined	in,	insisting	 that	she	would	be	utterly
miserable	without	her,	and	since	Kate	never	could	bear	to	see	her	sister	unhappy,
her	fate	had	been	sealed.

      And	so	here	she	was—sitting	in	a	somewhat	faded	drawing	room	in	 a	rented
house	in	a	section	of	London	that	was	almost	fashionable,	and…

      She	looked	about	mischievously.

      …and	she	was	about	to	snatch	a	newspaper	from	her	sister’s	grasp.

      “Kate!”	  Edwina	squealed,	her	eyes	bugging	out	at	the	tiny	triangle	of
newsprint	that	remained	between	her	right	thumb	and	forefinger.	“I	 wasn’t	 done
yet!”

      “You’ve	 been	reading	it	forever,”	 Kate	said	with	 a	cheeky	grin.	“Besides,	I
want	to	see	what	she	has	to	say	about	Viscount	Bridgerton	today.”

      Edwina’s	 eyes,	which	were	usually	compared	to	peaceful	Scottish	lochs,
glinted	devilishly.	 “You’re	  awfully	interested	in	the	viscount,	Kate.	Is	 there
something	you’re	not	telling	 us?”

      “Don’t	 be	silly.	 I	don’t	 even	know	the	man.	And	if	 I	did,	 I	would	probably

23
      “Don’t	 be	silly.	 I	don’t	 even	know	the	man.	And	if	 I	did,	 I	would	probably
run	in	the	opposite	direction.	He	is	exactly	 the	sort	of	man	the	two	of	us	should
avoid	at	all	costs.	He	could	probably	seduce	an	iceberg.”

      “Kate!”	  Mary	exclaimed.

      Kate	grimaced.	She’d	forgotten	 her	stepmother	was	listening.	“Well,	 it’s
true,”	she	added.	“I’ve	heard	he’s	had	more	mistresses	than	I’ve	had	birthdays.”

      Mary	 looked	at	her	for	a	few	seconds,	as	if	trying	to	decide	whether	or	not
she	wanted	to	respond,	and	then	finally	she	said,	“Not	that	this	is	an	appropriate
topic	for	your	 ears,	but	many	men	have.”

      “Oh.”	 Kate	flushed.	There	was	little	 less	appealing	than	being	decisively
contradicted	while	one	was	trying	to	 make	a	grand	point.	“Well,	 then,	he’s	had
twice	as	many.	Whatever	the	case,	he’s	far	more	promiscuous	than	most	men,
and	not	the	sort	Edwina	ought	to	allow	to	court	 her.”

      “You	are	enjoying	 a	season	as	well,”	Mary	reminded	her.

      Kate	shot	Mary	 the	most	sarcastic	of	glances.	They	all	knew	that	if	the
viscount	chose	to	court	a	Sheffield,	it	would	 not	be	Kate.

      “I	 don’t	think	 there	is	anything	in	 there	that’s	going	to	alter	your	opinion,”
Edwina	said	with	a	shrug	as	she	leaned	toward	Kate	to	get	a	better	view	of	the
newspaper.	“She	doesn’t	say	very	much	about	him,	actually.	It’s	more	of	 a
treatise	on	the	topic	of	rakes.”

      Kate’s	eyes	swept	over	the	typeset	words.	“Hmmph,”	 she	said,	her	favorite
expression	of	disdain.	“I’ll	  wager	she’s	correct.	He	probably	won’t	 come	up	to
scratch	this	year.”

      “You	 always	think	 Lady	Whistledown	 is	correct,”	 Mary	murmured	with	 a
smile.

      “She	usually	is,”	 Kate	replied.	“You	 must	admit,	 for	a	gossip	columnist,	she
displays	remarkable	good	sense.	She	has	certainly	been	correct	in	her	assessment
of	all	the	people	I	have	met	thus	far	in	London.”

      “You	 should	make	your	own	judgments,	Kate,”	 Mary	 said	lightly.	 “It	 is
beneath	you	to	base	your	opinions	on	a	gossip	column.”

24
      Kate	knew	her	stepmother	was	right,	but	she	didn’t	 want	to	admit	it,	 and	so
she	just	let	out	another	“Hmmph”	 and	turned	back	to	the	paper	in	her	hands.

      Whistledown	was,	without	 a	doubt,	the	most	interesting	reading	material	in
all	London.	Kate	wasn’t	 entirely	certain	when	the	gossip	column	had	begun—
sometime	the	previous	year,	she’d	heard—but	one	thing	was	certain.	Whoever
Lady	Whistledown	 was	(and	no	one	really	knew	who	she	was),	she	was	a	well-
connected	member	of	the	ton.	She	had	to	be.	No	interloper	could	ever	uncover
all	the	gossip	she	printed	in	her	columns	every	Monday,	Wednesday,	and	Friday.

      Lady	Whistledown	 always	had	all	the	latest	on-dits,	and	unlike	 other
columnists,	she	wasn’t	hesitant	about	using	people’s	full	names.	Having	decided
last	week,	for	example,	that	Kate	didn’t	 look	good	in	yellow,	 she	wrote,	clear	as
day:	“The	color	yellow	 makes	the	dark-haired	Miss	Katharine	 Sheffield	look	 like
a	singed	daffodil.”

      Kate	hadn’t	minded	 the	insult.	She’d	heard	it	said	on	more	than	one	occasion
that	one	could	not	consider	oneself	“arrived”	 until	one	had	been	insulted	by
Lady	Whistledown.	 Even	Edwina,	who	was	a	huge	social	success	by	anyone’s
measure,	had	been	jealous	that	Kate	had	been	singled	out	for	an	insult.

      And	even	though	Kate	didn’t	 particularly	 want	to	be	in	London	 for	a	season,
she	figured	that	if	she	had	to	participate	in	the	social	whirl,	 she	might	as	well	not
be	a	complete	and	utter	failure.	If	getting	insulted	 in	a	gossip	column	was	to	be
her	only	sign	of	success,	well	then,	so	be	it.	Kate	would	take	her	triumphs	where
she	may.

      Now	 when	Penelope	Featherington	bragged	about	being	likened	to	an
overripe	citrus	fruit	 in	her	tangerine	satin,	Kate	could	wave	her	arm	and	sigh
with	great	drama,	“Yes,	well,	 I	am	a	singed	daffodil.”

      “Someday,”	 Mary	announced	out	of	the	blue,	giving	 her	spectacles	yet
another	push	with	her	index	finger,	“someone	is	going	 to	discover	that	woman’s
true	identity,	and	then	she’s	going	to	be	in	trouble.”

      Edwina	looked	 at	her	mother	with	interest.	“Do	 you	really	think	 someone
will	 ferret	her	out?	She	has	managed	to	keep	her	secret	for	over	a	year	now.”

      “Nothing	 that	big	can	stay	a	secret	forever,”	Mary	 replied.	She	jabbed	her
embroidery	with	 her	needle,	pulling	a	long	strand	of	yellow	 thread	through	the
fabric.	“Mark	 my	words.	 It’s	all	 going	to	come	out	sooner	or	later,	and	when	it

25
fabric.	“Mark	 my	words.	 It’s	all	 going	to	come	out	sooner	or	later,	and	when	it
does,	a	scandal	the	likes	of	which	you	have	never	seen	is	going	to	erupt	all	over
town.”

      “Well,	 if	 I	knew	who	 she	was,”	Kate	announced,	flipping	the	single-sheet
newspaper	over	to	page	two,	“I’d	probably	 make	her	my	best	friend.	She’s
fiendishly	entertaining.	 And	no	matter	what	anyone	says,	she’s	almost	always
right.”

      Just	then,	Newton,	Kate’s	somewhat	overweight	corgi,	 trotted	into	the	room.

      “Isn’t	 that	dog	supposed	to	stay	outside?”	Mary	asked.	Then	she	yelped,
“Kate!”	 as	the	dog	angled	over	to	her	feet	and	panted	as	if	waiting	for	a	kiss.

      “Newton,	 come	here	this	minute,”	Kate	 ordered.

      The	dog	gazed	longingly	at	Mary,	 then	waddled	over	to	Kate,	hopped	up
onto	the	sofa,	and	laid	his	front	paws	across	her	lap.

      “He’s	 covering	you	with	 fur,”	 Edwina	said.

      Kate	shrugged	as	she	stroked	his	thick,	caramel-colored	coat.	“I	don’t	 mind.”

      Edwina	sighed,	but	she	reached	out	and	gave	Newton	a	quick	pat,	anyway.
“What	else	does	she	say?”	she	asked,	leaning	forward	with	interest.	“I	never	did
get	to	see	page	two.”

      Kate	smiled	at	her	sister’s	sarcasm.	“Not	much.	A	 little	 something	about	the
Duke	and	Duchess	of	Hastings,	who	apparently	arrived	in	town	earlier	 this	week,
a	list	of	the	food	at	Lady	Danbury’s	 ball,	which	 she	proclaimed	‘surprisingly
delicious,’	and	a	rather	unfortunate	description	of	 Mrs.	Featherington’s	gown
Monday	last.”

      Edwina	frowned.	 “She	does	seem	to	pick	on	the	Featheringtons	quite	a	bit.”

      “And	 no	wonder,”	 Mary	said,	setting	down	her	embroidery	 as	she	stood	up.
“That	woman	wouldn’t	 know	 how	to	pick	 out	a	dress	color	for	her	girls	if	 a
rainbow	wrapped	itself	right	 around	her	neck.”

      “Mother!”	  Edwina	exclaimed.

26
      Kate	clapped	a	hand	over	her	mouth,	trying	not	to	laugh.	Mary	 rarely	made
such	opinionated	pronouncements,	but	when	she	did,	they	were	always
marvelous.

      “Well,	 it’s	 true.	She	keeps	dressing	her	youngest	in	tangerine.	Anyone	can
see	that	poor	girl	needs	a	blue	or	a	mint	green.”

      “You	 dressed	me	in	yellow,”	 Kate	reminded	her.

      “And	 I’m	 sorry	I	did.	 That	will	 teach	me	to	listen	to	a	shopgirl.	I	should
never	have	doubted	my	own	judgment.	We’ll	 simply	 have	to	have	that	one	cut
down	for	Edwina.”

      Since	Edwina	was	a	full	 head	shorter	than	Kate,	and	several	shades	more
delicate,	this	would	not	be	a	problem.

      “When	 you	do,”	Kate	said,	turning	 to	her	sister,	“make	sure	you	eliminate
the	ruffle	on	the	sleeve.	It’s	dreadfully	 distracting.	And	it	 itches.	I	had	half	a
mind	to	rip	it	 off	right	 there	at	the	Ashbourne	ball.”

      Mary	 rolled	her	eyes.	“I	am	both	surprised	and	thankful	 that	you	saw	fit	to
restrain	yourself.”

      “I	 am	surprised	but	not	thankful,”	 Edwina	said	with	 a	mischievous	smile.
“Just	think	of	 the	fun	Lady	Whistledown	 would	 have	had	with	that.”

      “Ah,	 yes,”	Kate	said,	returning	 her	grin.	“I	 can	see	it	now.	‘The	singed
daffodil	 rips	off	her	petals.’	”

      “I	 am	going	upstairs,”	Mary	 announced,	shaking	her	head	at	her	daughters’
antics.	“Do	try	 not	to	forget	that	we	have	a	party	to	attend	this	evening.	You	girls
may	want	to	get	a	bit	of	rest	before	we	go	out.	It’s	 sure	to	be	another	late	night
for	us.”

      Kate	and	Edwina	nodded	and	murmured	promises	to	that	effect	as	Mary
gathered	her	embroidery	and	left	the	room.	As	soon	as	she	was	gone,	Edwina
turned	to	Kate	and	asked,	“Have	you	decided	what	you’re	going	to	 wear
tonight?”

      “The	 green	gauze,	I	think.	I	should	wear	white,	I	 know,	but	I	fear	it	 does	not
suit	me.”

27
suit	me.”

      “If	 you	don’t	 wear	white,”	 Edwina	said	loyally,	 “then	 neither	shall	I.	I	shall
wear	my	blue	muslin.”

      Kate	nodded	her	approval	as	she	glanced	back	at	the	newspaper	in	her	hand,
trying	to	balance	Newton,	who	 had	flipped	over	onto	his	back	and	was	angling
to	have	his	belly	rubbed.	“Just	last	week	Mr.	 Berbrooke	said	you	are	an	angel	in
blue.	On	account	of	it	matching	your	 eyes	so	well.”

      Edwina	blinked	 in	surprise.	“Mr.	 Berbrooke	said	that?	To	you?”

      Kate	looked	back	up.	“Of	 course.	All	 of	your	beaux	try	 to	pass	on	their
compliments	through	me.”

      “They	 do?	Whyever?”

      Kate	smiled	slowly	 and	indulgently.	 “Well,	 now,	Edwina,	 it	might	 have
something	to	do	with	the	time	you	 announced	to	the	entire	audience	at	the
Smythe-Smith	musicale	that	you	could	never	marry	without	 your	sister’s
approval.”

      Edwina’s	 cheeks	turned	just	the	slightest	bit	pink.	“It	 wasn’t	the	entire
audience,”	she	mumbled.

      “It	 might	as	well	 have	been.	The	news	traveled	faster	than	fire	on	rooftops.	I
wasn’t	even	in	the	room	at	the	time	and	it	only	 took	two	minutes	for	 me	to	hear
about	it.”

      Edwina	crossed	her	arms	and	let	out	a	“Hmmph”	 that	made	her	sound	rather
like	her	older	sister.	“Well,	 it’s	 true,	and	I	don’t	 care	who	knows	it.	I	know	 I’m
expected	to	make	a	grand	and	brilliant	match,	but	I	don’t	 have	to	marry	someone
who	will	 ill	 treat	me.	Anyone	with	 the	fortitude	to	actually	 impress	you	would
have	to	be	up	to	snuff.”

      “Am	 I	so	difficult	  to	impress,	then?”

      The	two	sisters	looked	at	each	other,	then	answered	in	unison,	“Yes.”

      But	as	Kate	laughed	along	with	Edwina,	 a	niggling	sense	of	guilt	 rose	within
her.	All	three	Sheffields	 knew	that	it	would	 be	Edwina	who	would	 snag	a
nobleman	or	marry	into	a	fortune.	It	 would	be	Edwina	who	 would	ensure	that

28
nobleman	or	marry	into	a	fortune.	It	 would	be	Edwina	who	 would	ensure	that
her	family	would	 not	have	to	live	out	their	 lives	in	genteel	poverty.	Edwina	 was
a	beauty,	while	Kate	was…

      Kate	was	Kate.

      Kate	didn’t	 mind.	Edwina’s	 beauty	was	simply	a	fact	of	 life.	There	were
certain	truths	Kate	had	long	since	come	to	accept.	Kate	would	never	learn	to
waltz	without	 trying	to	 take	the	lead;	she’d	always	be	afraid	of	electrical	storms,
no	matter	how	often	she	told	herself	she	was	being	silly;	and	no	matter	what	she
wore,	no	matter	how	she	dressed	her	hair	or	pinched	her	cheeks,	she’d	never	be
as	pretty	as	Edwina.

      Besides,	Kate	wasn’t	certain	that	she’d	like	 all	the	attention	Edwina
received.	Nor,	she	was	coming	to	realize,	would	she	relish	the	responsibility	 of
having	to	marry	well	 to	provide	for	 her	mother	and	sister.

      “Edwina,”	 Kate	 said	softly,	her	eyes	growing	serious,	“you	 don’t	have	to
marry	anyone	you	don’t	like.	 You	know	 that.”

      Edwina	nodded,	suddenly	looking	 as	if	she	might	cry.

      “If	 you	decide	there	isn’t	 a	single	gentleman	in	London	who	is	good	enough
for	you,	then	so	be	it.	We	shall	simply	 go	back	to	Somerset	and	enjoy	our	own
company.	There’s	no	one	I	like	better,	anyway.”

      “Nor	 I,”	 Edwina	whispered.

      “And	 if	 you	do	find	a	man	who	sweeps	you	off	your	 feet,	then	Mary	and	I
shall	be	delighted.	You	should	not	worry	 about	leaving	us,	either.	We	shall	get
on	fine	with	 each	other	for	company.”

      “You	 might	find	 someone	to	marry	as	well,”	 Edwina	pointed	out.

      Kate	felt	 her	lips	twist	into	 a	small	smile.	“I	 might,”	 she	allowed,	knowing
that	it	probably	wasn’t	 true.	She	didn’t	want	to	remain	a	spinster	her	entire	life,
but	she	doubted	she	would	find	a	husband	here	in	London.	“Perhaps	one	of	your
lovesick	suitors	will	 turn	to	 me	once	he	realizes	you	are	unattainable,”	she
teased.

      Edwina	swatted	her	with	 a	pillow.	 “Don’t	 be	silly.”

29
      Edwina	swatted	her	with	a	pillow.	“Don’t	be	silly.”

      “But	I’m	not!”	 Kate	protested.	And	she	wasn’t.	Quite	frankly,	this	seemed	to
her	the	most	likely	avenue	by	which	she	might	actually	find	a	husband	in	town.

      “Do	you	know	what	sort	of	man	I’d	like	to	marry?”	Edwina	asked,	her	eyes
turning	dreamy.

      Kate	shook	her	head.

      “A	scholar.”

      “A	scholar?”

      “A	scholar,”	Edwina	said	firmly.

      Kate	cleared	her	throat.	“I’m	not	certain	you’ll	find	many	of	those	in	town
for	the	season.”

      “I	know.”	Edwina	let	out	a	little	sigh.	“But	the	truth	is—and	you	know	this
even	if	I	am	not	supposed	to	let	on	in	public—I’m	really	rather	bookish.	I’d
much	rather	spend	my	day	in	a	library	than	gadding	about	in	Hyde	Park.	I	think	I
should	enjoy	life	with	a	man	who	enjoyed	scholarly	pursuits	as	well.”

      “Right.	Hmmm…”	Kate’s	mind	worked	frantically.	Edwina	wasn’t	likely	to
find	a	scholar	back	in	Somerset,	either.	“You	know,	Edwina,	it	might	be	difficult
to	find	you	a	true	scholar	outside	the	university	towns.	You	might	have	to	settle
for	a	man	who	likes	to	read	and	learn	as	you	do.”

      “That	would	be	all	right,”	Edwina	said	happily.	“I’d	be	quite	content	with	an
amateur	scholar.”

      Kate	breathed	a	sigh	of	relief.	Surely	they	could	find	someone	in	London
who	liked	to	read.

      “And	do	you	know	what?”	Edwina	added.	“You	truly	cannot	tell	a	book	by
its	cover.	All	sorts	of	people	are	amateur	scholars.	Why,	even	that	Viscount
Bridgerton	Lady	Whistledown	keeps	talking	about	might	be	a	scholar	at	heart.”

      “Bite	your	tongue,	Edwina.	You	are	not	to	have	anything	to	do	with
Viscount	Bridgerton.	Everyone	knows	he	is	the	worst	sort	of	rake.	In	fact,	he’s
the	worst	rake,	period.	In	all	London.	In	the	entire	country!”

30
the	worst	rake,	period.	In	all	London.	 In	the	entire	country!”

      “I	 know,	I	 was	just	using	him	as	an	example.	Besides,	he’s	not	likely	to
choose	a	bride	this	year,	anyway.	Lady	Whistledown	said	so,	and	you	yourself
said	that	she	is	almost	always	right.”

      Kate	patted	her	sister	on	the	arm.	“Don’t	 worry.	 We	will	 find	you	 a	suitable
husband.	But	not—not	not	not	not	not	Viscount	 Bridgerton!”
                                                                	

At	that	very	moment,	the	subject	of	their	discussion	was	relaxing	at	White’s	with	two	of	his	three	younger
brothers,	enjoying	a	late	afternoon	drink.

      Anthony	 Bridgerton	leaned	back	in	his	leather	chair,	regarded	his	scotch
with	a	thoughtful	 expression	as	he	swirled	it	about,	and	then	announced,	“I’m
thinking	about	getting	married.”

      Benedict	Bridgerton,	 who	had	been	indulging	in	a	habit	his	mother	 detested
—tipping	 his	chair	drunkenly	on	the	back	two	legs—fell	 over.

      Colin	 Bridgerton	started	to	choke.

      Luckily	 for	 Colin,	Benedict	 regained	his	seat	with	enough	time	to	smack	him
soundly	on	the	back,	sending	a	green	olive	sailing	across	the	table.

      It	narrowly	 missed	Anthony’s	 ear.

      Anthony	 let	the	indignity	 pass	without	comment.	He	was	all	too	aware	that
his	sudden	declaration	had	come	as	a	bit	of	a	surprise.

      Well,	 perhaps	more	than	a	bit.	“Complete,”	“total,”	  and	“utter”	 were	words
that	came	to	mind.

      Anthony	 knew	that	he	did	not	fit	 the	image	of	a	man	who	had	settling	down
on	his	mind.	He’d	spent	the	last	decade	as	the	worst	sort	of	rake,	taking	pleasure
where	he	may.	For	as	he	well	knew,	life	was	short	and	certainly	meant	to	be
enjoyed.	Oh,	he’d	had	a	certain	code	of	honor.	He	never	dallied	with	 well-bred
young	women.	Anyone	who	might	 have	any	right	to	demand	marriage	was
strictly	off-limits.

      With	 four	younger	sisters	of	his	own,	Anthony	 had	a	healthy	degree	of
respect	for	the	good	reputations	of	gently	bred	women.	He’d	already	nearly

31
respect	for	the	good	reputations	of	gently	bred	women.	He’d	already	nearly
fought	a	duel	for	one	of	his	sisters,	all	over	a	slight	to	 her	honor.	And	as	for	the
other	three…he	freely	admitted	that	he	broke	out	in	a	cold	sweat	at	the	mere
thought	of	their	getting	 involved	with	 a	man	who	bore	a	reputation	like	his.

      No,	he	certainly	 wasn’t	about	to	despoil	some	other	gentleman’s	younger
sister.

      But	as	for	the	other	sort	of	women—the	 widows	and	actresses	who	knew
what	they	wanted	and	what	they	were	getting	into—he’d	 enjoyed	their	company
and	enjoyed	it	well.	Since	the	day	he	left	Oxford	 and	headed	west	to	London,
he’d	not	been	without	a	mistress.

      Sometimes,	he	thought	wryly,	 he’d	not	been	without	two.

      He’d	 ridden	in	nearly	every	horse	race	society	had	to	offer,	he’d	boxed	at
Gentleman	Jackson’s,	and	he’d	won	more	card	games	than	he	could	count.	(He’d
lost	a	few,	too,	but	he	disregarded	those.)	He’d	spent	the	decade	of	his	twenties
in	a	mindful	 pursuit	of	pleasure,	tempered	only	by	his	overwhelming	 sense	of
responsibility	to	his	 family.

      Edmund	Bridgerton’s	 death	had	been	both	sudden	and	unexpected;	he’d	not
had	a	chance	to	make	any	final	requests	of	his	eldest	son	before	he	perished.	But
if	he	had,	Anthony	was	certain	that	he	would	have	asked	him	to	care	for	his
mother	and	siblings	with	the	same	diligence	and	affection	Edmund	had
displayed.

      And	so	in	between	Anthony’s	 rounds	of	parties	and	horse	races,	he’d	sent	his
brothers	to	Eton	and	Oxford,	gone	to	a	mind-numbing	number	of	 piano	recitals
given	by	his	sisters	(no	easy	feat;	three	out	of	four	of	them	were	tone	deaf),	and
kept	a	close	and	watchful	eye	on	the	family	finances.	With	 seven	brothers	and
sisters,	he	saw	it	as	his	duty	to	make	sure	there	was	enough	money	to	secure	all
of	their	futures.

      As	he	grew	closer	to	thirty,	 he’d	realized	that	he	was	spending	more	and
more	time	tending	to	his	heritage	and	family	 and	less	and	less	in	his	old	pursuit
of	decadence	and	pleasure.	And	he’d	realized	that	he	liked	it	that	way.	He	still
kept	a	mistress,	but	never	more	than	one	at	a	time,	and	he	discovered	that	he	no
longer	felt	the	need	to	enter	every	horse	race	or	stay	late	at	a	party	just	to	win
that	last	hand	of	cards.

32
      His	reputation,	of	 course,	stayed	with	him.	He	didn’t	 mind	that,	actually.
There	were	certain	benefits	to	being	thought	England’s	most	reprehensible	rake.
He	was	nearly	universally	feared,	for	example.

      That	was	always	a	good	thing.

      But	now	 it	was	time	for	 marriage.	He	ought	to	settle	down,	have	a	son.	He
had	a	title	to	pass	on,	after	all.	He	did	feel	a	rather	sharp	twinge	of	regret—and
perhaps	a	touch	of	guilt	as	well—over	the	fact	that	it	 was	unlikely	 that	he’d	live
to	see	his	son	into	adulthood.	But	what	could	he	do?	He	was	the	firstborn
Bridgerton	of	a	firstborn	 Bridgerton	 of	a	firstborn	Bridgerton	 eight	times	over.
He	had	a	dynastic	responsibility	to	be	fruitful	 and	multiply.

      Besides,	he	took	some	comfort	in	knowing	 that	he’d	leave	three	able	and
caring	brothers	behind.	They’d	see	to	it	that	his	son	was	brought	up	with	the	love
and	honor	that	every	Bridgerton	enjoyed.	His	sisters	would	coddle	the	boy,	 and
his	mother	might	spoil	him…

      Anthony	 actually	smiled	a	bit	 as	he	thought	of	his	large	and	often	boisterous
family.	His	 son	would	not	need	a	father	to	be	well	loved.

      And	whatever	children	 he	sired—well,	 they	probably	wouldn’t	 remember
him	after	he	was	gone.	They’d	be	young,	unformed.	It	 had	not	escaped
Anthony’s	 notice	that	of	all	the	Bridgerton	 children,	he,	the	eldest,	was	the	one
most	deeply	affected	by	their	father’s	death.

      Anthony	 downed	another	sip	of	his	scotch	and	straightened	his	shoulders,
pushing	such	unpleasant	ruminations	from	his	mind.	He	needed	to	focus	on	the
matter	at	hand,	namely,	the	pursuit	of	a	wife.

      Being	a	discerning	and	somewhat	organized	man,	he’d	made	a	mental	list	of
requirements	for	the	position.	First,	she	ought	to	be	reasonably	attractive.	She
needn’t	be	a	raving	beauty	(although	that	would	be	nice),	but	if	 he	was	going	to
have	to	bed	her,	he	figured	a	bit	of	attraction	ought	to	make	the	job	more
pleasant.

      Second,	she	couldn’t	be	stupid.	This,	Anthony	 mused,	might	be	the	most
difficult	 of	his	requirements	to	fill.	  He	was	not	universally	impressed	by	the
mental	prowess	of	London	debutantes.	The	last	time	he’d	made	the	mistake	of
engaging	a	young	chit	fresh	out	of	the	schoolroom	in	conversation,	she’d	been

33
unable	to	discuss	anything	other	than	food	(she’d	had	a	plate	of	strawberries	in
her	hand	at	the	time)	and	the	weather	(and	she	hadn’t	even	gotten	that	right;
when	Anthony	had	asked	if	she	thought	the	weather	was	going	to	turn	inclement,
she’d	replied,	“I’m	 sure	I	don’t	 know.	I’ve	 never	been	to	Clement.”)

      He	might	 be	able	to	avoid	conversation	with	a	wife	 who	was	less	than
brilliant,	 but	he	did	not	want	stupid	children.

      Third—and	 this	was	the	most	important—she	couldn’t	 be	anyone	with
whom	he	might	actually	 fall	in	 love.

      Under	no	circumstances	would	this	rule	 be	broken.

      He	wasn’t	a	complete	cynic;	 he	knew	that	true	love	existed.	Anyone	who’d
ever	been	in	the	same	room	with	his	parents	knew	that	true	love	existed.

      But	love	 was	a	complication	he	wished	to	avoid.	He	had	no	desire	for	his	life
to	be	visited	by	that	particular	miracle.

      And	since	Anthony	 was	used	to	getting	what	he	wanted,	he	had	no	doubt
that	he	would	find	an	attractive,	intelligent	 woman	with	 whom	he	would	 never
fall	in	love.	 And	what	was	the	problem	with	 that?	Chances	were	he	wouldn’t
have	found	the	love	of	his	life	 even	if	he	had	been	looking	for	her.	Most	 men
didn’t.

      “Good	 God,	Anthony,	what	 has	you	frowning	so?	Not	that	olive.	 I	saw	it
clearly	and	it	didn’t	 even	touch	you.”

      Benedict’s	voice	 broke	him	out	of	 his	reverie,	and	Anthony	blinked	 a	few
times	before	answering,	“Nothing.	 Nothing	at	all.”

      He	hadn’t,	of	 course,	shared	his	thoughts	about	his	own	mortality	with
anyone	else,	even	his	brothers.	It	was	not	the	sort	of	thing	one	wanted	to
advertise.	Hell,	if	 someone	had	come	up	to	him	and	said	the	same	thing,	he
probably	would	have	laughed	him	right	 out	the	door.

      But	no	one	else	could	understand	the	depth	of	the	bond	he’d	felt	with	 his
father.	And	no	one	could	possibly	understand	the	way	Anthony	 felt	it	 in	his
bones,	how	he	simply	knew	that	he	could	not	live	 longer	than	his	father	had
done.	Edmund	had	been	everything	to	him.	He’d	always	aspired	to	be	as	great	a

34
man	as	his	father,	knowing	that	that	was	unlikely,	 yet	trying	all	 the	same.	To
actually	achieve	more	than	Edmund	had—in	any	way—that	 was	nothing	short	of
impossible.

      Anthony’s	 father	was,	quite	simply,	 the	greatest	man	he’d	ever	known,
possibly	the	greatest	man	who’d	ever	lived.	To	think	 that	he	might	be	more	than
that	seemed	conceited	in	the	extreme.

      Something	had	happened	to	him	the	night	his	father	had	died,	when	he’d
remained	in	his	parents’	bedroom	with	the	body,	just	 sitting	there	for	hours,
watching	his	father	and	trying	desperately	to	remember	every	moment	they’d
shared.	It	would	be	so	easy	to	forget	the	little	things—how	 Edmund	would
squeeze	Anthony’s	upper	arm	when	he	needed	encouragement.	Or	how	he	could
recite	from	memory	Balthazar’s	 entire	“Sigh	No	 More”	 song	from	Much	Ado
About	Nothing,	not	because	he	thought	it	particularly	meaningful	 but	just
because	he	liked	it.

      And	when	Anthony	 finally	 emerged	from	the	room,	 the	first	streaks	of	dawn
pinking	the	sky,	he	somehow	knew	that	his	days	were	numbered,	and	numbered
in	the	same	way	Edmund’s	had	been.

      “Spit	 it	out,”	 Benedict	said,	breaking	into	his	thoughts	once	again.	“I	 won’t
offer	you	a	penny	for	your	 thoughts,	since	I	know	they	can’t	 possibly	be	worth
that	much,	but	what	are	you	thinking	about?”

      Anthony	 suddenly	sat	up	straighter,	determined	to	force	his	attention	back	to
the	matter	at	hand.	After	all,	he	had	a	bride	to	choose,	and	that	was	surely
serious	business.	“Who	is	considered	the	diamond	of	this	season?”	he	asked.

      His	brothers	paused	for	a	moment	to	think	on	this,	and	then	Colin	 said,
“Edwina	Sheffield.	 Surely	you’ve	 seen	her.	Rather	petite,	with	blond	hair	and
blue	eyes.	You	can	usually	spot	her	by	the	sheeplike	crowd	of	lovesick	suitors
following	 her	about.”

      Anthony	 ignored	his	brother’s	attempts	at	sarcastic	humor.	“Has	she	a
brain?”

      Colin	 blinked,	as	if	the	question	of	a	woman	with	 a	brain	were	one	that	had
never	occurred	to	him.	“Yes,	I	 rather	think	she	does.	I	once	heard	her	discussing
mythology	with	 Middlethorpe,	 and	it	sounded	as	if	she	had	the	right	of	it.”

35
      “Good,”	Anthony	said,	letting	his	glass	of	scotch	hit	the	table	with	a	thunk.
“Then	I’ll	marry	her.”

36
Chapter	    2


At	the	Hartside	ball	Wednesday	night,	Viscount	Bridgerton	was	seen	dancing
with	more	than	one	eligible	young	lady.	This	behavior	can	only	be	termed
“startling”	 as	Bridgerton	normally	avoids	proper	young	misses	with	a
perseverance	that	would	be	impressive	were	it	not	so	utterly	frustrating	to	all
marriage-minded	Mamas.

      Can	it	be	that	the	viscount	read	This	Author’s	most	recent	column	and,	in
that	perverse	manner	all	males	of	the	species	seem	to	endorse,	decided	to	prove
This	Author	wrong?

      It	may	seem	that	This	Author	is	ascribing	to	herself	far	more	importance
than	She	actually	wields,	but	men	have	certainly	made	decisions	based	on	far,
far	less.

                                                 LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	22	APRIL	1814



By	 eleven	o’clock	that	evening,	all	of	Kate’s	fears	had	been	realized.

      Anthony	Bridgerton	had	asked	Edwina	to	dance.

      Even	worse,	Edwina	had	accepted.

      Even	worse,	Mary	was	gazing	at	the	couple	as	if	she’d	like	to	reserve	a
church	that	minute.

      “Will	 you	stop	that?”	Kate	hissed,	poking	her	stepmother	in	the	ribs.

      “Stop	what?”

      “Looking	at	them	like	that!”

      Mary	blinked.	“Like	what?”

      “Like	you’re	planning	the	wedding	breakfast.”

      “Oh.”	Mary’s	cheeks	turned	pink.	A	guilty	sort	of	pink.

37
      “Oh.”	 Mary’s	 cheeks	turned	pink.	A	guilty	 sort	of	 pink.

      “Mary!”

      “Well,	 I	 might	have	been,”	Mary	 admitted.	“And	 what’s	wrong	with	 that,	I
might	ask?	He’d	be	a	superb	catch	for	Edwina.”

      “Were	 you	listening	this	afternoon	in	 the	drawing	room?	It’s	 bad	enough	that
Edwina	has	any	number	of	rakes	and	rogues	sniffing	about	her.	You	cannot
imagine	the	amount	of	time	it	 has	taken	me	to	sort	the	good	suitors	from	the	bad.
But	Bridgerton!”	 Kate	 shuddered.	“He’s	quite	possibly	the	worst	rake	in	all
London.	You	cannot	want	her	to	marry	 a	man	like	him.”

      “Don’t	 you	 presume	to	tell	me	what	I	can	and	cannot	do,	Katharine	Grace
Sheffield,”	 Mary	said	sharply,	stiffening	 her	spine	until	she’d	 straightened	to	her
full	height—which	  was	still	a	full	 head	shorter	than	Kate.	“I	am	still	 your
mother.	Well,	your	 stepmother.	And	that	counts	for	something.”

      Kate	immediately	 felt	like	 a	worm.	Mary	 was	all	she’d	ever	known	as	a
mother,	and	she’d	never,	not	even	once,	made	Kate	feel	any	less	her	daughter
than	Edwina	was.	She’d	tucked	Kate	into	bed	at	night,	told	 her	stories,	kissed
her,	hugged	her,	helped	her	through	the	awkward	years	between	childhood	and
adulthood.	The	only	thing	she	had	not	done	was	ask	Kate	to	call	her	“Mother.”

      “It	 counts,”	Kate	said	in	 a	quiet	voice,	letting	her	gaze	fall	shamefully	 down
to	her	feet.	“It	counts	for	 a	lot.	And	you	are	 my	mother.	In	every	way	 that
matters.”

      Mary	 stared	at	her	for	a	long	moment,	then	started	to	blink	rather	furiously.
“Oh,	dear,”	she	choked	out,	reaching	into	her	reticule	for	 a	handkerchief.	“Now
you’ve	gone	and	turned	me	into	a	watering	pot.”

      “I’m	  sorry,”	Kate	murmured.	 “Oh,	here,	turn	around	so	no	one	sees	you.
There	you	are.”

      Mary	 pulled	out	a	white	square	of	linen	and	dabbed	at	her	eyes,	the	exact
same	blue	as	Edwina’s.	“I	do	love	you,	Kate.	 You	know	that,	don’t	 you?”

      “Of	 course!”	Kate	 exclaimed,	shocked	that	Mary	would	 even	ask.	“And	you
know…you	 know	that	I…”

38
      “I	know.”	Mary	patted	her	arm.	“Of	course	I	know.	It’s	just	that	when	you
agree	to	be	mother	to	a	child	you	haven’t	borne,	your	responsibility	is	twice	as
great.	You	must	work	even	harder	to	ensure	that	child’s	happiness	and	welfare.”

      “Oh,	Mary,	I	do	love	you.	And	I	love	Edwina.”

      At	the	mention	of	Edwina’s	name,	they	both	turned	and	looked	out	across
the	ballroom	at	her,	dancing	prettily	with	the	viscount.	As	usual,	Edwina	was	a
vision	of	petite	loveliness.	Her	blond	hair	was	swept	atop	her	head,	a	few	stray
curls	left	to	frame	her	face,	and	her	form	was	the	epitome	of	grace	as	she	moved
through	the	steps	of	the	dance.

      The	viscount,	Kate	noted	with	irritation,	was	blindingly	handsome.	Dressed
in	stark	black	and	white,	he	eschewed	the	garish	colors	that	had	become	popular
among	the	more	foppish	members	of	the	ton.	He	was	tall,	stood	straight	and
proud,	and	had	thick	chestnut	hair	that	tended	to	fall	forward	over	his	brow.

      He	was,	on	the	surface	at	least,	everything	man	was	meant	to	be.

      “They	make	a	handsome	couple,	don’t	they?”	Mary	murmured.

      Kate	bit	her	tongue.	She	actually	bit	her	tongue.

      “He’s	a	trifle	tall	for	her,	but	I	don’t	see	that	as	an	insurmountable	obstacle,
do	you?”

      Kate	clasped	her	hands	together	and	let	her	nails	bite	into	her	skin.	It	said	a
great	deal	about	the	strength	of	her	grip	that	she	could	feel	them	all	the	way
through	her	kid	gloves.

      Mary	smiled.	A	rather	sly	smile,	Kate	thought.	She	gave	her	stepmother	a
suspicious	look.

      “He	dances	well,	don’t	you	think?”	Mary	asked.

      “He	is	not	going	to	marry	Edwina!”	Kate	burst	out.

      Mary’s	smile	slid	straight	into	a	grin.	“I	was	wondering	how	long	you’d
manage	to	hold	your	silence.”

      “Far	longer	than	was	my	natural	inclination,”	Kate	retorted,	practically

39
      “Far	longer	 than	was	my	natural	inclination,”	 Kate	retorted,	practically
biting	each	word.

      “Yes,	 that	much	was	clear.”

      “Mary,	 you	know	 he	is	not	the	sort	of	man	we	want	for	Edwina.”

      Mary	 cocked	her	head	slightly	to	the	side	and	raised	her	brows.	“I	believe
the	question	ought	to	be	whether	he	is	the	sort	of	man	Edwina	wants	for
Edwina.”

      “He’s	 not	that,	either!”	 Kate	replied	heatedly.	“Just	this	afternoon	 she	told
me	that	she	wanted	to	marry	a	scholar.	A	scholar!”	She	jerked	her	head	toward
the	dark-haired	cretin	dancing	with	her	sister.	“Does	 he	look	like	a	scholar	to
you?”

      “No,	 but	then	again,	you	don’t	look	 particularly	 like	an	accomplished
watercolorist,	and	yet	I	know	 that	you	are.”	Mary	 smirked	a	bit,	which	 needled
Kate	to	no	end,	and	waited	for	her	reply.

      “I’ll	  allow,”	 Kate	said	through	clenched	teeth,	“that	one	ought	not	judge	a
person	merely	on	his	outer	appearance,	but	surely	you	must	agree.	From	all	that
we	have	heard	of	him,	he	does	not	seem	the	sort	to	spend	his	afternoons	bent
over	musty	books	in	a	library.”

      “Perhaps	not,”	Mary	 mused,	“but	I	 had	a	lovely	chat	with	his	mother	 earlier
this	evening.”

      “His	 mother?”	Kate	fought	 to	follow	 the	conversation.	“What	 has	that	to	do
with	anything?”

      Mary	 shrugged.	“I	find	 it	difficult	  to	believe	that	such	a	gracious	and
intelligent	lady	 could	have	raised	anything	but	the	finest	of	gentlemen,
regardless	of	his	reputation.”

      “But	 Mary—”

      “When	 you	are	a	mother,”	she	said	loftily,	 “you	 will	 understand	what	I
mean.”

      “But—”

40
      “Have	 I	told	you,”	 Mary	 said,	the	purposeful	tone	of	her	voice	indicating
that	she’d	meant	to	interrupt,	“how	 lovely	you	 look	in	that	green	gauze?	I’m	so
glad	we	chose	it.”

      Kate	looked	dumbly	 down	at	her	dress,	wondering	why	on	earth	Mary	 had
changed	the	subject	so	suddenly.

      “The	 color	suits	you	well.	 Lady	Whistledown	 shall	not	be	calling	you	 a
singed	blade	of	grass	in	Friday’s	column!”

      Kate	stared	at	Mary	in	dismay.	 Perhaps	her	stepmother	had	become
overheated.	It	was	crowded	in	the	ballroom,	and	the	air	had	grown	thick.

      Then	she	felt	Mary’s	 finger	jabbing	 her	directly	below	 her	left	shoulder
blade,	and	she	knew	something	else	was	afoot	entirely.

      “Mr.	 Bridgerton!”	  Mary	suddenly	exclaimed,	 sounding	as	gleeful	as	a	young
girl.

      Horrified,	 Kate	jerked	her	head	up	to	see	a	startlingly	handsome	man
approach	them.	A	startlingly	handsome	man	who	looked	startlingly	 like	 the
viscount	currently	dancing	with	 her	sister.

      She	swallowed.	It	was	either	that	or	let	 her	jaw	hang	open.

      “Mr.	 Bridgerton!”	  Mary	said	again.	“How	 nice	to	see	you.	This	is	my
daughter	Katharine.”

      He	took	her	limp,	 gloved	hand	and	brushed	an	airy	kiss	across	her	knuckles.
So	airy,	in	fact,	that	Kate	rather	suspected	he	hadn’t	kissed	her	at	all.

      “Miss	 Sheffield,”	 he	murmured.

      “Kate,”	 Mary	 continued,	“this	 is	Mr.	Colin	 Bridgerton.	 I	met	him	earlier	 this
evening	while	I	was	talking	 with	 his	mother,	Lady	Bridgerton.”	 She	turned	to
Colin	and	beamed.	“Such	a	lovely	lady.”

      He	grinned	back.	“We	 think	so.”

      Mary	 tittered.	Tittered!	 Kate	thought	she	might	gag.

41
      “Kate,”	 Mary	 said	again,	“Mr.	 Bridgerton	is	brother	 to	the	viscount.	Who	is
dancing	with	Edwina,”	 she	added	unnecessarily.

      “I	 gathered,”	Kate	replied.

      Colin	 Bridgerton	shot	her	a	sideways	glance,	and	she	knew	instantly	that	he
had	not	missed	the	vague	sarcasm	in	her	tone.

      “It	 is	a	pleasure	to	meet	you,	Miss	Sheffield,”	 he	said	politely.	“I	 do	hope
you	will	 favor	me	with	 one	of	your	dances	this	evening.”

      “I—Of	  course.”	She	cleared	her	throat.	“I	would	 be	honored.”

      “Kate,”	 Mary	 said,	nudging	her	softly,	“show	 him	your	 dance	card.”

      “Oh!	 Yes,	of	course.”	Kate	 fumbled	for	her	dance	card,	which	was	tied
prettily	to	her	wrist	 with	 a	green	ribbon.	That	she	had	to	fumble	for	anything
actually	tied	to	her	body	was	a	bit	alarming,	 but	Kate	decided	to	blame	her	lack
of	composure	on	the	sudden	and	unexpected	appearance	of	a	heretofore
unknown	Bridgerton	 brother.

      That,	and	the	unfortunate	fact	that	even	under	the	best	of	circumstances	she
was	never	the	most	graceful	girl	in	the	room.

      Colin	 filled	 his	name	in	for	one	of	the	dances	later	that	evening,	then	asked	if
she	might	like	to	walk	 with	him	 to	the	lemonade	table.

      “Go,	 go,”	Mary	 said,	before	Kate	could	reply.	“Don’t	  worry	about	me.	I’ll	  be
just	fine	without	 you.”

      “I	 can	bring	you	back	a	glass,”	Kate	offered,	trying	 to	figure	 out	if	it	 was
possible	to	glare	at	her	stepmother	without	Mr.	Bridgerton	 noticing.

      “Not	 necessary.	I	really	should	get	back	to	my	position	with	 all	the	other
chaperones	and	mamas.”	Mary	whipped	her	head	around	frantically	until	she
spied	a	familiar	face.	“Oh,	 look,	there	is	Mrs.	Featherington.	I	must	be	off.
Portia!	Portia!”

      Kate	watched	her	stepmother’s	rapidly	 retreating	form	for	 a	moment	before
turning	back	to	Mr.	 Bridgerton.	“I	 think,”	 she	said	dryly,	 “that	she	doesn’t	want

42
any	lemonade.”

      A	sparkle	of	 humor	glinted	in	 his	emerald	green	eyes.	“Either	that	or	she’s
planning	to	run	all	the	way	 to	Spain	to	pick	the	lemons	herself.”

      Despite	herself,	Kate	laughed.	She	didn’t	want	 to	like	Mr.	 Colin	Bridgerton.
She	didn’t	much	want	to	like	 any	Bridgerton	after	 all	she’d	read	about	the
viscount	in	the	newspaper.	But	she	allowed	that	it	probably	wasn’t	 fair	to	judge	a
man	based	on	his	brother’s	misdeeds,	so	she	forced	herself	to	relax	a	bit.

      “And	 are	you	thirsty,”	 she	asked,	“or	were	you	merely	being	polite?”

      “I	 am	always	polite,”	 he	said	with	a	wicked	grin,	 “but	I	 am	thirsty	as	well.”

      Kate	took	one	look	 at	that	grin,	lethally	 combined	with	those	devastating
green	eyes,	and	nearly	groaned.	“You	are	a	rake	as	well,”	she	said	with	a	sigh.

      Colin	 choked—on	what,	she	did	not	know,	but	he	choked	nonetheless.	“I
beg	your	pardon?”

      Kate’s	face	flushed	as	she	realized	with	horror	that	she’d	spoken	aloud.	“No,
it	is	I	who	 should	beg	your	pardon.	Please	forgive	me.	That	was	unforgivably
rude.”

      “No,	 no,”	he	said	quickly,	 looking	 terribly	 interested	and	not	a	little	bit
amused,	“do	continue.”

      Kate	swallowed.	 There	was	really	no	way	to	get	out	of	it	 now.	“I	 was	merely
—”	She	cleared	her	throat.	“If	 I	might	 be	frank…”

      He	nodded,	his	sly	grin	telling	 her	that	he	could	not	imagine	her	being
anything	but	frank.

      Kate	cleared	her	throat	yet	again.	Really,	this	was	getting	ridiculous.	 She
was	starting	to	sound	as	if	she’d	swallowed	a	toad.	“It	had	occurred	to	me	that
you	might	be	rather	like	your	 brother,	that	is	all.”

      “My	 brother?”

      “The	 viscount,”	she	said,	thinking	 it	must	be	obvious.

43
      “I	have	three	brothers,”	he	explained.

      “Oh.”	Now	she	felt	stupid.	“I’m	sorry.”

      “I’m	sorry,	too,”	he	said	with	great	feeling.	“Most	of	the	time	they’re	a
dreadful	nuisance.”

      Kate	had	to	cough	to	cover	up	her	small	gasp	of	surprise.

      “But	at	least	you	were	not	comparing	me	to	Gregory,”	he	said	with	a
dramatic	sigh	of	relief.	He	shot	her	a	cheeky,	sideways	look.	“He’s	thirteen.”

      Kate	caught	the	smile	in	his	eyes	and	realized	he’d	been	bamming	her	all
along.	This	was	not	a	man	who	wished	his	brothers	off	to	perdition.	“You’re
rather	devoted	to	your	family,	aren’t	you?”	she	asked.

      His	eyes,	which	had	been	laughing	throughout	the	conversation,	turned	dead
serious	without	even	a	blink.	“Utterly.”

      “As	am	I,”	Kate	said	pointedly.

      “And	that	means?”

      “It	means,”	she	said,	knowing	she	should	hold	her	tongue	but	speaking
anyway,	“that	I	will	not	allow	anyone	to	break	my	sister’s	heart.”

      Colin	remained	silent	for	a	moment,	slowly	turning	his	head	to	watch	his
brother	and	Edwina,	who	were	just	then	finishing	up	their	dance.	“I	see,”	he
murmured.

      “Do	you?”

      “Oh,	indeed.”	They	arrived	at	the	lemonade	table,	and	he	reached	out	and
took	two	glasses,	handing	one	to	her.	She’d	already	had	three	glasses	of
lemonade	that	evening,	a	fact	of	which	she	was	sure	Mary	had	been	aware
before	she’d	insisted	Kate	have	some	more.	But	it	was	hot	in	the	ballroom—it
was	always	hot	in	ballrooms—and	she	was	thirsty	again.

      Colin	took	a	leisurely	sip,	watching	her	over	the	rim	of	his	glass,	then	said,
“My	brother	has	it	in	his	mind	to	settle	down	this	year.”

44
      Two	could	 play	at	this	game,	Kate	thought.	She	took	a	sip	of	her	lemonade
—slowly—before	 speaking.	“Is	that	so?”

      “I	 would	certainly	 be	in	a	position	to	know.”

      “He	 is	reputed	to	be	quite	a	rake.”

      Colin	 looked	at	her	assessingly.	“That	is	true.”

      “It	 is	difficult	  to	imagine	so	notorious	a	rogue	settling	down	with	 one
woman	and	finding	happiness	in	marriage.”

      “You	 seem	to	have	given	such	a	scenario	a	great	deal	of	thought,	Miss
Sheffield.”

      She	leveled	a	frank	stare	directly	at	his	face.	“Your	 brother	is	not	the	first
man	of	questionable	character	to	court	my	sister,	Mr.	Bridgerton.	 And	I	assure
you,	I	do	not	take	my	sister’s	happiness	lightly.”

      “Surely	 any	girl	would	 find	 happiness	in	marriage	to	a	wealthy	and	titled
gentleman.	Isn’t	that	what	a	season	in	London	is	all	about?”

      “Perhaps,”	Kate	allowed,	 “but	I’m	 afraid	 that	line	of	thinking	 does	not
address	the	true	problem	at	hand.”

      “Which	 is?”

      “Which	 is	that	a	husband	can	break	a	heart	with	far	greater	intensity	than	a
mere	suitor.”	She	smiled—a	small,	knowing	 sort	of	smile—then	 added,	“Don’t
you	think?”

      “Having	 never	been	married,	I	am	certainly	not	in	 a	position	to	speculate.”

      “Shame,	shame,	Mr.	Bridgerton.	 That	was	the	worst	sort	of	evasion.”

      “Was	it?	 I	rather	thought	it	might	 be	the	best.	I	am	clearly	losing	my	touch.”

      “That,	 I	fear,	will	 never	be	a	worry.”	 Kate	finished	the	rest	of	her	lemonade.
It	was	a	small	glass;	Lady	Hartside,	their	hostess,	was	notoriously	stingy.

      “You	 are	far	too	generous,”	he	said.

45
      She	smiled,	a	real	smile	this	time.	“I	 am	rarely	accused	of	that,	Mr.
Bridgerton.”

      He	laughed.	Right	out	loud	 in	the	middle	of	 the	ballroom.	Kate	realized	with
discomfort	that	they	were	suddenly	the	object	of	numerous	curious	stares.

      “You,”	  he	said,	still	sounding	most	heartily	amused,	“must	meet	my
brother.”

      “The	 viscount?”	she	asked	with	disbelief.

      “Well,	 you	might	 enjoy	Gregory’s	 company	as	well,”	he	allowed,	 “but	as	I
said,	he	is	only	thirteen	and	likely	 to	put	a	frog	on	your	chair.”

      “And	 the	viscount?”

      “Is	 not	likely	 to	put	a	frog	on	your	chair,”	 he	said	with	an	utterly	 straight
face.

      How	 Kate	managed	not	to	laugh	she	would	never	know.	Keeping	her	lips
completely	straight	and	serious,	she	replied,	“I	see.	He	has	a	great	deal	to
recommend	him,	then.”

      Colin	 grinned.	“He’s	 not	such	a	bad	sort.”

      “I	 am	much	relieved.	I	shall	begin	planning	 the	wedding	breakfast
immediately.”

      Colin’s	 mouth	fell	 open.	“I	didn’t	 mean—You	 shouldn’t—That	 is	to	say,
such	a	move	would	be	premature—”

      Kate	took	pity	 on	him	and	said,	“I	 was	joking.”

      His	face	flushed	slightly.	 “Of	 course.”

      “Now,	 if	 you’ll	 excuse	me,	I	must	make	my	farewell.”

      He	raised	a	brow.	“Not	 leaving	so	early,	are	you,	Miss	Sheffield?”

      “Not	 at	all.”	 But	she	wasn’t	about	to	tell	him	 she	had	to	go	relieve	herself.
Four	glasses	of	lemonade	tended	to	do	that	to	a	body.	“I	promised	a	friend	I
would	meet	her	for	a	moment.”

46
would	meet	her	for	a	moment.”

      “It	 has	been	a	pleasure.”	He	executed	a	smart	bow.	“May	I	see	you	to	your
destination?”

      “No,	 thank	you.	I	shall	be	quite	all	 right	on	my	 own.”	And	 with	 a	smile	over
her	shoulder,	she	made	her	retreat	from	the	ballroom.

      Colin	 Bridgerton	watched	her	go	with	 a	thoughtful	expression,	then	made	his
way	to	his	older	brother,	who	was	leaning	against	a	wall,	arms	crossed	in	an
almost	belligerent	manner.

      “Anthony!”	  he	called	out,	slapping	his	brother	on	the	back.	“How	 was	your
dance	with	the	lovely	Miss	 Sheffield?”

      “She’ll	 do,”	 was	Anthony’s	 terse	reply.	They	both	knew	what	that	meant.

      “Really?”	 Colin’s	 lips	 twitched	ever	so	slightly.	 “You	 should	meet	the	sister,
then.”

      “I	 beg	your	pardon?”

      “Her	 sister,”	Colin	 repeated,	starting	to	laugh.	“You	simply	 must	meet	her
sister.”
                                                                	

Twenty	minutes	later,	Anthony	was	confident	he’d	gotten	the	whole	story	on	Edwina	Sheffield	from	Colin.
And	it	seemed	that	the	road	to	Edwina’s	heart	and	hand	in	marriage	lay	squarely	through	her	sister.

      Edwina	Sheffield	 apparently	would	 not	marry	without	 the	approval	of	her
older	sister.	According	to	Colin,	 this	was	common	knowledge,	and	had	been	for
at	least	a	week,	ever	since	Edwina	had	made	an	announcement	to	this	effect	at
the	annual	Smythe-Smith	musicale.	The	Bridgerton	brothers	had	all	missed	this
momentous	statement,	as	they	avoided	Smythe-Smith	musicales	like	the	plague
(as	did	anyone	with	any	affection	for	 Bach,	Mozart,	or	music	in	 any	form.)

      Edwina’s	 older	sister,	one	Katharine	Sheffield,	more	commonly	 known	as
Kate,	was	also	making	her	debut	this	year,	even	though	she	was	reputed	to	be	at
least	one	and	twenty.	Such	timing	led	Anthony	to	 believe	that	the	Sheffields
must	be	among	the	less	wealthy	ranks	of	the	ton,	a	fact	which	suited	him	nicely.
He	had	no	need	of	a	bride	with	a	great	dowry,	and	a	bride	without	one	might

47
have	more	need	of	him.

      Anthony	 believed	in	using	all	 of	his	advantages.

      Unlike	 Edwina,	the	elder	Miss	Sheffield	 had	not	immediately	taken	the	ton
by	storm.	According	 to	Colin,	she	was	generally	well	liked,	 but	she	lacked
Edwina’s	dazzling	beauty.	She	was	tall	where	Edwina	was	tiny,	 and	dark	where
Edwina	was	fair.	She	also	lacked	Edwina’s	dazzling	grace.	Again,	 according	to
Colin	(who,	 though	recently	arrived	in	London	 for	the	season,	was	a	veritable
font	of	knowledge	 and	gossip),	more	than	one	gentleman	had	reported	sore	feet
after	a	dance	with	Katharine	Sheffield.

      The	entire	situation	seemed	a	bit	absurd	to	Anthony.	After	 all,	who	 had	ever
heard	of	a	girl	requiring	 her	sister’s	approval	for	a	husband?	A	father,	yes,	a
brother,	or	even	a	mother,	but	a	sister?	It	was	unfathomable.	And	furthermore,	it
seemed	odd	that	Edwina	would	look	to	Katharine	for	 guidance	when	Katharine
clearly	did	not	know	 what	she	was	about	in	matters	of	the	ton.

      But	Anthony	 didn’t	 particularly	 feel	like	 searching	out	another	suitable
candidate	to	court,	so	he	conveniently	decided	this	simply	meant	that	family	 was
important	to	Edwina.	And	 since	family	 was	all-important	to	 him,	this	was	one
more	indication	that	she	would	make	an	excellent	choice	as	a	wife.

      So	now	it	appeared	that	all	he	had	to	do	was	charm	the	sister.	And	how
difficult	 could	that	be?

      “You’ll	  have	no	trouble	winning	 her	over,”	 Colin	predicted,	a	confident
smile	lighting	 his	face.	“No	trouble	 at	all.	A	shy,	aging	spinster?	She’s	probably
never	received	attentions	from	such	a	man	as	you.	She’ll	never	know	what	hit
her.”

      “I	 don’t	want	 her	to	fall	in	 love	with	 me,”	Anthony	 retorted.	“I	 just	want	her
to	recommend	me	to	her	sister.”

      “You	 can’t	fail,”	  Colin	said.	“You	 simply	 can’t	fail.	 Trust	me,	I	spent	a	few
minutes	in	conversation	with	her	earlier	this	 evening,	and	she	could	not	say
enough	about	you.”

      “Good.”	 Anthony	 pushed	himself	up	off	 the	wall	and	gazed	out	with	an	air
of	determination.	“Now,	 where	is	she?	I	need	you	to	introduce	us.”

48
      Colin	 scanned	the	room	for	a	minute	or	so,	then	said,	“Ah,	there	she	is.	She’s
coming	this	way,	as	a	matter	of	fact.	What	a	marvelous	coincidence.”

      Anthony	 was	coming	to	believe	that	nothing	within	 five	 yards	of	his	younger
brother	was	ever	a	coincidence,	but	he	followed	his	gaze	nonetheless.	“Which
one	is	she?”

      “In	 the	green,”	Colin	 said,	motioning	toward	her	with	 a	barely	perceptible
nod	of	his	chin.

      She	was	not	at	all	what	he’d	expected,	Anthony	realized	as	he	watched	her
pick	her	way	through	the	crowds.	She	was	certainly	no	ape-leading	amazon;	it
was	only	when	compared	to	Edwina,	who	barely	touched	five	 feet,	that	she
would	appear	so	tall.	In	fact,	Miss	 Katharine	Sheffield	was	quite	pleasant-
looking,	with	 thick,	 medium	brown	hair	and	dark	eyes.	Her	skin	was	pale,	her
lips	pink,	and	she	held	herself	with	an	air	of	 confidence	he	could	not	help	but
find	attractive.

      She	would	certainly	 never	be	considered	a	diamond	of	the	first	water	like	her
sister,	but	Anthony	didn’t	 see	why	she	shouldn’t	be	able	to	find	a	husband	of	her
own.	Perhaps	after	he	married	Edwina	he’d	provide	a	dowry	for	 her.	It	seemed
the	very	least	a	man	could	do.

      Beside	him,	Colin	 strode	forward,	pushing	through	the	crowd.	 “Miss
Sheffield!	Miss	 Sheffield!”

      Anthony	 swept	along	in	Colin’s	 wake,	mentally	preparing	himself	 to	charm
Edwina’s	older	sister.	An	 underappreciated	spinster,	was	she?	He’d	have	her
eating	out	of	his	hand	in	no	time.

      “Miss	 Sheffield,”	 Colin	 was	saying,	“what	a	delight	to	 see	you	again.”

      She	looked	a	bit	perplexed,	and	Anthony	didn’t	 blame	her.	Colin	 was
making	it	sound	as	if	they’d	 bumped	into	each	other	accidentally,	when	they	all
knew	he’d	trampled	at	least	a	half	dozen	people	to	reach	her	side.

      “And	 it’s	 lovely	to	 see	you	again	as	well,	sir,”	she	replied	wryly.	 “And	 so
unexpectedly	soon	after	our	last	encounter.”

      Anthony	 smiled	to	himself.	 She	had	a	sharper	wit	than	he’d	been	led	to
believe.

49
believe.

      Colin	 grinned	winningly,	 and	Anthony	 had	the	distinct	and	unsettling
impression	that	his	brother	was	up	to	something.	“I	can’t	 explain	why,”	 Colin
said	to	Miss	Sheffield,	“but	 it	suddenly	seemed	imperative	that	I	introduce	 you
to	my	brother.”

      She	looked	abruptly	to	Colin’s	 right	 and	stiffened	as	her	gaze	settled	on
Anthony.	In	 fact,	she	rather	looked	as	if	she’d	just	swallowed	an	antidote.

      This,	Anthony	 thought,	was	odd.

      “How	 kind	 of	you,”	 Miss	Sheffield	 murmured—between	her	teeth.

      “Miss	 Sheffield,”	 Colin	 continued	brightly,	 motioning	 to	Anthony,	“my
brother	Anthony,	Viscount	 Bridgerton.	 Anthony,	Miss	 Katharine	Sheffield.	 I
believe	you	made	the	acquaintance	of	her	sister	earlier	this	evening.”

      “Indeed,”	 Anthony	 said,	becoming	aware	of	an	overwhelming	desire—no,
need—to	strangle	his	brother.

      Miss	Sheffield	 bobbed	a	quick,	awkward	curtsy.	“Lord	  Bridgerton,”	 she
said,	“it	is	an	honor	to	make	your	acquaintance.”

      Colin	 made	a	noise	that	sounded	suspiciously	like	a	snort.	Or	maybe	a	laugh.
Or	maybe	both.

      And	Anthony	 suddenly	knew.	One	look	at	his	brother’s	 face	should	have
given	it	all	 away.	This	was	no	shy,	retiring,	underappreciated	spinster.	And
whatever	she	had	said	to	Colin	earlier	that	evening,	it	had	contained	no
compliments	about	Anthony.

      Fratricide	was	legal	in	 England,	wasn’t	it?	If	 not,	it	damn	well	 should	have
been.

      Anthony	 belatedly	realized	that	Miss	Sheffield	 had	held	out	her	hand	to	him,
as	was	only	polite.	He	took	it	and	brushed	a	light	kiss	across	her	gloved
knuckles.	“Miss	 Sheffield,”	 he	murmured	unthinkingly,	 “you	 are	as	lovely	as
your	sister.”

      If	 she	had	seemed	uncomfortable	before,	her	bearing	now	turned	downright

50
hostile.	And	Anthony	 realized	with	 a	mental	slap	that	he’d	said	exactly	the
wrong	thing.	Of	 course	he	should	not	have	compared	her	to	her	sister.	It	was	the
one	compliment	she	could	never	have	believed.

      “And	 you,	Lord	 Bridgerton,”	 she	replied	in	a	tone	that	could	have	frozen
champagne,	“are	almost	as	handsome	as	your	brother.”

      Colin	 snorted	again,	only	this	time	it	sounded	as	if	he	were	being	strangled.

      “Are	 you	all	right?”	 Miss	 Sheffield	asked.

      “He’s	 fine,”	 Anthony	 barked.

      She	ignored	him,	keeping	her	attention	on	Colin.	 “Are	 you	certain?”

      Colin	 nodded	furiously.	“Tickle	  in	my	throat.”

      “Or	 perhaps	a	guilty	conscience?”	Anthony	suggested.

      Colin	 turned	deliberately	from	 his	brother	to	Kate.	“I	 think	I	 might	need
another	glass	of	lemonade,”	he	gasped.

      “Or	 maybe,”	said	Anthony,	 “something	stronger.	Hemlock,	 perhaps?”

      Miss	Sheffield	 clapped	a	hand	over	her	mouth,	presumably	to	stifle	a	burst
of	horrified	 laughter.

      “Lemonade	will	  do	just	fine,”	 Colin	returned	smoothly.

      “Would	 you	like	 me	to	fetch	you	a	glass?”	she	asked.	Anthony	noticed	that
she’d	already	stepped	out	with	one	foot,	looking	 for	any	excuse	to	flee.

      Colin	 shook	his	head.	“No,	no,	I’m	 quite	capable.	But	I	do	believe	I	 had
reserved	this	next	dance	with	you,	Miss	Sheffield.”

      “I	 shall	not	hold	you	 to	it,”	 she	said	with	a	wave	of	her	hand.

      “Oh,	 but	I	could	not	live	 with	 myself	were	I	to	leave	you	unattended,”	he
replied.

      Anthony	 could	see	Miss	Sheffield	growing	 worried	at	the	devilish	 gleam	in

51
Colin’s	eye.	He	took	a	rather	uncharitable	pleasure	in	this.	His	reaction	was,	he
knew,	a	touch	out	of	proportion.	 But	something	about	this	Miss	Katharine
Sheffield	sparked	his	temper	and	made	him	positively	itch	 to	do	battle	with	her.

      And	win.	 That	much	went	without	 saying.

      “Anthony,”	  Colin	 said,	sounding	so	deucedly	innocent	and	earnest	that	it
was	all	Anthony	could	 do	not	to	kill	 him	on	the	spot,	“you’re	 not	engaged	for
this	dance,	are	you?”

      Anthony	 said	nothing,	just	glared	at	him.

      “Good.	 Then	you	will	 dance	with	Miss	Sheffield.”

      “I’m	  sure	that’s	not	necessary,”	the	woman	in	question	blurted	out.

      Anthony	 glared	at	his	brother,	then	for	good	measure	at	Miss	Sheffield,	who
was	looking	at	him	as	if	he’d	 just	despoiled	ten	virgins	in	 her	presence.

      “Oh,	 but	it	is,”	 Colin	said	with	 great	drama,	ignoring	the	optical	daggers
being	hurled	across	their	little	threesome.	“I	 could	never	dream	of	abandoning	a
young	lady	in	her	hour	of	 need.	How”—he	shuddered—“ungentlemanly.”

      Anthony	 thought	seriously	about	pursuing	some	ungentlemanly	behavior
himself.	Perhaps	planting	his	fist	in	 Colin’s	face.

      “I	 assure	you,”	Miss	Sheffield	 said	quickly,	“that	 being	left	 to	my	own
devices	would	be	far	preferable	to	dan—”

      Enough,	Anthony	 thought	savagely,	was	really	enough.	His	own	brother	had
already	played	him	for	a	fool;	 he	was	not	going	to	stand	idly	by	while	 he	was
insulted	by	Edwina’s	 sharp-tongued	spinster	sister.	He	laid	a	heavy	hand	on
Miss	Sheffield’s	 arm	and	said,	“Allow	 me	to	prevent	you	from	 making	a
grievous	mistake,	Miss	Sheffield.”

      She	stiffened.	How,	he	did	not	 know;	her	back	was	already	ramrod	straight.
“I	beg	your	pardon,”	 she	said.

      “I	 believe,”	 he	said	smoothly,	“that	you	were	about	to	say	something	you
would	soon	regret.”

52
      “No,”	she	said,	sounding	deliberately	thoughtful,	“I	don’t	think	regrets	were
in	my	future.”

      “They	will	be,”	he	said	ominously.	And	then	he	grabbed	her	arm	and
practically	dragged	her	onto	the	ballroom	floor.

53
Chapter	     3


Viscount	Bridgerton	 was	also	seen	dancing	with	Miss	Katharine	Sheffield,	elder
sister	to	the	fair	Edwina.	 This	can	only	mean	one	thing,	as	it	has	not	escaped	the
notice	of	This	Author	that	the	elder	Miss	 Sheffield	has	been	in	much	demand	on
the	dance	floor	ever	since	the	younger	Miss	Sheffield	made	her	bizarre	and
unprecedented	announcement	at	the	Smythe-Smith	musicale	last	week.

      Whoever	heard	of	a	girl	 needing	her	sister’s	permission	to	choose	a
husband?

      And	perhaps	more	importantly,	 whoever	decided	that	the	words	“Smythe-
Smith”	and	“musicale”	  might	 be	used	in	the	same	sentence?	This	Author	has
attended	one	of	these	gatherings	in	the	past,	and	heard	nothing	that	might
ethically	be	termed	“music.”

                                                     LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	22	APRIL	1814



There	 was	really	nothing	 she	could	do,	Kate	realized	with	dismay.	He	was	a
viscount,	and	she	was	a	mere	nobody	from	Somerset,	and	they	were	both	in	the
middle	of	a	crowded	ballroom.	 It	didn’t	 matter	if	 she’d	disliked	him	 on	sight.
She	had	to	dance	with	him.

      “There	is	no	need	to	drag	me,”	she	hissed.

      He	made	a	great	show	of	loosening	his	grip.

      Kate	ground	her	teeth	together	and	swore	to	herself	that	this	man	would
never	take	her	sister	as	his	bride.	His	manner	was	too	cold,	too	superior.	He	was,
she	thought	a	touch	unfairly,	too	handsome	as	well,	with	velvety	 brown	eyes	that
matched	his	hair	to	perfection.	He	was	tall,	certainly	 over	six	feet,	although
probably	not	by	more	than	an	inch,	and	his	lips,	while	 classically	beautiful	 (Kate
had	studied	enough	art	to	regard	herself	qualified	to	make	such	a	judgment)	were
tight	at	the	corners,	as	if	he	did	not	know	how	to	 smile.

      “Now	 then,”	 he	said,	once	their	feet	began	to	move	in	the	familiar	steps,
“suppose	you	tell	me	why	you	hate	me.”

54
“suppose	you	tell	me	why	you	hate	me.”

      Kate	trod	on	his	foot.	 Lord,	he	was	direct.	“I	 beg	your	pardon?”

      “There	is	no	need	to	maim	me,	Miss	 Sheffield.”

      “It	 was	an	accident,	I	assure	you.”	And	it	was,	even	if	 she	didn’t	really	 mind
this	particular	example	of	her	lack	of	 grace.

      “Why,”	  he	mused,	“do	I	find	 I	have	difficulty	 believing	 you?”

      Honesty,	Kate	quickly	 decided,	would	be	her	best	strategy.	If	he	could	be
direct,	well	then,	so	could	she.	“Probably,”	 she	answered	with	a	wicked	smile,
“because	you	know	that	had	it	occurred	to	me	to	step	on	your	foot	on	purpose,	I
would	have	done	so.”

      He	threw	back	his	head	and	laughed.	It	was	not	the	reaction	she’d	been
either	expecting	or	hoping	for.	Come	to	think	 of	it,	 she	had	no	idea	what	sort	of
reaction	she’d	been	hoping	for,	but	this	certainly	 wasn’t	what	she’d	been
expecting.

      “Will	  you	stop,	my	lord?”	 she	whispered	urgently.	“People	are	starting	to
stare.”

      “People	started	to	stare	two	minutes	ago,”	he	returned.	“It’s	 not	often	a	man
such	as	I	dances	with	a	woman	such	as	you.”

      As	barbs	went,	this	one	was	well	aimed,	but	sadly	for	 him,	also	incorrect.
“Not	true,”	 she	replied	jauntily.	 “You	 are	certainly	not	the	first	 of	Edwina’s
besotted	idiots	to	attempt	to	gain	her	favor	through	me.”

      He	grinned.	“Not	 suitors,	but	idiots?”

      She	caught	his	gaze	with	hers	and	was	surprised	to	find	true	mirth	in	his
eyes.	“Surely	you’re	not	going	 to	hand	me	such	a	delicious	piece	of	bait	as	that,
my	lord?”

      “And	 yet	you	did	 not	take	it,”	he	mused.

      Kate	looked	down	 to	see	if	there	was	some	way	she	might	discreetly	step	on
his	foot	again.

55
      “I	have	very	thick	boots,	Miss	Sheffield,”	he	said.

      Her	head	snapped	back	up	in	surprise.

      One	corner	of	his	mouth	curved	up	in	a	mockery	of	a	smile.	“And	quick	eyes
as	well.”

      “Apparently	so.	I	shall	have	to	watch	my	step	around	you,	to	be	sure.”

      “My	goodness,”	he	drawled,	“was	that	a	compliment?	I	might	expire	from
the	shock	of	it.”

      “If	you’d	like	to	consider	that	a	compliment,	I	give	you	leave	to	do	so,”	she
said	airily.	“You’re	not	likely	to	receive	many	more.”

      “You	wound	me,	Miss	Sheffield.”

      “Does	that	mean	that	your	skin	is	not	as	thick	as	your	boots?”

      “Oh,	not	nearly.”

      She	felt	herself	laugh	before	she	realized	she	was	amused.	“That	I	find
difficult	to	believe.”

      He	waited	for	her	smile	to	melt	away,	then	said,	“You	did	not	answer	my
question.	Why	do	you	hate	me?”

      A	rush	of	air	slipped	through	Kate’s	lips.	She	hadn’t	expected	him	to	repeat
the	question.	Or	at	least	she’d	hoped	that	he	would	not.	“I	do	not	hate	you,	my
lord,”	she	replied,	choosing	her	words	with	great	care.	“I	do	not	even	know
you.”

      “Knowing	is	rarely	a	prerequisite	for	hating,”	he	said	softly,	his	eyes	settling
on	hers	with	lethal	steadiness.	“Come	now,	Miss	Sheffield,	you	don’t	seem	a
coward	to	me.	Answer	the	question.”

      Kate	held	silent	for	a	full	minute.	It	was	true,	she	had	not	been	predisposed
to	like	the	man.	She	certainly	wasn’t	about	to	give	her	blessing	to	his	courtship
of	Edwina.	She	didn’t	believe	for	one	second	that	reformed	rakes	made	the	best
husbands.	She	wasn’t	even	sure	that	a	rake	could	be	properly	reformed	in	the

56
first	place.

      But	he	might	 have	been	able	to	overcome	her	preconceptions.	He	could	have
been	charming	and	sincere	and	straightforward,	and	been	able	to	convince	her
that	the	stories	about	him	in	Whistledown	were	an	exaggeration,	that	he	was	not
the	worst	rogue	London	had	seen	since	the	turn	of	the	century.	He	might	have
convinced	her	that	he	held	to	a	code	of	honor,	that	he	was	a	man	of	principles
and	honesty…

      If	 he	hadn’t	gone	and	compared	her	to	Edwina.

      For	nothing	could	 have	been	more	obvious	a	lie.	She	knew	she	wasn’t	an
antidote;	her	face	and	form	were	pleasing	enough.	But	there	was	simply	no	way
she	could	be	compared	to	Edwina	in	this	measure	and	emerge	as	her	equal.
Edwina	was	truly	a	diamond	of	 the	first	water,	and	Kate	could	never	be	more
than	average	and	unremarkable.

      And	if	 this	man	was	saying	otherwise,	then	he	had	some	ulterior	motive,
because	it	was	obvious	he	wasn’t	blind.

      He	could	have	offered	her	any	other	empty	compliment	 and	she	would	have
accepted	it	as	a	gentleman’s	polite	conversation.	She	might	have	even	been
flattered	if	his	words	 had	struck	anywhere	close	to	the	truth.	But	to	compare	her
to	Edwina…

      Kate	adored	her	sister.	She	truly	did.	And	she	knew	better	than	anyone	that
Edwina’s	heart	was	as	beautiful	and	radiant	as	her	face.	She	didn’t	like	to	think
herself	jealous,	but	still…somehow	 the	comparison	stung	right	to	the	core.

      “I	 do	not	hate	you,”	she	finally	 replied.	Her	eyes	were	trained	on	his	chin,
but	she	had	no	patience	for	cowardice,	especially	within	herself,	so	she	forced
herself	to	meet	his	gaze	when	she	added,	“But	I	find	I	cannot	like	 you.”

      Something	in	his	eyes	told	her	that	he	appreciated	her	stark	honesty.	“And
why	is	that?”	he	asked	softly.

      “May	 I	be	frank?”

      His	lips	 twitched.	“Please	do.”

      “You	 are	dancing	with	me	right	 now	because	you	wish	to	court	my	sister.

57
      “You	 are	dancing	with	me	right	 now	because	you	wish	to	court	my	sister.
This	does	not	bother	me,”	she	hastened	to	assure	him.	“I	am	well	used	to
receiving	attentions	from	Edwina’s	 suitors.”

      Her	mind	 was	clearly	not	on	her	feet.	Anthony	pulled	 his	foot	out	of	 the	way
of	hers	before	she	could	injure	him	again.	He	noticed	with	 interest	that	she	was
back	to	referring	to	them	as	suitors	rather	than	idiots.	“Please	continue,”	he
murmured.

      “You	 are	not	the	sort	of	man	I	would	 wish	my	sister	to	marry,”	 she	said
simply.	Her	manner	was	direct,	and	her	intelligent	 brown	eyes	never	left	his.
“You	 are	a	rake.	You	are	a	rogue.	You	are,	in	fact,	notorious	for	being	both.	I
would	not	allow	 my	sister	within	 ten	feet	of	you.”

      “And	 yet,”	 he	said	with	a	wicked	little	 smile,	“I	 waltzed	with	 her	earlier	this
evening.”

      “An	 act	which	shall	 not	be	repeated,	I	can	assure	you.”

      “And	 is	it	your	 place	to	decide	Edwina’s	fate?”

      “Edwina	 trusts	my	judgment,”	 she	said	primly.

      “I	 see,”	he	said	in	what	he	hoped	was	his	most	mysterious	manner.	“That	is
very	interesting.	I	thought	Edwina	 was	an	adult.”

      “Edwina	 is	but	seventeen	years	old!”

      “And	 you	are	so	ancient	at,	what,	twenty	years	of	age?”

      “Twenty-one,”	  she	bit	off.

      “Ah,	 that	makes	you	a	veritable	expert	on	men,	and	husbands	in	particular.
Especially	since	you	have	been	married	yourself,	yes?”

      “You	 know	I	 am	unwed,”	she	ground	out.

      Anthony	 stifled	the	urge	to	smile.	Good	Lord,	 but	it	was	fun	baiting	 the	elder
Miss	Sheffield.	“I	 think,”	 he	said,	keeping	his	words	slow	 and	deliberate,	“that
you	have	found	it	relatively	 easy	to	manage	most	of	the	men	who	have	come
knocking	on	your	sister’s	door.	 Is	that	true?”

58
      She	kept	her	stony	silence.

      “Is	 it?”

      Finally	 she	gave	him	one	curt	nod.

      “I	 thought	so,”	he	murmured.	“You	 seem	the	sort	who	would.”

      She	glared	at	him	with	such	intensity	 that	it	was	all	he	could	do	to	keep	from
laughing.	If	he	weren’t	 dancing,	he	probably	would	have	stroked	his	chin	in	 an
affectation	of	deep	thought.	But	since	his	hands	were	otherwise	engaged,	he	had
to	settle	for	a	ponderous	tilt	of	his	head,	combined	with	 an	arch	raise	of	his
eyebrows.	“But	I	 also	think,”	 he	added,	“that	you	made	a	grave	mistake	when
you	thought	to	manage	me.”

      Kate’s	lips	 were	set	in	a	grim,	straight	line,	but	she	managed	to	say,	“I	do	not
seek	to	manage	you,	Lord	Bridgerton.	I	only	 seek	to	keep	you	away	from	my
sister.”

      “Which	 just	goes	to	show,	Miss	Sheffield,	 how	very	little	 you	know	 of	men.
At	least	of	the	rakish,	roguish	variety.”	 He	leaned	in	closer,	letting	 his	hot	breath
brush	against	her	cheek.

      She	shivered.	He’d	known	she’d	shiver.

      He	smiled	wickedly.	 “There	 is	very	little	 we	relish	more	than	a	challenge.”

      The	music	drew	to	a	close,	leaving	them	standing	in	the	middle	 of	the
ballroom	floor,	 facing	one	another.	Anthony	took	 her	arm,	but	before	he	led	her
back	to	the	perimeter	of	the	room,	he	put	his	lips	very	close	to	her	ear	and
whispered,	“And	you,	 Miss	Sheffield,	 have	issued	to	me	a	most	delicious
challenge.”

      Kate	stepped	on	his	foot.	Hard.	Enough	to	make	him	let	 out	a	small,
decidedly	unrakish,	unroguish	squeak.

      When	he	glared	at	her,	though,	she	just	shrugged	and	said,	“It	was	my	only
defense.”

      His	eyes	darkened.	“You,	Miss	 Sheffield,	are	a	menace.”

59
      “And	 you,	Lord	 Bridgerton,	need	thicker	boots.”

      His	grasp	tightened	on	her	arm.	“Before	 I	return	you	to	the	sanctuary	of	the
chaperones	and	spinsters,	there	is	one	thing	we	need	to	make	clear.”

      Kate	held	her	breath.	She	did	not	like	the	hard	tone	of	his	voice.

      “I	 am	going	to	court	your	 sister.	And	should	I	decide	that	she	will	 make	a
suitable	Lady	Bridgerton,	 I	will	 make	her	my	wife.”

      Kate	whipped	her	head	up	to	face	him,	fire	 flashing	in	her	eyes.	“And	 I
suppose,	then,	that	you	think	it	is	your	place	to	decide	Edwina’s	fate.	Do	 not
forget,	my	lord,	 that	even	if	you	decide	she	will	make	a	suitable”—she	 sneered
the	word—“Lady	 Bridgerton,	 she	might	choose	otherwise.”

      He	looked	down	 at	her	with	the	confidence	of	a	male	who	is	never	crossed.
“Should	I	decide	to	ask	Edwina,	she	will	 not	say	no.”

      “Are	 you	trying	 to	tell	me	that	no	woman	has	ever	been	able	to	resist	you?”

      He	did	not	answer,	just	raised	one	supercilious	brow	and	let	her	draw	her
own	conclusions.

      Kate	wrenched	her	arm	free	and	strode	back	to	her	stepmother,	shaking	with
fury,	resentment,	and	not	a	little	bit	of	 fear.

      Because	she	had	an	awful	feeling	that	he	did	not	lie.	And	if	 he	really	did	turn
out	to	be	irresistible…

      Kate	shuddered.	She	and	Edwina	were	going	to	be	in	big,	big	trouble.
                                                                	

The	next	afternoon	was	like	any	following	a	major	ball.	The	Sheffields’	drawing	room	was	filled	to	bursting
with	flower	bouquets,	each	one	accompanied	by	a	crisp	white	card	bearing	the	name,	“Edwina	Sheffield.”

      A	simple	 “Miss	 Sheffield”	 would	have	sufficed,	Kate	 thought	with	a
grimace,	but	she	supposed	one	couldn’t	really	fault	Edwina’s	 suitors	for	wanting
to	make	certain	the	flowers	went	to	the	correct	Miss	Sheffield.

      Not	that	anyone	was	likely	 to	make	a	mistake	on	that	measure.	Floral
arrangements	generally	went	to	Edwina.	In	fact,	there	was	nothing	general	about

60
it;	every	bouquet	that	had	arrived	at	the	Sheffield	residence	in	the	last	month	had
gone	to	Edwina.

      Kate	liked	 to	think	she	had	the	last	laugh,	however.	Most	of	the	flowers
made	Edwina	sneeze,	so	they	tended	to	end	up	in	Kate’s	chamber,	anyway.

      “You	 beautiful	 thing,”	 she	said,	lovingly	fingering	 a	fine	orchid.	“I	 think	 you
belong	right	on	my	bedstand.	And	you”—she	 leaned	forward	and	sniffed	at	a
bouquet	of	perfect	white	roses—“you	 will	 look	smashing	on	my	dressing	table.”

      “Do	 you	always	talk	to	 flowers?”

      Kate	whirled	 around	at	the	sound	of	a	deep	male	voice.	Good	heavens,	it	was
Lord	Bridgerton,	 looking	sinfully	  handsome	in	a	blue	morning	coat.	What	the
devil	was	he	doing	here?

      No	sense	in	not	asking.

      “What	 the	dev—”	 She	caught	herself	just	in	time.	She	would	not	let	this	man
reduce	her	to	cursing	aloud,	no	matter	how	often	she	did	it	in	her	head.	“What
are	you	doing	here?”

      He	raised	a	brow	as	he	adjusted	the	huge	bouquet	of	flowers	he	had	tucked
under	his	arm.	Pink	roses,	she	noted.	Perfect	buds.	They	were	lovely.	Simple	and
elegant.	Exactly	the	sort	of	thing	she’d	choose	for	herself.

      “I	 believe	it’s	 customary	for	suitors	to	call	 upon	young	women,	yes?”	he
murmured.	“Or	did	 I	misplace	my	etiquette	book?”

      “I	 meant,”	Kate	growled,	 “how	 did	you	get	in?	No	one	alerted	me	to	your
arrival.”

      He	cocked	his	head	toward	the	hall.	“The	 usual	manner.	I	knocked	on	your
front	door.”

      Kate’s	look	 of	irritation	 at	his	sarcasm	did	not	prevent	him	from	 continuing
with,	“Amazingly	  enough,	your	butler	answered.	Then	I	gave	him	my	card,	he
took	a	look	at	it,	and	showed	me	to	the	drawing	room.	Much	 as	I’d	like	 to	claim
some	sort	of	devious,	underhanded	subterfuge,”	he	continued,	maintaining	a
rather	impressively	supercilious	tone,	“it	 was	actually	quite	aboveboard	and
straightforward.”

61
straightforward.”

      “Infernal	 butler,”	 Kate	muttered.	“He’s	 supposed	to	see	if	we’re	‘at	home’
before	showing	you	in.”

      “Maybe	 he	had	previous	instructions	that	you	would	 be	‘at	home’	for	me
under	any	circumstances.”

      She	bristled.	“I	 gave	him	no	such	instructions.”

      “No,”	 Lord	 Bridgerton	 said	with	a	chuckle,	“I	 wouldn’t	 have	thought	so.”

      “And	 I	know	 Edwina	didn’t.”

      He	smiled.	“Perhaps	your	mother?”

      Of	course.	“Mary,”	  she	groaned,	a	world	of	accusation	in	the	single	word.

      “You	 call	her	by	her	given	 name?”	he	asked	politely.

      She	nodded.	“She’s	actually	my	stepmother.	Although	 she’s	really	all	 I
know.	She	married	my	father	when	I	was	but	three.	I	don’t	 know	why	 I	still	 call
her	Mary.”	 She	gave	her	head	a	little	shake	as	her	shoulders	lifted	into	a
perplexed	shrug.	“I	just	do.”

      His	brown	 eyes	remained	fixed	on	her	face,	and	she	realized	she’d	just	let
this	man—her	nemesis,	really—into	a	small	corner	of	 her	life.	She	felt	the	words
“I’m	 sorry”	 bubbling	on	her	tongue—a	reflexive	 reaction,	she	supposed,	for
having	spoken	too	freely.	But	she	didn’t	 want	to	apologize	to	this	man	for
anything,	so	instead	she	just	said,	“Edwina	is	out,	I’m	 afraid,	so	your	visit	 was
for	nothing.”

      “Oh,	 I	don’t	 know	about	that,”	he	replied.	He	grasped	the	bouquet	of	flowers
—which	had	been	tucked	under	his	right	arm—with	 his	other	hand,	and	as	he
brought	it	forward	 Kate	saw	that	it	was	not	one	massive	bouquet,	but	three
smaller	ones.

      “This,”	 he	said,	putting	one	of	 the	bouquets	down	on	a	side	table,	“is	for
Edwina.	And	this”—he	 did	the	same	with	the	second—“is	 for	your	mother.”

      He	was	left	with	 a	single	bouquet.	Kate	stood	frozen	with	shock,	unable	to
take	her	eyes	off	the	perfect	pink	blooms.	She	knew	what	he	had	to	be	about,

62
take	her	eyes	off	the	perfect	pink	blooms.	She	knew	what	he	had	to	be	about,
that	the	only	reason	he’d	included	her	in	the	gesture	was	to	impress	Edwina,	but
blast	it,	no	one	had	ever	brought	her	flowers	before,	and	she	hadn’t	known	until
that	very	moment	how	badly	she’d	wanted	someone	to	do	so.

      “These,”	 he	said	finally,	holding	 out	the	final	 arrangement	of	pink	roses,
“are	for	you.”

      “Thank	 you,”	she	said	hesitantly,	taking	them	into	 her	arms.	“They’re
lovely.”	 She	leaned	down	to	sniff	them,	sighing	with	 pleasure	at	the	thick	scent.
Glancing	back	up,	she	added,	“It	was	very	thoughtful	 of	you	to	think	 of	Mary
and	me.”

      He	nodded	graciously.	“It	 was	my	pleasure.	I	must	confess,	a	suitor	for	my
sister’s	hand	once	did	the	same	for	my	mother,	and	I	don’t	believe	I’ve	 ever	seen
her	more	delighted.”

      “Your	 mother	or	your	 sister?”

      He	smiled	at	her	pert	question.	“Both.”

      “And	 what	happened	to	this	suitor?”	Kate	asked.

      Anthony’s	 grin	turned	devilish	 in	the	extreme.	“He	 married	my	sister.”

      “HmmPh.	 Don’t	 think	history	 is	likely	 to	repeat	itself.	But—”	 Kate	coughed,
not	particularly	 wanting	to	be	honest	with	him	but	 quite	incapable	of	doing
anything	otherwise.	“But	 the	flowers	are	truly	 lovely,	and—and	it	 was	a	lovely
gesture	on	your	part.”	She	swallowed.	This	wasn’t	 easy	for	her.	“And	I	 do
appreciate	them.”

      He	leaned	forward	slightly,	 his	dark	eyes	positively	 melting.	“A	 kind
sentence,”	he	mused.	“And	directed	at	me,	no	less.	There	now,	that	wasn’t	so
difficult,	 was	it?”

      Kate	went	from	 bending	lovingly	 over	the	flowers	 to	standing	uncomfortably
straight	in	an	instant.	“You	 do	seem	to	have	a	knack	for	saying	the	exact	wrong
thing.”

      “Only	 where	you’re	 concerned,	my	dear	Miss	Sheffield.	Other	women,	I
assure	you,	hang	on	my	every	word.”

63
assure	you,	hang	on	my	every	word.”

      “So	I’ve	 read,”	she	muttered.

      His	eyes	lit	 up.	“Is	that	where	you’ve	 developed	your	opinions	of	me?	Of
course!	The	estimable	Lady	Whistledown.	I	 should	have	known.	Lud,	I’d	 like	 to
strangle	the	woman.”

      “I	 find	her	rather	intelligent	 and	quite	on	the	mark,”	 Kate	said	primly.

      “You	 would,”	 he	returned.

      “Lord	 Bridgerton,”	 Kate	ground	 out,	“I’m	 sure	you	did	not	come	calling	 to
insult	me.	May	I	 leave	a	message	for	Edwina	for	you?”

      “I	 think	not.	 I	don’t	particularly	 trust	 that	it	would	reach	her	unadulterated.”

      That	was	really	too	much.	“I	 would	 never	stoop	to	interfering	with	 another
person’s	correspondence,”	Kate	somehow	managed	to	say.	Her	entire	body	was
shaking	with	rage,	and	if	she’d	been	a	less	controlled	sort	of	woman,	her	hands
would	surely	have	been	wrapped	around	his	throat.	“How	dare	you	imply
otherwise.”

      “When	 all	is	said	and	done,	Miss	Sheffield,”	 he	said	with	annoying
calmness,	“I	really	don’t	 know	you	very	 well.	What	 I	do	know	consists	of	your
fervent	avowals	that	I	will	 never	find	 myself	within	 ten	feet	of	your	 sister’s
saintly	presence.	You	tell	me,	would	you	feel	 confident	to	leave	a	note	if	you
were	me?”

      “If	 you	are	attempting	to	gain	my	 sister’s	favor	through	me,”	 Kate	replied
icily,	 “you	are	not	doing	a	very	good	job	 of	it.”

      “I’m	  aware	of	that,”	he	said.	“I	 really	shouldn’t	 provoke	you.	It’s	 not	very
well	done	of	me,	is	it?	But	 I’m	 afraid	I	just	can’t	 help	myself.”	 He	grinned
roguishly	and	held	up	his	hands	in	a	helpless	manner.	“What	can	I	say?	You	do
something	to	me,	Miss	Sheffield.”

      His	smile,	 Kate	realized	with	dismay,	was	truly	 a	force	to	be	reckoned	with.
She	suddenly	felt	faint.	A	 seat…yes,	what	she	needed	to	do	was	sit	down.
“Please,	have	a	seat,”	she	said,	waving	at	the	blue	damask	sofa	as	she	scrambled
across	the	room	to	a	chair.	She	didn’t	particularly	want	 him	to	linger,	but	 she

64
couldn’t	very	 well	sit	without	 offering	 him	a	seat	as	well,	and	her	legs	were
starting	to	feel	awfully	 wobbly.

      If	 the	viscount	thought	oddly	of	 her	sudden	burst	of	politeness,	he	did	not
say	anything.	Instead	he	removed	a	long	black	case	off	the	sofa	and	placed	it	on
a	table,	then	sat	down	in	its	place.	“Is	that	a	musical	instrument?”	he	queried,
motioning	to	the	case.

      Kate	nodded.	“A	 flute.”

      “Do	 you	play?”

      She	shook	her	head,	then	cocked	her	head	slightly	and	nodded.	“I’m	trying
to	learn.	I	took	it	 up	just	this	year.”

      He	nodded	in	reply,	and	that,	apparently,	was	to	be	the	end	of	the	subject,
because	he	then	politely	asked,	“When	do	you	expect	Edwina	to	return?”

      “Not	 for	at	least	an	hour,	I	should	think.	 Mr.	Berbrooke	 took	her	out	for	a
ride	in	his	curricle.”

      “Nigel	 Berbrooke?”	 He	practically	 choked	on	the	name.

      “Yes,	 why?”

      “The	 man	has	more	hair	than	wit.	A	great	deal	more.”

      “But	 he’s	going	bald,”	 she	couldn’t	resist	pointing	 out.

      He	grimaced.	“And	 if	 that	doesn’t	prove	my	point,	 I	don’t	know	 what	will.”

      Kate	had	reached	much	the	same	conclusion	about	Mr.	Berbrooke’s
intelligence	(or	lack	 thereof),	but	she	said,	“Isn’t	it	 considered	bad	form	to	insult
one’s	fellow	 suitors?”

      Anthony	 let	out	a	little	 snort.	“It	 wasn’t	an	insult.	It	 was	the	truth.	He	courted
my	sister	last	year.	Or	tried	to.	Daphne	did	her	best	to	discourage	him.	He’s	a
nice	enough	fellow,	I’ll	  grant	you	that,	but	not	someone	you’d	want	building	 you
a	boat	were	you	stranded	on	a	desert	island.”

      Kate	had	a	strange	and	unwelcome	image	of	the	viscount	stranded	on	a

65
      Kate	had	a	strange	and	unwelcome	image	of	the	viscount	stranded	on	a
desert	island,	clothes	in	tatters,	skin	kissed	by	the	sun.	It	left	her	feeling
uncomfortably	warm.

      Anthony	 cocked	his	head,	regarding	her	with	a	quizzical	gaze.	“I	 say,	Miss
Sheffield,	are	you	feeling	all	 right?”

      “Fine!”	  she	practically	barked.	“Never	better.	You	 were	saying?”

      “You	 look	a	bit	 flushed.”	He	leaned	in,	watching	 her	closely.	She	really
didn’t	look	 well.

      Kate	fanned	herself.	“It’s	 a	bit	hot	in	 here,	don’t	you	think?”

      Anthony	 shook	his	head	slowly.	“Not	 at	all.”

      She	gazed	longingly	out	the	door.	“I	 wonder	where	Mary	 is.”

      “Are	 you	expecting	her?”

      “It’s	 unlike	 her	to	leave	me	unchaperoned	for	so	long,”	she	explained.

      Unchaperoned?	The	ramifications	were	frightening.	 Anthony	 had	a	sudden
vision	of	being	trapped	into	 marriage	with	Miss	 Sheffield	the	elder,	and	it	made
him	break	out	in	a	cold	sweat.	Kate	was	so	unlike	any	debutante	he’d	ever	met
that	he’d	quite	forgotten	that	they	even	needed	a	chaperone.	“Perhaps	she’s	not
aware	I’m	here,”	he	said	quickly.

      “Yes,	 that	must	be	it.”	She	sprang	to	her	feet	and	crossed	the	room	to	the
bellpull.	Giving	 it	 a	firm	yank,	she	said,	“I’ll	  just	ring	for	 someone	to	alert	her.
I’m	sure	she	won’t	want	 to	miss	you.”

      “Good.	 Perhaps	she	can	keep	us	company	while	we	wait	for	your	sister	to
return.”

      Kate	froze	halfway	 back	to	her	chair.	“You’re	 planning	 to	wait	for	 Edwina?”

      He	shrugged,	enjoying	her	discomfort.	 “I	 have	no	other	plans	for	the
afternoon.”

      “But	 she	might	be	hours!”

      “An	 hour	at	most,	I’m	 sure,	and	besides—”	He	cut	himself	off,	 noting	the

66
      “An	 hour	at	most,	I’m	 sure,	and	besides—”	He	cut	himself	off,	 noting	the
arrival	of	a	maid	in	 the	doorway.

      “You	 rang,	miss?”	the	maid	queried.

      “Yes,	 thank	you,	Annie,”	 Kate	replied.	“Would	 you	 please	inform	Mrs.
Sheffield	that	we	have	a	guest?”

      The	maid	bobbed	a	curtsy	and	departed.

      “I’m	  sure	Mary	will	 be	down	at	any	moment,”	Kate	 said,	quite	unable	to
stop	tapping	her	foot.	“Any	 minute	now.	 I’m	sure	of	it.”

      He	just	smiled	in	 that	annoying	manner,	looking	terribly	 relaxed	and
comfortable	on	the	sofa.

      An	awkward	 silence	fell	across	the	room.	Kate	offered	him	 a	tight	smile.	He
just	raised	a	brow	in	return.

      “I’m	  sure	she’ll	be	here—”

      “Any	 minute	now,”	 he	finished	for	 her,	sounding	heartily	amused.

      She	sank	back	into	her	chair,	trying	not	to	grimace.	 She	probably	didn’t
succeed.

      Just	then	a	small	commotion	broke	out	in	the	hall—a	 few	decidedly	canine
barks,	followed	by	a	high-pitched	 shriek	of,	“Newton!	  Newton!	Stop	that	at
once!”

      “Newton?”	 the	viscount	queried.

      “My	 dog,”	 Kate	explained,	sighing	as	she	rose	to	her	feet.	“He	doesn’t—”

      “NEWTON!”

      “—get	 along	with	 Mary	very	well,	 I’m	 afraid.”	 Kate	moved	to	the	door.
“Mary?	Mary?”

      Anthony	 rose	when	Kate	did,	wincing	 as	the	dog	let	out	three	more
earsplitting	barks,	which	were	immediately	 followed	 by	another	terrified	 shriek

67
from	Mary.	 “What	is	 he,”	he	muttered,	“a	mastiff?”	 It	had	to	be	a	mastiff.	Miss
Sheffield	the	elder	seemed	exactly	the	sort	to	keep	a	man-eating	mastiff	at	her
beck	and	call.

      “No,”	 Kate	said,	rushing	out	 into	the	hall	as	Mary	let	out	 another	shriek.
“He’s	a—”

      But	Anthony	 missed	her	words.	It	didn’t	 matter	much,	anyway,	because	one
second	later,	in	trotted	the	most	benign-looking	corgi	 he’d	ever	seen,	with	thick
caramel-colored	fur	and	a	belly	that	almost	dragged	on	the	ground.

      Anthony	 froze	with	 surprise.	This	was	the	fearsome	creature	from	the	hall?
“Good	day,	dog,”	 he	said	firmly.

      The	dog	stopped	in	its	tracks,	sat	right	down,	and…

      Smiled?

68
Chapter	    4


This	Author	was,	sadly,	unable	to	determine	all	the	details,	but	there	was	a
considerable	to-do	Thursday	last	near	The	Serpentine	in	Hyde	Park	involving
Viscount	Bridgerton,	Mr.	Nigel	Berbrooke,	both	the	Misses	Sheffield,	and	an
unnamed	dog	of	indeterminate	breed.

      This	Author	was	not	an	eyewitness,	but	all	accounts	seem	to	indicate	that	the
unnamed	dog	emerged	the	victor.

                                                 LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	25	APRIL	1814



Kate	stumbled	back	into	the	drawing	room,	knocking	arms	with	Mary	as	they
both	squeezed	through	the	doorway	at	the	same	time.	Newton	was	seated
happily	in	the	middle	of	the	room,	shedding	on	the	blue-and-white	rug	as	he
grinned	up	at	the	viscount.

      “I	think	he	likes	you,”	Mary	said,	somewhat	accusingly.

      “He	likes	you,	too,	Mary,”	Kate	said.	“The	problem	is	that	you	don’t	like
him.”

      “I’d	like	him	better	if	he	didn’t	try	to	accost	me	every	time	I	come	through
the	hall.”

      “I	thought	you	said	Mrs.	Sheffield	and	the	dog	didn’t	get	along,”	Lord
Bridgerton	said.

      “They	don’t,”	Kate	replied.	“Well,	they	do.	Well,	they	don’t	and	they	do.”

      “That	clears	things	up	immeasurably,”	he	murmured.

      Kate	ignored	his	quiet	sarcasm.	“Newton	adores	Mary,”	she	explained,	“but
Mary	doesn’t	adore	Newton.”

      “I’d	adore	him	a	bit	more,”	Mary	interrupted,	“if	he’d	adore	me	a	bit	less.”

69
      “So,”	 Kate	continued	determinedly,	“poor	 Newton	regards	Mary	 as
something	of	a	challenge.	So	when	he	sees	her…”	She	shrugged	helplessly.
“Well,	 I’m	 afraid	he	simply	adores	her	more.”

      As	if	 on	cue,	the	dog	caught	sight	of	Mary	and	bounded	straight	over	to	her
feet.

      “Kate!”	  Mary	exclaimed.

      Kate	rushed	to	her	stepmother’s	side,	just	as	Newton	rose	on	his	hind	legs
and	planted	his	front	paws	just	above	Mary’s	knees.	“Newton,	 down!”	 she
scolded.	“Bad	dog.	Bad	dog.”

      The	dog	sat	back	down	with	a	little	 whine.

      “Kate,”	 Mary	 said	in	an	extremely	no-nonsense	voice,	“that	dog	must	be
taken	for	a	walk.	Now.”

      “I	 had	been	planning	to	when	the	viscount	arrived,”	 Kate	replied,	motioning
to	the	man	across	the	room.	Really,	it	was	remarkable	the	number	of	things	she
could	blame	on	the	insufferable	man	if	she	put	her	mind	to	it.

      “Oh!”	  Mary	yelped.	“I	 beg	your	pardon,	my	lord.	 How	rude	of	me	not	to
greet	you.”

      “It	 is	of	no	concern,”	 he	said	smoothly.	“You	 were	a	bit	preoccupied	upon
your	arrival.”

      “Yes,”	 Mary	 grumbled,	“that	 beastly	dog….	Oh,	but	where	are	my	manners?
May	we	offer	 you	tea?	Something	to	eat?	It	is	so	kind	of	you	to	call	upon	us.”

      “No,	 thank	you.	I’ve	 just	been	enjoying	your	daughter’s	invigorating
company	while	I	await	 Miss	Edwina’s	 arrival.”

      “Ah,	 yes,”	Mary	 answered.	“Edwina’s	 off	with	 Mr.	 Berbrooke,	I	believe.
Isn’t	that	so,	Kate?”

      Kate	nodded	stonily,	not	 sure	she	liked	being	called	“invigorating.”

      “Do	 you	know	Mr.	 Berbrooke,	Lord	 Bridgerton?”	 Mary	asked.

70
      “Ah,	yes,”	he	said,	with	what	Kate	thought	was	fairly	surprising	reticence.
“Yes,	I	do.”

      “I	wasn’t	sure	if	I	should	have	allowed	Edwina	to	go	off	with	him	for	a	ride.
Those	curricles	are	terribly	difficult	to	drive,	aren’t	they?”

      “I	believe	that	Mr.	Berbrooke	has	a	steady	hand	with	his	horses,”	Anthony
replied.

      “Oh,	good,”	Mary	replied,	letting	out	a	much-relieved	sigh.	“You	have
surely	set	my	mind	at	rest.”

      Newton	let	out	a	staccato	bark,	simply	to	remind	everyone	of	his	presence.

      “I	had	better	find	his	lead	and	take	him	for	a	walk,”	Kate	said	hurriedly.	She
certainly	could	use	a	bit	of	fresh	air.	And	it	would	be	nice	to	finally	escape	the
viscount’s	fiendish	company.	“If	you’ll	excuse	me…”

      “But	wait,	Kate!”	Mary	called	out.	“You	cannot	leave	Lord	Bridgerton	here
with	me.	I’m	sure	I’ll	bore	him	to	tears.”

      Kate	slowly	turned	around,	dreading	Mary’s	next	words.

      “You	could	never	bore	me,	Mrs.	Sheffield,”	the	viscount	said,	debonair	rake
that	he	was.

      “Oh,	but	I	could,”	she	assured	him.	“You’ve	never	been	trapped	in
conversation	with	me	for	an	hour.	Which	is	about	how	long	it	will	be	before
Edwina	returns.”

      Kate	stared	at	her	stepmother,	her	jaw	actually	hanging	open	with	shock.
What	on	earth	did	Mary	think	she	was	doing?

      “Why	don’t	you	go	with	Kate	to	take	Newton	for	a	walk?”	Mary	suggested.

      “Oh,	but	I	could	never	ask	Lord	Bridgerton	to	accompany	me	on	a	chore,”
Kate	said	quickly.	“It	would	be	beyond	rudeness,	and	after	all,	he	is	our
esteemed	guest.”

      “Don’t	be	silly,”	Mary	answered,	before	the	viscount	could	get	even	half	of
a	word	in.	“I’m	sure	he	wouldn’t	look	upon	it	as	a	chore.	Would	you,	my	lord?”

71
a	word	in.	“I’m	 sure	he	wouldn’t	 look	 upon	it	as	a	chore.	Would	you,	my	lord?”

      “Of	 course	not,”	he	murmured,	looking	 utterly	 sincere.	But	really,	what	else
could	he	say?

      “There.	That	 settles	it,”	Mary	 said,	sounding	inordinately	pleased	with
herself.	“And	 who	knows?	You	may	stumble	across	Edwina	in	your	 travels.
Wouldn’t	 that	be	convenient?”

      “Indeed,”	 Kate	said	under	her	breath.	It	would	be	lovely	 to	be	rid	of	the
viscount,	but	the	last	thing	she	wanted	to	do	was	deliver	Edwina	into	 his
clutches.	Her	sister	was	still	young	and	impressionable.	What	if	 she	couldn’t
resist	one	of	his	smiles?	Or	his	glib	tongue?

      Even	Kate	was	willing	 to	admit	 that	Lord	Bridgerton	 exuded	considerable
charm,	and	she	didn’t	even	like	the	man!	Edwina,	with	 her	less	suspicious
nature,	would	surely	be	overwhelmed.

      She	turned	to	the	viscount.	“You	 shouldn’t	feel	 you	must	accompany	me
while	I	walk	 Newton,	my	 lord.”

      “I’d	 be	delighted,”	 he	said	with	a	wicked	smile,	 and	Kate	had	the	distinct
impression	he	was	agreeing	to	go	for	the	sole	purpose	of	vexing	her.	“Besides,”
he	continued,	“as	your	mother	said,	we	might	see	Edwina,	and	wouldn’t	 that	be	a
delightful	 coincidence?”

      “Delightful,”	  Kate	 returned	flatly.	“Just	 delightful.”

      “Excellent!”	  Mary	 said,	clapping	her	hands	together	with	joy.	“I	 saw
Newton’s	lead	on	the	hall	table.	Here,	I’ll	  go	and	get	it	for	you.”

      Anthony	 watched	Mary	leave,	then	turned	to	Kate	and	said,	“That	was	very
neatly	done.”

      “I’ll	  say,”	Kate	muttered.

      “Do	 you	suppose,”	he	whispered,	leaning	toward	her,	“that	her	matchmaking
is	directed	toward	Edwina	or	you?”

      “Me?”	 Kate	all	 but	croaked.	“Surely	you	 jest.”

      Anthony	 rubbed	his	chin	thoughtfully,	 gazing	at	the	doorway	through	which

72
      Anthony	 rubbed	his	chin	thoughtfully,	 gazing	at	the	doorway	through	which
Mary	had	just	exited.	“I’m	  not	certain,”	he	mused,	“but—”	 He	closed	his	mouth
upon	hearing	Mary’s	footsteps	drawing	 back	near.

      “Here	you	 are,”	Mary	 said,	holding	the	lead	out	to	Kate.	Newton	barked
enthusiastically	and	drew	back	as	if	preparing	to	lunge	at	Mary—undoubtedly	 to
shower	her	with	all	sorts	of	unpalatable	love—but	 Kate	kept	a	firm	 hold	on	his
collar.

      “Here,”	 Mary	 quickly	 amended,	handing	the	lead	instead	to	Anthony.	“Why
don’t	you	give	 this	to	Kate?	I’d	 rather	not	get	too	close.”

      Newton	barked	and	gazed	longingly	 at	Mary,	who	inched	farther	 away.

      “You,”	  Anthony	said	forcefully	 to	 the	dog.	“Sit	down	and	be	quiet.”

      Much	to	 Kate’s	surprise,	Newton	obeyed,	settling	his	plump	 bottom	onto	the
rug	with	almost	comical	 alacrity.

      “There,”	 Anthony	 said,	sounding	rather	pleased	with	himself.	He	held	out
the	lead	toward	Kate.	“Shall	you	do	the	honors	or	shall	I?”

      “Oh,	 go	right	ahead,”	she	replied.	“You	 seem	to	have	such	an	affinity	for
canines.”

      “Clearly,”	  he	shot	back,	keeping	his	voice	low	so	that	Mary	could	 not	hear,
“they	are	not	so	very	different	 from	women.	Both	 breeds	hang	on	my	every
word.”

      Kate	stepped	on	his	hand	as	he	knelt	to	fasten	the	lead	to	Newton’s	collar.
“Oops,”	she	said,	rather	insincerely.	“I’m	  so	sorry.”

      “Your	 tender	solicitude	quite	 unmans	me,”	he	returned,	standing	back	up.	“I
might	break	into	tears.”

      Mary’s	 head	bobbed	back	and	forth	between	Kate	and	Anthony.	She
couldn’t	hear	what	they	were	saying	but	was	clearly	fascinated.	“Is	 something
wrong?”	she	queried.

      “Not	 at	all,”	 Anthony	replied,	 just	as	Kate	gave	a	firm,	“No.”

      “Good,”	 Mary	 said	briskly.	“Then	 I’ll	 see	you	to	the	door.”	 At	Newton’s

73
      “Good,”	Mary	said	briskly.	“Then	I’ll	see	you	to	the	door.”	At	Newton’s
enthusiastic	bark,	she	added,	“Then	again,	maybe	not.	I	don’t	really	want	to	get
within	ten	feet	of	that	dog.	But	I’ll	wave	you	off.”

      “What	would	I	do,”	Kate	said	to	Mary	as	she	passed	her,	“without	you	to
wave	me	off?”

      Mary	smiled	slyly.	“I	surely	don’t	know,	Kate.	I	surely	don’t	know.”

      Which	left	Kate	with	a	queasy	feeling	in	her	stomach	and	a	vague	suspicion
that	Lord	Bridgerton	might	have	been	correct.	Maybe	Mary	was	playing
matchmaker	with	more	than	just	Edwina	this	time	around.

      It	was	a	horrifying	thought.

      With	Mary	standing	in	the	hall,	Kate	and	Anthony	exited	out	the	doorway
and	headed	west	on	Milner	Street.	“I	usually	stay	to	the	smaller	streets	and	make
my	way	up	to	Brompton	Road,”	Kate	explained,	thinking	that	he	might	not	be
very	familiar	with	this	area	of	town,	“then	take	that	to	Hyde	Park.	But	we	can
walk	straight	up	Sloane	Street,	if	you	prefer.”

      “Whatever	you	wish,”	he	demurred.	“I	shall	follow	your	direction.”

      “Very	well,”	Kate	replied,	marching	determinedly	up	Milner	Street	toward
Lenox	Gardens.	Maybe	if	she	kept	her	eyes	ahead	of	her	and	moved	briskly,
he’d	be	discouraged	from	conversation.	Her	daily	walks	with	Newton	were
supposed	to	be	her	time	for	personal	reflection.	She	did	not	appreciate	having	to
drag	him	along.

      Her	strategy	worked	quite	well	for	several	minutes.	They	walked	in	silence
all	the	way	to	the	corner	of	Hans	Crescent	and	Brompton	Road,	and	then	he
quite	suddenly	said,	“My	brother	played	us	for	fools	last	night.”

      That	stopped	her	in	her	tracks.	“I	beg	your	pardon?”

      “Do	you	know	what	he	told	me	about	you	before	he	introduced	us?”

      Kate	stumbled	a	step	before	shaking	her	head,	no.	Newton	hadn’t	stopped	in
his	tracks,	and	he	was	tugging	on	the	lead	like	mad.

      “He	told	me	you	couldn’t	say	enough	about	me.”

74
      “Wellll,”	 Kate	stalled,	“if	one	doesn’t	want	to	put	too	fine	a	point	on	it,
that’s	not	entirely	untrue.”

      “He	implied,”	Anthony	added,	“that	you	could	not	say	enough	good	about
me.”

      She	shouldn’t	have	smiled.	“That’s	not	true.”

      He	probably	shouldn’t	have	smiled,	either,	but	Kate	was	glad	he	did.	“I
didn’t	think	so,”	he	replied.

      They	turned	up	Brompton	Road	toward	Knightsbridge	and	Hyde	Park,	and
Kate	asked,	“Why	would	he	do	such	a	thing?”

      Anthony	shot	her	a	sideways	look.	“You	don’t	have	a	brother,	do	you?”

      “No,	just	Edwina,	I’m	afraid,	and	she’s	decidedly	female.”

      “He	did	it,”	Anthony	explained,	“purely	to	torture	me.”

      “A	noble	pursuit,”	Kate	said	under	her	breath.

      “I	heard	that.”

      “I	rather	thought	you	would,”	she	added.

      “And	I	expect,”	he	continued,	“that	he	wanted	to	torture	you	as	well.”

      “Me?”	she	exclaimed.	“Whyever?	What	could	I	possibly	have	done	to	him?”

      “You	might	have	provoked	him	ever	so	slightly	by	denigrating	his	beloved
brother,”	he	suggested.

      Her	brows	arched.	“Beloved?”

      “Much-admired?”	he	tried.

      She	shook	her	head.	“That	one	doesn’t	wash,	either.”

      Anthony	grinned.	Miss	Sheffield	the	elder,	for	all	her	annoyingly	managing
ways,	did	have	an	admirable	wit.	They’d	reached	Knightsbridge,	so	he	took	her
arm	as	they	crossed	over	the	thoroughfare	and	took	one	of	the	smaller	pathways

75
arm	as	they	crossed	over	the	thoroughfare	and	took	one	of	the	smaller	pathways
that	led	to	South	Carriage	Road	within	Hyde	Park.	Newton,	 clearly	a	country
dog	at	heart,	picked	up	his	pace	considerably	as	they	entered	greener
surroundings,	although	it	would	 be	difficult	 to	imagine	the	portly	 canine	moving
with	anything	 that	might	correctly	 be	termed	speed.

      Still,	 the	dog	seemed	rather	jolly	and	certainly	interested	in	every	flower,
small	animal,	or	passerby	that	crossed	their	path.	The	spring	air	was	crisp,	but
the	sun	was	warm,	and	the	sky	was	a	surprisingly	clear	blue	after	so	many
typical	London	 days	of	rain.	And	while	 the	woman	on	his	arm	was	not	the
woman	he	planned	to	take	to	wife,	nor,	in	fact,	was	she	a	woman	he	planned	to
take	to	anything,	Anthony	felt	 a	rather	easy	sense	of	contentment	wash	over	him.

      “Shall	 we	cross	over	to	Rotten	Row?”	he	asked	Kate.

      “Hmmm?”	 was	her	distracted	reply.	She	had	her	face	tipped	up	to	the	sun
and	was	basking	in	its	warmth.	And	for	 one	extremely	disconcerting	moment,
Anthony	felt	 a	sharp	stab	of…something.

      Something?	He	gave	his	head	a	little	shake.	It	couldn’t	 possibly	be	desire.
Not	for	this	woman.

      “Did	 you	say	something?”	she	murmured.

      He	cleared	his	throat	and	took	a	deep	breath,	hoping	it	would	clear	his	head.
Instead,	he	simply	got	an	intoxicating	whiff	  of	her	scent,	which	was	an	odd
combination	of	exotic	 lilies	and	sensible	soap.	“You	seem	to	be	enjoying	the
sun,”	he	said.

      She	smiled,	turning	to	face	him	 with	a	clear-eyed	gaze.	“I	know	 that’s	not
what	you	said,	but	yes,	I	am.	It’s	been	so	dreadfully	rainy	 of	late.”

      “I	 thought	young	ladies	were	not	supposed	to	let	sun	on	their	faces,”	he
teased.

      She	shrugged,	looking	only	the	slightest	bit	 sheepish	as	she	replied,	“They’re
not.	That	is	to	say,	we’re	not.	But	it	 does	feel	heavenly.”	She	let	out	a	little	 sigh,
and	a	look	of	longing	crossed	her	face,	so	intense	that	Anthony	almost	ached	for
her.	“I	do	wish	 I	could	remove	my	bonnet,”	 she	said	wistfully.

      Anthony	 nodded	his	agreement,	feeling	much	the	same	way	about	his	hat.

76
      Anthony	 nodded	his	agreement,	feeling	much	the	same	way	about	his	hat.
“You	 could	probably	push	it	back	just	a	bit	 without	anyone	noticing,”	 he
suggested.

      “Do	 you	think?”	 Her	entire	face	lit	 up	at	the	prospect,	and	that	strange	stab
of	something	pierced	his	gut	again.

      “Of	 course,”	he	murmured,	reaching	up	to	adjust	the	rim	of	 the	bonnet.	It
was	one	of	those	bizarre	confections	women	seemed	to	favor,	all	ribbons	and
lace,	and	tied	in	such	a	way	that	no	reasonable	man	could	ever	make	sense	of	it.
“Here,	just	hold	still	 for	 a	moment.	I’ll	 fix	 it.”

      Kate	held	still,	 just	as	he’d	gently	ordered,	but	when	his	fingers	accidentally
brushed	the	skin	on	her	temple	she	stopped	breathing	as	well.	He	was	so	very
close,	and	there	was	something	very	odd	about	it.	She	could	feel	the	heat	of	his
body,	and	smell	the	clean,	soapy	scent	of	him.

      And	it	 sent	a	prickle	of	awareness	straight	through	her.

      She	hated	him,	or	at	least	she	heartily	disliked	and	disapproved	of	him,	and
yet	she	had	the	most	absurd	inclination	to	lean	forward	slightly,	 until	the	space
between	their	bodies	was	squeezed	into	nothingness,	and…

      She	swallowed	and	forced	herself	to	draw	back.	Good	God,	what	had	come
over	her?

      “Hold	 for	 a	moment,”	he	said.	“I	haven’t	 finished.”

      Kate	reached	up	with	frantic	 fingers	to	adjust	her	bonnet.	“I’m	 sure	it’s	 just
fine.	You	needn’t—you	 needn’t	worry	 yourself.”

      “Can	you	 feel	the	sun	any	better?”	he	asked.

      She	nodded,	even	though	she	was	so	distracted	she	wasn’t	even	sure	if	it	was
true.	“Yes,	thank	you.	It’s	 lovely.	 I—Oh!”

      Newton	let	 out	a	loud	stream	of	barks	and	yanked	on	the	lead.	Hard.

      “Newton!”	  she	called	out,	jerking	forward	 with	 the	lead.	But	the	dog	already
had	something	in	his	sights—Kate	had	no	idea	what—and	was	bounding
enthusiastically	forward,	pulling	 her	along	until	 she	was	stumbling	over	her	feet,
her	entire	body	pulled	into	a	diagonal	line,	 with	her	shoulder	decidedly	in	 front

77
her	entire	body	pulled	into	a	diagonal	line,	 with	her	shoulder	decidedly	in	 front
of	the	rest	of	her.	“Newton!”	  she	called	out	again,	rather	helplessly.	“Newton!
Stop!”

      Anthony	 watched	with	amusement	as	the	dog	barreled	forward,	moving	with
more	speed	than	he	would	have	ever	guessed	its	short,	pudgy	legs	could	have
managed.	Kate	was	making	a	valiant	attempt	to	keep	her	grip	on	the	lead,	but
Newton	was	now	barking	like	 mad,	and	running	with	 equal	vigor.

      “Miss	 Sheffield,	allow	 me	to	take	the	lead,”	he	boomed,	striding	forward	 to
aid	her.	It	wasn’t	the	most	glamorous	manner	in	which	 to	play	the	hero,	but
anything	would	do	when	one	was	trying	 to	impress	the	sister	of	one’s	future
bride.

      But	just	as	Anthony	 caught	up	with	her,	Newton	 gave	the	lead	a	vicious	tug,
and	it	went	flying	 from	her	grasp.	Kate	let	out	a	shriek	and	dashed	forward,	but
the	dog	was	off	and	running,	the	lead	snaking	along	the	grass	behind	him.

      Anthony	 didn’t	 know	whether	to	laugh	or	groan.	Newton	 clearly	did	not
intend	to	be	caught.

      Kate	froze	for	 a	moment,	one	hand	clasped	over	her	mouth.	Then	her	eyes
caught	Anthony’s,	and	he	had	the	worst	sort	of	feeling	that	he	knew	what	 she
intended	to	do.

      “Miss	 Sheffield,”	 he	said	quickly,	 “I’m	 sure—”

      But	she	was	off	and	running,	hollering,	 “Newton!”	  with	 a	decided	lack	of
decorum.	Anthony	let	out	a	weary	sigh	and	began	running	after	her.	He	couldn’t
very	well	let	 her	chase	the	dog	on	her	own	and	still	presume	to	call	himself	a
gentleman.

      She	had	a	bit	of	a	head	start	on	him,	though,	and	when	he	caught	up	with	her
around	the	corner,	she’d	stopped.	She	was	breathing	hard,	her	hands	on	her	hips
as	she	scanned	her	surroundings.

      “Where’d	 he	go?”	Anthony	 asked,	trying	to	forget	that	there	was	something
rather	arousing	about	a	woman	who	was	panting.

      “I	 don’t	know.”	 She	paused	to	catch	her	breath.	“I	think	he’s	chasing	a
rabbit.”

78
rabbit.”

      “Oh,	 now,	well,	 that	will	 make	it	easy	to	catch	him,”	he	said.	“Since	rabbits
always	stick	to	the	well-trod	 paths.”

      She	scowled	at	his	sarcasm.	“What	are	we	to	do?”

      Anthony	 had	half	a	mind	to	answer,	“Go	home	and	get	a	real	dog,”	 but	she
looked	so	worried	he	bit	his	tongue.	Actually,	 upon	closer	inspection	she	looked
more	irritated	than	worried,	 but	there	was	definitely	a	bit	of	 worry	in	 the	mix.

      So	instead	he	said,	“I	propose	we	wait	until	 we	hear	someone	shriek.	Any
minute	now	he’s	bound	to	dash	right	across	some	young	lady’s	feet	and	scare	her
out	of	her	very	wits.”

      “Do	 you	think?”	 She	didn’t	look	 convinced.	“Because	he’s	not	the	scariest
dog	to	look	at.	He	thinks	he	is,	and	it’s	 really	quite	sweet,	actually,	but	the	truth
is,	he’s—”

      “Eeeeeeeeeeeeeeaaaaaaaaaahhhhhk!”

      “I	 believe	we	have	our	answer,”	Anthony	 said	dryly,	and	he	took	off	 in	the
direction	of	the	anonymous	lady’s	 scream.

      Kate	hurried	after	him,	 cutting	right	 across	the	grass	toward	Rotten	Row.
The	viscount	was	running	in	front	 of	her,	and	all	she	could	think	was	that	he
must	really	want	to	marry	Edwina,	 because	despite	the	fact	that	he	was	clearly	a
splendid	athlete,	he	looked	most	undignified	dashing	through	the	park	after	a
rotund	corgi.	Even	worse,	they	were	going	to	have	to	run	right	 across	Rotten
Row,	the	ton’s	favorite	 spot	for	riding	 and	driving.

      Everyone	was	going	to	see	them.	A	less	determined	man	would	have	given
up	ages	ago.

      Kate	kept	running	 on	after	them,	but	she	was	losing	ground.	She	hadn’t
spent	much	time	in	breeches,	but	she	was	fairly	certain	it	was	easier	to	run	in
them	than	in	skirts.	Especially	when	one	was	out	in	public	 and	could	not	hitch
them	up	above	one’s	ankles.

      She	tore	across	Rotten	Row,	refusing	to	make	eye	contact	with	any	of	the
fashionable	ladies	and	gentlemen	out	with	their	horses.	There	was	always	the
chance	she	wouldn’t	be	recognized	as	the	hoydenish	miss	racing	through	the

79
chance	she	wouldn’t	be	recognized	as	the	hoydenish	miss	racing	through	the
park	as	if	someone	had	set	fire	to	her	shoes.	Not	much	of	a	chance,	but	a	chance
nonetheless.

      When	she	reached	the	grass	again,	she	stumbled	for	a	second	and	had	to
pause	to	take	a	few	deep	breaths.	Then	horror	dawned.	They	were	almost	to	The
Serpentine.

      Oh,	no.

      There	was	little	 Newton	liked	 better	than	to	jump	in	a	lake.	And	the	sun	was
just	warm	enough	that	it	might	 look	tempting,	especially	if	 one	happened	to	be	a
creature	covered	with	thick,	heavy	fur,	 a	creature	who’d	been	running	at
breakneck	speed	for	five	minutes.	Well,	breakneck	for	 an	overweight	corgi.

      Which	 was	still,	Kate	noted	with	 some	interest,	fast	enough	to	keep	a	six-
foot-tall	 viscount	at	bay.

      Kate	hitched	up	her	skirts	an	inch	or	so—hang	the	onlookers,	she	couldn’t
afford	to	be	fussy	right	now—and	 took	off	 running	again.	There	was	no	way
she’d	catch	up	with	Newton,	but	maybe	she	could	catch	up	with	 Lord	Bridgerton
before	he	killed	Newton.

      Murder	 had	to	be	on	his	mind	by	now.	The	man	would	 have	to	be	a	saint	not
to	want	to	murder	the	dog.

      And	if	 one	percent	of	what	had	been	written	about	him	in	Whistledown	 was
true,	he	was	no	saint.

      Kate	gulped.	“Lord	 Bridgerton!”	  she	called	out,	intending	to	tell	 him	to	call
off	the	hunt.	She’d	simply	 have	to	wait	for	 Newton	to	exhaust	himself.	With
four-inch-tall	 legs,	that	had	to	come	sooner	rather	than	later.	“Lord	Bridgerton!
We	can	just—”

      Kate	stumbled	in	her	tracks.	Was	that	Edwina	over	there	by	The	Serpentine?
She	squinted.	It	was	Edwina,	standing	gracefully	with	 her	hands	clasped	in	front
of	her.	And	it	 appeared	that	the	hapless	Mr.	Berbrooke	was	making	some	sort	of
repair	to	his	curricle.

      Newton	stopped	short	for	one	moment,	spying	Edwina	 at	the	same	moment
Kate	did,	and	abruptly	changed	his	course,	barking	joyfully	 as	he	ran	toward	his

80
Kate	did,	and	abruptly	changed	his	course,	barking	joyfully	 as	he	ran	toward	his
beloved.

      “Lord	 Bridgerton!”	  Kate	called	out	again.	“See,	look!	There’s—”

      Anthony	 turned	around	at	the	sound	of	her	voice,	then	followed	her	pointed
finger	toward	Edwina.	 So	that	was	why	the	damned	dog	spun	on	its	heel	and
made	a	ninety-degree	change	of	course.	Anthony	had	nearly	slipped	on	the	mud
and	fallen	on	his	bum	trying	 to	maneuver	such	a	sharp	turn.

      He	was	going	to	kill	 that	dog.

      No,	he	was	going	to	kill	 Kate	Sheffield.

      No,	maybe—

      Anthony’s	 gleeful	thoughts	of	 vengeance	were	broken	by	Edwina’s	sudden
shriek	of,	“Newton!”

      Anthony	 liked	to	think	 of	himself	 as	a	man	of	decisive	action,	but	when	he
saw	that	dog	launch	himself	in	the	air	and	hurtle	himself	 toward	Edwina,	he	was
quite	simply	frozen	with	 shock.	Shakespeare	himself	could	not	have	devised	a
more	appropriate	ending	to	this	farce,	and	it	was	all	playing	 out	right	before
Anthony’s	 eyes	as	if	at	half	speed.

      And	there	was	nothing	he	could	do	about	it.

      The	dog	was	going	to	hit	Edwina	 straight	in	the	chest.	Edwina	was	going	to
topple	backward.

      Straight	into	 The	Serpentine.

      “Nooooooo!”	  he	yelled,	charging	forward	even	though	he	knew	all	 attempts
at	heroics	on	his	part	were	utterly	useless.

      Splash!

      “Dear	God!”	 Berbrooke	 exclaimed.	“She’s	all	 wet!”

      “Well,	 don’t	 just	stand	there,”	Anthony	 snapped,	reaching	the	scene	of	the
accident	and	charging	forward	into	the	waters.	“Do	 something	to	help!”

81
      Berbrooke	clearly	 did	not	quite	understand	what	that	meant,	because	he	just
stood	there,	bug-eyed,	as	Anthony	reached	down,	grasped	Edwina’s	hand,	and
hauled	her	to	her	feet.

      “Are	 you	all	right?”	 he	asked	gruffly.

      She	nodded,	sputtering	and	sneezing	too	hard	to	answer.

      “Miss	 Sheffield,”	 he	roared,	seeing	Kate	skid	to	a	halt	on	the	banks.	“No,	not
you,”	he	added,	when	he	felt	Edwina	jerk	 to	attention	at	his	side.	“Your	 sister.”

      “Kate?”	 she	asked,	blinking	the	filthy	 water	from	 her	eyes.	“Where’s	Kate?”

      “Dry	 as	a	bone	on	the	embankment,”	he	muttered,	followed	by	a	holler	in
Kate’s	direction	of,	 “Rein	in	 your	bloody	 dog!”

      Newton	had	cheerfully	 splashed	back	out	of	the	Serpentine	and	was	now
sitting	on	the	grass,	his	tongue	hanging	happily	out	of	his	mouth.	Kate	scurried
to	his	side	and	grabbed	the	lead.	Anthony	noticed	that	she	had	no	pithy
comeback	to	his	roared	order.	Good,	he	thought	viciously.	He	wouldn’t	 have
thought	the	bloody	woman	would	 have	had	the	sense	to	keep	her	mouth	shut.

      He	turned	back	to	Edwina,	who,	 astoundingly,	still	 managed	to	look	lovely
even	while	dripping	 with	pond	water.	“Let	 me	get	you	out	of	here,”	 he	said
gruffly,	 and	before	she	had	a	chance	to	react,	he	scooped	her	into	his	arms	and
carried	her	to	dry	ground.

      “I’ve	 never	seen	anything	like	that,”	 Berbrooke	said,	shaking	his	head.

      Anthony	 made	no	reply.	He	didn’t	 think	he’d	 be	able	to	speak	without
tossing	the	idiot	into	the	water.	What	was	he	thinking,	 just	standing	there	while
Edwina	was	submerged	by	that	pathetic	excuse	for	a	dog?

      “Edwina?”	 Kate	asked,	walking	 forward	as	far	as	Newton’s	lead	would
allow.	“Are	 you	all	 right?”

      “I	 think	you’ve	 done	enough,”	Anthony	 bit	out,	advancing	upon	her	until
they	were	barely	a	foot	apart.

      “Me?”	 she	gasped.

82
      “Look	 at	her,”	he	snapped,	thrusting	a	pointed	finger	in	 Edwina’s	direction
even	while	his	full	 attention	was	focused	on	Kate.	“Just	look	at	her!”

      “But	 it	was	an	accident!”

      “I’m	  really	fine!”	 Edwina	 called	out,	sounding	a	little	panicked	by	 the	level
of	anger	simmering	between	her	sister	and	the	viscount.	“Cold,	but	fine!”

      “See?”	Kate	returned,	swallowing	 convulsively	 as	she	took	in	the	disheveled
sight	of	her	sister.	“It	 was	an	accident.”

      He	merely	crossed	his	arms	and	arched	a	brow.

      “You	 don’t	 believe	me,”	she	breathed.	“I	can’t	believe	 you	don’t	believe
me.”

      Anthony	 said	nothing.	It	was	inconceivable	to	 him	that	Kate	Sheffield,	 for
all	her	wit	and	intelligence,	 could	not	be	jealous	of	her	sister.	And	even	if	 there
was	nothing	she	could	have	done	to	prevent	this	mishap,	surely	she	must	be
taking	a	bit	of	pleasure	in	the	fact	that	she	was	dry	and	comfortable	while
Edwina	looked	like	 a	drowned	rat.	An	attractive	rat,	to	be	sure,	but	certainly	a
drowned	one.

      But	Kate	clearly	 wasn’t	done	with	 the	conversation.	“Aside	from	 the	fact,”
she	scorned,	“that	I	would	never	ever	do	anything	to	harm	Edwina,	how	 do	you
propose	I	managed	this	amazing	feat?”	She	clapped	her	free	hand	to	her	cheek	in
an	expression	of	mock	discovery.	“Oh,	yes,	I	know	 the	secret	language	of	the
corgis.	I	ordered	the	dog	to	yank	the	lead	from	my	hand	and	then,	since	I	have
the	second	sight,	I	knew	that	Edwina	was	standing	right	here	by	the	Serpentine,
so	then	I	said	to	the	dog—through	our	powerful	 mind-to-mind	 connection,	since
he	was	much	too	far	away	to	hear	my	voice	at	this	point—to	 change	his
direction,	head	for	Edwina,	and	topple	her	into	 the	lake.”

      “Sarcasm	doesn’t	become	you,	Miss	Sheffield.”

      “Nothing	 becomes	you,	Lord	Bridgerton.”

      Anthony	 leaned	forward,	his	chin	jutting	 out	in	a	most	menacing	manner.
“Women	should	not	keep	pets	if	they	cannot	control	 them.”

      “And	 men	should	not	take	women	with	 pets	for	a	walk	in	the	park	if	 they

83
      “And	 men	should	not	take	women	with	 pets	for	a	walk	in	the	park	if	 they
cannot	control	either,”	she	shot	back.

      Anthony	 could	actually	feel	 the	tips	of	his	ears	turning	red	with	barely
leashed	rage.	“You,	madam,	are	a	menace	to	society.”

      She	opened	her	mouth	as	if	to	return	the	insult,	but	instead	she	just	offered
him	an	almost	frighteningly	 devious	smile	and	turned	to	the	dog	and	said,
“Shake,	Newton.”

      Newton	looked	 up	at	her	finger,	pointed	right	 at	Anthony,	and	obediently
trotted	a	few	steps	closer	to	him	before	allowing	himself	 a	full-body	 shake,
spraying	pond	water	everywhere.

      Anthony	 went	for	her	throat.	“I…am…going…to…KILL	     YOU!”	 he	roared.

      Kate	ducked	nimbly	 out	of	the	way,	dashing	over	to	Edwina’s	 side.	“Now,
now,	Lord	Bridgerton,”	  she	taunted,	seeking	safety	behind	her	sister’s	dripping
form.	“It	 would	 not	do	to	lose	your	temper	in	front	 of	the	fair	Edwina.”

      “Kate?”	 Edwina	whispered	urgently.	 “What	 is	going	on?	Why	are	you	being
so	mean	to	him?”

      “Why	 is	he	being	so	mean	to	me?”	Kate	hissed	back.

      “I	 say,”	Mr.	 Berbrooke	suddenly	said,	“that	dog	got	me	wet.”

      “He	 got	all	of	us	wet,”	 Kate	replied.	Including	 her.	But	it	 had	been	worth	it.
Oh,	it	had	been	worth	it	to	see	the	look	of	surprise	and	rage	on	that	pompous
aristocrat’s	face.

      “You!”	  Anthony	 roared,	jabbing	a	furious	finger	 at	Kate.	“Be	quiet.”

      Kate	held	her	silence.	She	wasn’t	foolhardy	 enough	to	provoke	him	any
further.	He	looked	as	if	his	head	might	explode	at	any	moment.	And	 he’d
certainly	lost	whatever	claim	 to	dignity	 he’d	had	at	the	beginning	of	the	day.	His
right	sleeve	was	dripping	wet	from	 when	he’d	hauled	Edwina	out	of	 the	water,
his	boots	looked	to	be	ruined	forever,	and	the	rest	of	him	was	spotted	with	water,
thanks	to	Newton’s	expert	shaking	prowess.

      “I’ll	  tell	you	 what	we’re	going	 to	do,”	he	continued	in	a	low,	 deadly	voice.

84
      “What	 I	need	to	do,”	Mr.	 Berbrooke	said	jovially,	 clearly	 unaware	that	Lord
Bridgerton	was	likely	 to	murder	the	first	 person	who	opened	his	mouth,	“is
finish	repairing	 this	curricle.	Then	I	 can	take	Miss	Sheffield	home.”	He	 pointed
at	Edwina,	just	in	case	anyone	didn’t	understand	to	which	Miss	Sheffield	 he
referred.

      “Mr.	 Berbrooke,”	 Anthony	 ground	out,	“do	you	 know	how	to	fix	 a	curricle?”

      Mr.	 Berbrooke	blinked	a	few	 times.

      “Do	 you	even	know	what	is	wrong	 with	your	 curricle?”

      Berbrooke’s	mouth	 opened	and	closed	a	few	more	times,	and	then	he	said,	“I
have	a	few	ideas.	Shouldn’t	take	terribly	long	 to	figure	out	which	 is	the	actual
problem.”

      Kate	stared	at	Anthony,	fascinated	by	the	vein	leaping	in	 his	throat.	She	had
never	before	seen	a	man	so	clearly	pushed	to	his	limit.	Feeling	not	a	little
apprehensive	at	the	impending	explosion,	she	took	a	prudent	half	step	behind
Edwina.

      She	didn’t	like	 to	think	 herself	a	coward,	but	self-preservation	was	another
matter	entirely.

      But	the	viscount	somehow	managed	to	keep	himself	under	control,	and	his
voice	was	terrifyingly	 even	as	he	said,	“This	is	what	we’re	 going	to	do.”

      Three	pairs	of	eyes	widened	in	expectation.

      “I	 am	going	to	walk	 over	there”—he	pointed	at	a	lady	and	gentleman	about
twenty	yards	away	who	were	trying	 not	to	stare	but	not	succeeding—“and	ask
Montrose	if	I	 might	borrow	 his	carriage	for	a	few	minutes.”

      “I	 say,”	Berbrooke	said,	craning	his	neck,	“is	 that	Geoffrey	Montrose?
Haven’t	seen	him	for	an	age.”

      A	second	vein	started	leaping,	this	time	on	Lord	 Bridgerton’s	 temple.	Kate
grasped	Edwina’s	hand	for	moral	support	and	held	tight.

      But	Bridgerton,	 to	his	credit,	ignored	 Berbrooke’s	exceedingly	inappropriate
interjection	and	continued	with,	 “Since	he	will	 say	yes—”

85
interjection	and	continued	with,	 “Since	he	will	 say	yes—”

      “Are	 you	sure?”	Kate	blurted	out.

      Somehow	his	brown	eyes	resembled	icicles.	“Am	 I	sure	of	what?”	 he	bit	off.

      “Nothing,”	  she	mumbled,	ready	to	kick	herself.	“Please	continue.”

      “As	 I	was	saying,	since	as	a	friend	and	a	gentleman”—he	glared	at	Kate
—“he	will	 say	yes,	I	will	 take	Miss	 Sheffield	home	and	then	I	will	 return	home
and	have	one	of	my	men	return	Montrose’s	curricle.”

      No	one	bothered	to	ask	which	Miss	Sheffield	 he	was	talking	about.

      “What	 about	Kate?”	Edwina	inquired.	 After	 all,	the	curricle	 could	only	seat
two.

      Kate	gave	her	hand	a	squeeze.	Dear,	sweet	Edwina.

      Anthony	 looked	straight	at	Edwina.	“Mr.	  Berbrooke	will	 escort	your	sister
home.”

      “But	 I	can’t,”	 Berbrooke	said.	“Got	 to	finish	 with	the	curricle,	 you	know.”

      “Where	 do	you	live?”	 Anthony	snapped.

      Berbrooke	blinked	 with	surprise	but	gave	his	address.

      “I	 will	 stop	by	your	house	and	fetch	a	servant	to	wait	with	your	 conveyance
while	you	escort	Miss	Sheffield	 to	her	home.	Is	that	clear?”	He	paused	and
looked	at	everyone—including	 the	dog—with	 a	rather	hard	expression.	Except
for	Edwina,	of	 course,	who	was	the	only	person	present	who	had	not	lit	a	fuse
directly	under	his	temper.

      “Is	 that	clear?”	he	repeated.

      Everyone	nodded,	and	his	plan	was	set	into	motion.	Minutes	later,	Kate
found	herself	watching	Lord	 Bridgerton	and	Edwina	 ride	off	into	 the	horizon—
the	very	two	people	she	had	vowed	should	never	even	be	in	the	same	room
together.

      Even	worse,	she	was	left	alone	with	Mr.	 Berbrooke	and	Newton.

86
      Even	worse,	she	was	left	alone	with	Mr.	 Berbrooke	and	Newton.

      And	it	 took	only	 two	minutes	to	discern	that	of	the	two,	 Newton	was	the
finer	conversationalist.

87
Chapter	    5


It	has	come	to	This	Author’s	attention	that	Miss	Katharine	Sheffield	took	offense
at	the	labeling	of	her	beloved	pet,	“an	unnamed	dog	of	indeterminate	breed.”

      This	Author	is,	to	be	sure,	prostrate	with	shame	at	this	grievous	and
egregious	error	and	begs	of	you,	dear	reader,	to	accept	this	abject	apology	and
pay	attention	to	the	first	ever	correction	in	the	history	of	this	column.

      Miss	Katharine	Sheffield’s	dog	is	a	corgi.	It	is	called	Newton,	although	it	is
difficult	to	imagine	that	England’s	great	inventor	and	physicist	would	have
appreciated	being	immortalized	in	the	form	of	a	short,	fat	canine	with	poor
manners.

                                                 LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	27	APRIL	1814



By	 that	evening,	it	had	become	apparent	that	Edwina	had	not	come	through	her
(albeit	brief)	ordeal	unscathed.	Her	nose	turned	red,	her	eyes	began	to	water,	and
it	was	apparent	to	anyone	who	glimpsed	her	puffy	face	for	even	a	second	that,
while	not	seriously	ill,	she’d	caught	a	bad	cold.

      But	even	while	Edwina	was	tucked	into	bed	with	a	hot	water	bottle	between
her	feet	and	a	therapeutic	potion	brewed	up	by	the	cook	in	a	mug	on	her	bedside
table,	Kate	was	determined	to	have	a	conversation	with	her.

      “What	did	he	say	to	you	on	the	ride	home?”	Kate	demanded,	perching	on	the
edge	of	her	sister’s	bed.

      “Who?”	Edwina	replied,	sniffing	fearfully	at	the	remedy.	“Look	at	this,”	she
said,	holding	it	forward.	“It’s	giving	off	fumes.”

      “The	viscount,”	Kate	ground	out.	“Who	else	would	have	spoken	to	you	on
the	ride	home?	And	don’t	be	a	ninny.	It’s	not	giving	off	fumes.	That’s	just
steam.”

      “Oh.”	Edwina	took	another	sniff	and	pulled	a	face.	“It	doesn’t	smell	like
steam.”

88
steam.”

      “It’s	 steam,”	Kate	ground	 out,	gripping	the	mattress	until	her	knuckles	hurt.
“What	did	 he	say?”

      “Lord	 Bridgerton?”	 Edwina	asked	blithely.	 “Oh,	 just	the	usual	sort	of	things.
You	know	what	 I	mean.	Polite	conversation	and	all	that.”

      “He	 made	polite	conversation	while	you	were	dripping	 wet?”	 Kate	asked
doubtfully.

      Edwina	took	 a	hesitant	sip,	then	nearly	gagged.	“What	is	in	this?”

      Kate	leaned	over	and	sniffed	at	the	contents.	“It	smells	a	bit	 like	licorice.
And	I	think	 I	see	a	raisin	at	the	bottom.”	But	as	she	sniffed,	she	thought	she
heard	rain	pattering	against	the	glass	of	the	window,	and	so	she	sat	back	up.	“Is
it	raining?”

      “I	 don’t	know,”	 Edwina	 said.	“It	 might	be.	It	was	rather	cloudy	when	the	sun
set	earlier.”	She	gave	the	glass	one	more	dubious	look,	then	set	it	back	on	the
table.	“If	 I	drink	 that,	I	know	it	will	 make	me	sicker,”	 she	stated.

      “But	 what	else	did	he	say?”	Kate	persisted,	getting	up	to	check	out	the
window.	She	pushed	the	curtain	aside	and	peered	out.	It	was	raining,	but	only
lightly,	 and	it	was	too	early	to	tell	whether	the	precipitation	 would	 be
accompanied	by	any	thunder	or	lightning.

      “Who,	 the	viscount?”

      Kate	thought	herself	a	saint	for	not	 shaking	her	sister	senseless.	“Yes,	the
viscount.”

      Edwina	shrugged,	clearly	not	as	interested	in	the	conversation	as	Kate.	“Not
much.	He	asked	for	my	welfare,	of	course.	Which	 was	only	reasonable,
considering	that	I	had	just	been	dunked	in	The	Serpentine.	Which,	I	might	 add,
was	perfectly	wretched.	Aside	from	 being	cold,	the	water	was	most	certainly	not
clean.”

      Kate	cleared	her	throat	and	sat	back	down,	preparing	to	ask	a	most
scandalous	question,	but	one	which,	in	her	opinion,	simply	had	to	be	asked.
Trying	to	keep	her	voice	devoid	 of	the	complete	and	total	fascination	that	was
coursing	through	her	veins,	she	asked,	“Did	he	make	any	untoward	advances?”

89
coursing	through	her	veins,	she	asked,	“Did	he	make	any	untoward	advances?”

      Edwina	lurched	back,	her	eyes	growing	round	 with	shock.	“Of	 course	not!”
she	exclaimed.	“He	was	a	perfect	gentleman.	Really,	I	don’t	 see	what	has	you	so
excited.	It	wasn’t	a	very	interesting	 conversation.	I	can’t	even	remember	half	of
what	was	said.”

      Kate	just	stared	at	her	sister,	unable	to	fathom	that	she	could	have	been
trapped	in	conversation	with	that	odious	rake	for	a	good	ten	minutes	and	it	didn’t
make	an	indelible	impression	on	her.	Much	to	her	own	everlasting	 dismay,	every
single	awful	word	 he’d	said	to	her	was	etched	permanently	on	her	brain.

      “By	 the	way,”	 Edwina	added,	“how	was	your	time	 with	Mr.	 Berbrooke?	It
took	you	nearly	an	hour	to	return.”

      Kate	shuddered	visibly.

      “That	 bad?”

      “I’m	  sure	he	will	make	some	woman	a	good	husband,”	Kate	said.	“Just	not
one	with	a	brain.”

      Edwina	let	 out	a	little	giggle.	 “Oh,	Kate,	you	 are	awful.”

      Kate	sighed.	“I	 know.	I	 know.	That	was	terribly	 cruel	of	me.	The	poor	man
hasn’t	an	unkind	bone	in	his	body.	It’s	 just	that—”

      “He	 hasn’t	an	intelligent	bone,	either,”	 Edwina	finished.

      Kate	raised	her	brows.	It	was	most	unlike	 Edwina	to	make	such	a	judgmental
comment.

      “I	 know,”	 Edwina	said	with	 a	sheepish	smile.	“Now	I	am	the	unkind	 one.	I
really	shouldn’t	 have	said	a	word,	but	truly,	I	thought	 I	would	perish	on	our
curricle	ride.”

      Kate	straightened	with	concern.	“Was	 he	a	dangerous	driver?”

      “Not	 at	all.	It	 was	his	conversation.”

      “Boring?”

90
      Edwina	nodded,	her	blue	eyes	slightly	bewildered.	 “He	was	so	hard	to
follow	 it	was	almost	fascinating	to	try	 to	figure	out	how	 his	mind	works.”	 She	let
out	a	stream	of	coughs,	then	added,	“But	it	made	my	brain	hurt.”

      “So	he’s	not	to	 be	your	perfect	scholar-husband?”	Kate	said	with	an
indulgent	smile.

      Edwina	coughed	some	more.	“I’m	 afraid	not.”

      “Maybe	 you	should	try	a	bit	 more	of	that	brew,”	 Kate	suggested,	motioning
to	the	lonely	mug	sitting	 on	Edwina’s	bedside	table.	“Cook	 swears	by	it.”

      Edwina	shook	her	head	violently.	 “It	 tastes	like	death.”

      Kate	waited	a	few	moments,	then	had	to	ask,	“Did	 the	viscount	say	anything
about	me?”

      “You?”

      “No,	 some	other	me,”	Kate	practically	 snapped.	“Of	course	me.	How	many
other	people	may	I	correctly	refer	to	as	‘me’?”

      “No	 need	to	get	upset	about	it.”

      “I’m	  not	upset—”

      “But	 actually,	no,	he	didn’t	 mention	you.”

      Kate	suddenly	felt	 upset.

      “He	 had	a	lot	to	say	about	Newton,	though.”

      Kate’s	lips	 parted	with	dismay.	It	 was	never	flattering	to	be	passed	over	for	a
dog.

      “I	 assured	him	that	Newton	is	truly	 the	perfect	pet,	and	that	I	was	not	at	all
angry	with	him,	 but	he	was	rather	charmingly	upset	on	my	behalf.”

      “How	 charming,”	 Kate	muttered.

      Edwina	grabbed	a	handkerchief	and	blew	her	nose.	“I	say,	Kate,	you’re
rather	interested	in	the	viscount.”

91
rather	interested	in	the	viscount.”

      “I	 did	spend	practically	the	entire	afternoon	trapped	in	conversation	with
him,”	Kate	 replied,	as	if	that	ought	to	explain	everything.

      “Good.	 Then	you’ve	had	a	chance	to	see	how	polite	and	charming	he	can	be.
He’s	very	wealthy,	 too.”	Edwina	 let	out	a	loud	sniffle,	 then	fumbled	around	for	a
fresh	handkerchief.	“And	 while	I	 don’t	think	 that	one	can	choose	a	husband
based	entirely	on	finances,	given	our	lack	of	funds,	I	would	 be	remiss	not	to
consider	it,	don’t	you	 think?”

      “Well…”	  Kate	hedged,	knowing	 that	Edwina	was	absolutely	correct	but	not
wanting	to	say	anything	that	might	 be	construed	as	approval	of	Lord	Bridgerton.

      Edwina	brought	 the	handkerchief	to	her	face	and	gave	her	nose	a	rather
unfeminine	blow.	 “I	think	 we	should	add	him	to	our	list,”	  she	said,	snuffling
over	the	words.

      “Our	 list,”	 Kate	echoed,	her	voice	strangled.

      “Yes,	 of	possible	matches.	I	think	he	and	I	would	suit	 very	well.”

      “But	 I	thought	you	 wanted	a	scholar!”

      “I	 did.	I	do.	But	 you	yourself	pointed	 out	the	unlikelihood	 of	my	finding	 a
true	scholar.	Lord	Bridgerton	 seems	intelligent	enough.	I’ll	 just	have	to	devise	a
way	to	discover	if	 he	likes	to	read.”

      “I’d	 be	surprised	if	 that	boor	can	read,”	Kate	muttered.

      “Kate	 Sheffield!”	 Edwina	 exclaimed	with	a	laugh.	“Did	 you	just	 say	what	I
think	you	said?”

      “No,”	 Kate	said	baldly,	 because	of	course	the	viscount	could	read.	But	he
was	just	so	awful	in	every	other	way.

      “You	 did,”	 Edwina	accused.	“You	are	the	worst,	Kate.”	 She	smiled.	“But
you	do	make	me	laugh.”

      A	low	 rumble	of	 distant	thunder	echoed	in	the	night,	and	Kate	forced	a	smile
on	her	face,	trying	not	to	flinch.	 She	was	usually	all	right	 when	the	thunder	and
lightning	were	far	 away.	It	was	only	when	they	came	one	on	top	of	each	other,

92
lightning	were	far	 away.	It	was	only	when	they	came	one	on	top	of	each	other,
and	both	seemingly	on	top	of	her,	that	she	felt	as	if	she	were	about	to	burst	from
her	skin.

      “Edwina,”	 Kate	 said,	needing	to	have	this	discussion	with	her	sister	but	also
needing	to	say	something	that	would	take	her	mind	off	the	approaching	storm,
“you	must	put	the	viscount	from	 your	mind.	 He	is	absolutely	not	the	sort	of
husband	who	would	make	you	happy.	Aside	from	 the	fact	that	he	is	the	worst
sort	of	rake	and	would	probably	flaunt	 a	dozen	mistresses	in	your	face—”

      At	 Edwina’s	frown,	 Kate	cut	off	 the	rest	of	her	sentence	and	decided	to
expand	upon	this	point.	“He	would!”	  she	said	with	great	drama.	“Haven’t	you
been	reading	Whistledown?	Or	listening	to	anything	any	of	the	other	young
ladies’	mamas	have	to	say?	The	ones	who	have	been	on	the	social	circuit	for
several	years	and	know	what’s	what.	They	all	say	he	is	a	terrible	rake.	That	his
only	saving	grace	is	how	nicely	he	treats	his	family.”

      “Well,	 that	would	 be	a	mark	in	his	favor,”	 Edwina	pointed	out.	“Since	 a	wife
would	be	family,	 yes?”

      Kate	nearly	groaned.	“A	 wife	 isn’t	the	same	as	a	blood	relative.	Men	who
would	never	dream	of	uttering	a	cross	word	in	front	 of	their	 mothers	trample	all
over	their	wives’	 feelings	every	day.”

      “And	 how	would	 you	know	this?”	 Edwina	demanded.

      Kate’s	mouth	 fell	open.	She	couldn’t	remember	the	last	time	Edwina	 had
questioned	her	judgment	on	an	important	matter,	and	unfortunately,	the	only
answer	she	could	think	of	on	such	short	notice	was,	“I	just	do.”

      Which,	 even	she	had	to	admit,	really	didn’t	pass	muster.

      “Edwina,”	 she	said	in	a	placating	voice,	deciding	 to	steer	the	topic	in	a
different	direction,	 “aside	from	all	 that,	I	don’t	 think	you	would	 even	like	the
viscount	if	you	 got	to	know	him.”

      “He	 seemed	pleasant	enough	while	driving	me	home.”

      “But	 he	was	on	his	best	behavior!”	Kate	persisted.	“Of	 course	he’d	seem
nice.	He	wants	you	to	fall	in	 love	with	 him.”

93
      Edwina	blinked.	 “So	you	think	 it	was	all	 an	act.”

      “Exactly!”	  Kate	exclaimed,	pouncing	 on	the	concept.	“Edwina,	between	last
night	and	this	afternoon,	I	spent	several	hours	in	his	company,	and	I	can	assure
you,	he	was	not	on	his	best	behavior	with	me.”

      Edwina	gasped	with	horror	 and	maybe	a	little	titillation.	 “Did	  he	kiss	you?”
she	breathed.

      “No!”	  Kate	howled.	“Of	 course	not!	Where	on	earth	would	you	 get	that
idea?”

      “You	 said	he	wasn’t	on	his	best	behavior.”

      “What	 I	meant,”	Kate	 ground	out,	“was	that	he	wasn’t	polite.	 Nor	was	he
very	nice.	In	fact,	he	was	insufferably	 arrogant	and	dreadfully	rude	and
insulting.”

      “That’s	 interesting,”	 Edwina	murmured.

      “It	 wasn’t	the	least	bit	interesting.	 It	was	horrible!”

      “No,	 that’s	not	what	I	 meant,”	Edwina	said,	thoughtfully	 scratching	her	chin.
“It’s	 very	odd	that	he	would	have	behaved	rudely	to	you.	He	must	have	heard
that	I	shall	be	looking	to	 your	judgment	when	I	choose	a	husband.	One	would
think	he’d	go	out	of	 his	way	to	be	nice	to	you.	Why,”	 she	mused,	“would	 he
behave	the	churl?”

      Kate’s	face	colored	a	dull	 red—thankfully	 not	so	noticeable	in	the
candlelight—as	she	muttered,	“He	said	he	couldn’t	help	himself.”

      Edwina’s	 mouth	fell	 open,	and	for	one	second	she	sat	utterly	frozen,	as	if
suspended	in	time.	Then	she	fell	back	onto	her	pillows,	hooting	with	 laughter.
“Oh,	Kate!”	 she	gasped.	“That	is	splendid!	Oh,	what	a	tangle.	Oh,	I	love	 it!”

      Kate	glared	at	her.	“It’s	 not	funny.”

      Edwina	wiped	 at	her	eyes.	“It	might	be	the	funniest	thing	 I’ve	heard	all
month.	All	 year!	Oh,	my	goodness.”	She	let	out	a	short	stream	of	coughs,
brought	on	by	her	laughing	fit.	 “Oh,	Kate,	 I	do	believe	you	might	 have	cleared
out	my	nose.”

94
out	my	nose.”

      “Edwina,	 that’s	disgusting.”

      Edwina	brought	 her	handkerchief	to	her	face	and	blew	her	nose.	“But	true,”
she	said	triumphantly.

      “It	 won’t	 last,”	Kate	muttered.	“You’ll	   be	sick	as	a	dog	by	morning.”

      “You’re	 probably	 right,”	 Edwina	agreed,	“but	oh,	what	fun.	 He	said	he
couldn’t	help	himself?	 Oh,	Kate,	that	is	just	rich.”

      “There	is	no	need	to	dwell	 on	it,”	 Kate	grumbled.

      “Do	 you	know,	but	 he	might	be	the	very	first	gentleman	we’ve	 met	all
season	you	haven’t	been	able	to	manage.”

      Kate’s	lips	 twisted	into	a	grimace.	The	viscount	had	used	the	same	word,
and	they	were	both	correct.	She’d	indeed	spent	the	season	managing	men—
managing	them	for	Edwina.	And	 she	suddenly	wasn’t	so	sure	she	liked	this	role
of	mother	hen	she’d	been	thrust	into.

      Or	maybe	she’d	thrust	herself	into	 it.

      Edwina	saw	the	play	of	 emotion	on	her	sister’s	face	and	immediately	turned
apologetic.	“Oh,	dear,”	 she	murmured.	“I’m	 sorry,	Kate.	I	didn’t	 mean	to	tease.”

      Kate	arched	a	brow.

      “Oh,	 very	well,	 I	did	mean	to	tease,	but	never	to	actually	hurt	your	feelings.	I
had	no	idea	Lord	Bridgerton	had	upset	you	so.”

      “Edwina,	 I	just	don’t	 like	 the	man.	And	I	don’t	 think	you	should	even
consider	marrying	him.	I	 don’t	care	how	ardently	or	 how	persistently	he	pursues
you.	He	will	 not	make	a	good	husband.”

      Edwina	was	silent	for	 a	moment,	her	magnificent	eyes	utterly	sober.	Then
she	said,	“Well,	if	 you	say	so,	it	must	be	true.	I	have	certainly	never	been	steered
wrong	by	your	judgment	 before.	And,	as	you	said,	you	have	spent	more	time	in
his	company	than	have	I,	so	you	would	know	better.”

      Kate	let	out	a	long	and	ill-disguised	 sigh	of	relief.	 “Good,”	 she	said	firmly.

95
      Kate	let	out	a	long	and	ill-disguised	 sigh	of	relief.	 “Good,”	 she	said	firmly.
“And	 when	you	are	feeling	more	the	thing,	we	shall	look	 among	your	current
suitors	for	a	better	match.”

      “And	 maybe	you	could	look	 for	a	husband,	too,”	Edwina	suggested.

      “Of	 course	I’m	 always	looking,”	 Kate	insisted.	“What	 would	be	the	point	of
a	London	season	if	I	weren’t	looking?”

      Edwina	looked	 dubious.	“I	don’t	 think	 you	are	looking,	 Kate.	I	think	 that	all
you	do	is	interview	 possibilities	for	 me.	And	there	is	no	reason	you	shouldn’t
find	a	husband	as	well.	You	need	a	family	of	 your	own.	I	certainly	 can’t	imagine
anyone	more	suited	to	be	a	mother	than	you.”

      Kate	bit	her	lip,	 not	wanting	to	 respond	directly	to	Edwina’s	 point.	Because
behind	those	lovely	blue	eyes	and	perfect	face,	Edwina	was	quite	the	most
perceptive	person	she	knew.	And	Edwina	was	right.	Kate	hadn’t	been	looking
for	a	husband.	But	why	should	she?	No	one	was	considering	her	for	marriage,
either.

      She	sighed,	glancing	toward	the	window.	 The	storm	seemed	to	have	passed
without	striking	 her	area	of	London.	She	supposed	she	ought	to	be	thankful	for
small	favors.

      “Why	 don’t	 we	see	about	you	first,”	Kate	finally	  said,	“since	I	think	 we	both
agree	that	you	are	more	likely	to	receive	a	proposal	before	I	do,	and	then	we’ll
think	about	my	prospects?”

      Edwina	shrugged,	and	Kate	knew	that	her	deliberate	silence	meant	that	she
did	not	agree.

      “Very	 well,”	 Kate	said,	rising	 to	her	feet.	“I’ll	  leave	you	to	your	rest.	I’m
sure	you’ll	need	it.”

      Edwina	coughed	as	a	reply.

      “And	 drink	 that	remedy!”	Kate	 said	with	a	laugh,	heading	out	the	door.

      As	she	shut	the	door	behind	her,	she	heard	Edwina	mutter,	“I’d	 rather	die.”
                                                                	

96
Four	days	later,	Edwina	was	dutifully	drinking	Cook’s	remedy,	although	not	without	considerable
grumbling	and	complaint.	Her	health	had	improved,	but	only	to	the	point	where	she	was	almost	better.	She
was	still	stuck	in	bed,	still	coughing,	and	very	irritable.

       Mary	 had	declared	 that	 Edwina	 could	 not	 attend	any	 social	 functions	  until
Tuesday	at	 the	earliest.	 Kate	 had	taken	 that	to	 mean	that	 they	all	 would	  receive	 a
respite	(because	 really,	 what	 was	the	 point	 of	attending	  a	ball	 without	  Edwina?),
but	after	 Kate	 spent	a	blessedly	 uneventful	  Friday,	  Saturday,	 and	Sunday	 with
nothing	 to	do	 but	read	 and	take	Newton	  for	 walks,	 Mary	  suddenly	 declared	 that
the	two	 of	them	 would	  attend	Lady	 Bridgerton’s	   musicale	 Monday	  evening,	 and
—

       (Kate	 tried	 to	interject	  a	vehement	 argument	 about	 why	 this	was	 not	a	good
idea	at	this	 point.)

       —that	 was	final.

       Kate	gave	 in	fairly	  quickly.	  There	 was	really	  no	point	 in	 arguing	 any	 further,
especially	 since	 Mary	 turned	 on	her	 heel	and	walked	  away	 directly	 after	 uttering
the	word,	 “final.”

       Kate	did	 have	 certain	 standards,	and	 they	included	  not	arguing	  with	 closed
doors.

       And	 so	Monday	 evening	  she	found	 herself	 dressed	in	 ice	blue	 silk,	 fan	 in
hand,	as	she	and	Mary	  rolled	 through	 the	 streets	of	 London	 in	 their	 inexpensive
carriage,	 on	their	 way	 to	Bridgerton	  House	 in	 Grosvenor	 Square.

       “Everyone	  will	 be	 very	 surprised	 to	see	us	without	  Edwina,”	  Kate	 said,	her
left	 hand	fiddling	  with	  the	black	 gauze	of	 her	cloak.

       “You	 are	looking	  for	 a	husband	 as	well,”	  Mary	 replied.

       Kate	held	 silent	 for	 a	moment.	 She	couldn’t	   very	well	  argue	that	 point,	 since,
after	all,	 it	 was	supposed	 to	be	true.

       “And	 stop	 crumpling	  your	 cloak,”	  Mary	 added.	 “It	 will	  be	wrinkled	  all
evening.”

       Kate’s	 hand	went	 limp.	  She	then	tapped	 the	right	 one	 rhythmically	   against
the	seat	for	 several	seconds,	 until	 Mary	  blurted	 out,	 “Good	 heavens,	 Kate,	 can’t
you	sit	 still?”

97
you	sit	still?”

      “You	 know	I	 can’t,”	 Kate	said.

      Mary	 just	sighed.

      After	 another	long	silence,	punctuated	only	by	the	tapping	of	her	foot,	 Kate
added,	“Edwina	will	 be	lonely	without	 us.”

      Mary	 didn’t	 even	bother	to	look	at	her	as	she	answered,	“Edwina	has	a	novel
to	read.	The	latest	by	that	Austen	woman.	She	won’t	even	notice	we’re	gone.”

      That	much	was	also	true.	Edwina	probably	wouldn’t	  notice	if	her	bed	caught
on	fire	while	 she	was	reading	a	book.

      So	Kate	said,	“The	music	will	  probably	be	dreadful.	After	 that	Smythe-
Smith	affair…”

      “The	 Smythe-Smith	musicale	was	performed	by	the	Smythe-Smith
daughters,”	Mary	replied,	her	voice	 starting	to	hold	an	edge	of	impatience.
“Lady	Bridgerton	 has	hired	a	professional	opera	singer,	visiting	from	 Italy.	We
are	honored	simply	to	receive	an	invitation.”

      Kate	knew	without	 a	doubt	that	the	invitation	 was	for	Edwina;	 she	and	Mary
were	surely	included	only	out	of	 politeness.	But	Mary’s	 teeth	were	beginning	to
clench	together,	and	so	Kate	vowed	to	hold	her	tongue	for	the	remainder	of	the
ride.

      Which	 wouldn’t	 be	so	difficult,	 after	all,	as	they	were	presently	rolling	 up	in
front	of	Bridgerton	 House.

      Kate’s	mouth	 dropped	open	as	she	looked	out	the	window.	“It’s	huge,”	 she
said	dumbly.

      “Isn’t	 it?”	 Mary	 replied,	gathering	her	things	together.	“I	 understand	that
Lord	Bridgerton	 doesn’t	live	there.	Even	though	it	 belongs	to	him,	he	remains	in
his	bachelor’s	lodgings	so	that	his	mother	and	siblings	may	reside	at	Bridgerton
House.	Isn’t	that	thoughtful	 of	him?”

      Thoughtful	and	Lord	 Bridgerton	 were	not	two	expressions	Kate	would	have

98
thought	to	use	in	the	same	sentence,	but	she	nodded	nonetheless,	too	awed	by	the
size	and	grace	of	the	stone	building	to	make	an	intelligent	comment.

      The	carriage	rolled	to	a	halt,	and	Mary	 and	Kate	were	helped	down	by	one	of
the	Bridgerton	footmen,	who	 rushed	to	open	the	door.	A	butler	took	their
invitation	 and	admitted	them,	taking	their	wraps	and	pointing	them	toward	 the
music	room,	which	was	just	at	the	end	of	the	hall.

      Kate	had	been	inside	enough	grand	London	homes	not	to	publicly	gape	at
the	obvious	wealth	and	beauty	of	the	furnishings,	but	even	she	was	impressed	by
the	interiors,	decorated	with	elegance	and	restraint	in	the	Adam	style.	Even	the
ceilings	were	works	of	art—done	 up	in	pale	shades	of	sage	and	blue,	the	colors
separated	by	white	plasterwork	so	intricate	it	almost	appeared	to	be	a	more	solid
form	of	lace.

      The	music	room	was	just	as	lovely,	 the	walls	painted	a	friendly	shade	of
lemon	yellow.	Rows	 of	chairs	had	been	set	up	for	attendees,	and	Kate	quickly
steered	her	stepmother	toward	the	back.	Truly,	there	could	be	no	reason	why
she’d	want	to	put	herself	in	a	noticeable	position.	Lord	 Bridgerton	 was	sure	to	be
in	attendance—if	all	the	tales	about	his	devotion	to	his	family	 were	true—and	if
Kate	was	lucky,	maybe	he	wouldn’t	 even	notice	her	presence.
                                                                	

Quite	to	the	contrary,	Anthony	knew	exactly	when	Kate	stepped	out	of	her	carriage	and	entered	his	family
home.	He	had	been	in	his	study,	having	a	solitary	drink	before	heading	down	to	his	mother’s	annual
musicale.	In	a	bid	for	privacy,	he’d	chosen	not	to	live	at	Bridgerton	House	while	still	a	bachelor,	but	he	did
keep	his	study	here.	His	position	as	head	of	the	Bridgerton	family	carried	with	it	serious	responsibilities,
and	Anthony	generally	found	it	easier	to	attend	to	these	responsibilities	while	in	close	proximity	to	the	rest
of	his	family.

      The	study’s	windows	 looked	out	over	Grosvenor	Square,	however,	and	so	he
had	been	amusing	himself	watching	the	carriages	arrive	and	the	guests	alight.
When	Kate	Sheffield	had	stepped	down,	she’d	looked	up	at	the	facade	of
Bridgerton	House,	tipping	 her	face	up	in	much	the	same	manner	she’d	done
while	enjoying	 the	warmth	of	the	sun	in	Hyde	Park.	The	light	 from	the	sconces
on	either	side	of	the	front	door	had	filtered	 onto	her	skin,	bathing	her	with	 a
flickering	 glow.

      And	Anthony’s	 breath	was	sucked	right	out	of	 him.

      His	glass	tumbler	landed	on	the	wide	windowsill	  with	a	heavy	thunk.	This
was	getting	ridiculous.	He	wasn’t	 self-delusional	enough	to	mistake	the

99
was	getting	ridiculous.	He	wasn’t	 self-delusional	enough	to	mistake	the
tightening	of	his	muscles	as	anything	other	than	desire.

      Bloody	 hell.	He	didn’t	 even	like	the	woman.	She	was	too	bossy,	too
opinionated,	too	quick	to	jump	 to	conclusions.	She	wasn’t	even	beautiful—at
least	not	compared	to	quite	a	few	of	the	ladies	flitting	 about	London	for	 the
season,	her	sister	most	especially	included.

      Kate’s	face	was	a	touch	too	long,	her	chin	a	hair	too	pointed,	her	eyes	a
shade	too	big.	Everything	about	her	was	too	some	thing.	Even	her	mouth,	which
vexed	him	to	no	end	with	its	endless	stream	of	insults	and	opinions,	was	too	full.
It	was	a	rare	event	when	she	actually	had	it	closed	and	was	treating	him	to	a
moment	of	blessed	silence,	but	if	he	happened	to	look	at	her	in	that	split	second
(for	surely	she	could	not	be	silent	for	much	 longer	than	that)	all	he	saw	were	her
lips,	full	 and	pouty,	and—provided	that	she	kept	them	shut	and	didn’t	actually
speak—eminently	kissable.

      Kissable?

      Anthony	 shuddered.	The	thought	of	kissing	Kate	Sheffield	 was	terrifying.	 In
fact,	the	mere	fact	that	he’d	even	thought	of	it	ought	to	be	enough	to	have	him
locked	up	in	an	asylum.

      And	yet…

      Anthony	 collapsed	in	a	chair.

      And	yet	 he’d	dreamed	about	her.

      It	had	happened	after	the	fiasco	at	The	Serpentine.	He’d	been	so	furious	with
her	he	could	barely	speak.	It	was	a	wonder	he’d	managed	to	say	anything	at	all
to	Edwina	during	the	short	ride	back	to	her	house.	Polite	conversation	was	all
he’d	been	able	to	get	out—mindless	words	so	familiar	they	tripped	 from	his
tongue	as	if	by	rote.

      A	blessing	indeed,	since	his	mind	most	definitely	 had	not	been	where	it
should	be:	on	Edwina,	his	future	wife.

      Oh,	she	hadn’t	agreed	to	marry	him.	He	hadn’t	 even	asked.	But	she	fit	his
requirements	for	a	wife	in	every	 possible	way;	he’d	already	decided	that	she
would	be	the	one	to	whom	he	would	finally	 propose	marriage.	She	was

100
would	be	the	one	to	whom	he	would	finally	 propose	marriage.	She	was
beautiful,	intelligent,	 and	even-tempered.	Attractive	without	 making	his	blood
rush.	They	would	spend	enjoyable	years	together,	but	he’d	never	fall	in	love
with	her.

      She	was	exactly	what	he	needed.

      And	yet…

      Anthony	 reached	for	his	drink	and	downed	the	rest	of	its	contents	in	one
gasping	gulp.

      And	yet	 he’d	dreamed	about	her	sister.

      He	tried	not	to	remember.	He	tried	 not	to	remember	the	details	of	the	dream
—the	heat	and	the	sweat	of	it—but	he’d	only	 had	this	one	drink	this	evening,
certainly	not	enough	to	impair	 his	memory.	And	although	he’d	 had	no	intention
of	having	more	than	this	one	drink,	the	concept	of	sliding	 into	mindless	oblivion
was	starting	to	sound	appealing.

      Anything	 would	 be	appealing	if	it	meant	he	wouldn’t	 remember.

      But	he	didn’t	 feel	like	 drinking.	 He’d	not	overimbibed	 in	years.	It	seemed
such	the	young	man’s	game,	not	at	all	attractive	as	one	neared	thirty.	Besides,
even	if	he	did	decide	to	seek	temporary	amnesia	in	a	bottle,	it	wouldn’t	 come
fast	enough	to	make	the	memory	of	her	go	away.

      Memory?	Ha.	 It	wasn’t	even	a	real	memory.	Just	a	dream,	he	reminded
himself.	Just	a	dream.

      He’d	 fallen	asleep	quickly	upon	returning	 home	that	evening.	He’d	stripped
naked	and	soaked	in	a	hot	bath	for	nearly	an	hour,	trying	to	remove	the	chill
from	his	bones.	He	hadn’t	been	completely	submerged	in	The	Serpentine	as	had
Edwina,	but	his	legs	had	been	soaked,	as	had	one	of	his	sleeves,	and	Newton’s
strategic	shake	had	guaranteed	that	not	one	inch	of	his	body	remained	warm
during	the	windy	 ride	home	in	the	borrowed	curricle.

      After	 his	bath	he’d	crawled	into	 bed,	not	particularly	caring	that	it	 was	still
light	outside,	and	would	be	for	 a	good	hour	yet.	He	was	exhausted,	and	he’d	had
every	intention	of	falling	 into	 a	deep,	dreamless	sleep,	not	to	be	awakened	until
the	first	streaks	of	dawn	touched	the	morning.

101
      But	sometime	in	 the	night,	his	body	had	grown	restless	and	hungry.	And	his
treacherous	mind	had	filled	with	 the	most	awful	of	images.	He’d	 watched	it	as	if
floating	near	the	ceiling,	and	yet	he	felt	everything—his	 body,	 naked,	moving
over	a	lithe	female	form;	his	 hands	stroking	and	squeezing	warm	flesh.	The
delectable	tangle	of	arms	and	legs,	the	musky	scent	of	two	bodies	in	love—it	had
all	been	there,	hot	and	vivid	in	his	mind.

      And	then	he’d	 shifted.	Just	the	tiniest	bit,	perhaps	to	kiss	the	faceless
woman’s	ear.	Except	as	he	moved	to	the	side,	she	was	no	longer	faceless.	First
appeared	a	thick	lock	of	dark	brown	hair,	softly	 curling	 and	tickling	 at	his
shoulder.	Then	he	moved	even	farther…

      And	he	saw	her.

      Kate	Sheffield.

      He’d	 awakened	in	an	instant,	sitting	bolt	upright	 in	bed	and	shaking	from	the
horror	of	it.	 It	had	been	the	most	vivid	erotic	dream	he’d	ever	experienced.

      And	his	worst	 nightmare.

      He’d	 felt	frantically	 around	the	sheets	with	one	of	his	hands,	terrified	that
he’d	find	the	proof	 of	his	passion.	God	help	him	if	 he’d	actually	ejaculated	while
dreaming	of	quite	the	most	awful	woman	 of	his	acquaintance.

      Thankfully,	 his	sheets	were	clean,	and	so,	with	beating	heart	and	heavy
breath,	he’d	lain	back	against	his	pillows,	his	 movements	slow	and	careful,	as	if
that	would	somehow	prevent	a	recurrence	of	the	dream.

      He’d	 stared	at	the	ceiling	for	hours,	first	conjugating	 Latin	verbs,	then
counting	to	a	thousand,	all	in	an	attempt	to	keep	his	brain	on	anything	but	Kate
Sheffield.

      And	amazingly,	 he’d	exorcised	her	image	from	his	brain	 and	fallen	asleep.

      But	now	 she	was	back.	Here.	In	his	home.

      It	was	a	terrifying	 thought.

      And	where	the	hell	 was	Edwina?	Why	hadn’t	she	accompanied	her	mother
and	sister?

102
and	sister?

      The	first	 strains	of	a	string	quartet	drifted	under	his	door,	discordant	and
jumbled,	no	doubt	the	warm-up	of	 the	musicians	his	mother	had	hired	to
accompany	Maria	Rosso,	the	latest	soprano	to	take	London	by	storm.

      Anthony	 certainly	hadn’t	 told	his	mother,	but	he	and	Maria	had	enjoyed	a
pleasant	interlude	the	last	time	she’d	been	in	town.	Maybe	he	ought	to	consider
renewing	their	friendship.	 If	the	sultry	 Italian	beauty	didn’t	 cure	what	ailed	him,
nothing	would.

      Anthony	 stood	and	straightened	his	shoulders,	aware	that	he	probably	looked
as	if	he	were	girding	himself	 for	battle.	Hell,	 that’s	how	he	felt.	Maybe,	 if	he	was
lucky,	he’d	be	able	to	avoid	Kate	Sheffield	 entirely.	 He	couldn’t	 imagine	she’d
go	out	of	her	way	to	engage	him	in	conversation.	She’d	made	it	abundantly	clear
that	she	held	him	in	just	as	much	esteem	as	he	did	her.

      Yes,	that’s	exactly	 what	he	would	do.	Avoid	 her.	How	difficult	  could	that
be?

103
Chapter	     6


Lady	Bridgerton’s	 musicale	proved	to	be	a	decidedly	musical	affair	 (not,	This
Author	assures	you,	always	the	norm	for	musicales).	The	guest	performer	was
none	other	than	Maria	Rosso,	the	Italian	 soprano	who	made	her	debut	in
London	two	years	ago	and	has	returned	after	a	brief	stint	 on	the	Vienna	stage.

      With	thick,	 sable	hair	and	flashing	dark	 eyes,	Miss	Rosso	proved	as	lovely	in
form	as	she	did	in	voice,	and	more	than	one	(indeed,	more	than	a	dozen)	of
society’s	so-called	gentlemen	found	it	difficult	 indeed	to	remove	their	eyes	from
her	person,	even	after	the	performance	had	concluded.

                                                     LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	27	APRIL	1814



Kate	 knew	the	minute	he	walked	 in	the	room.

      She	tried	to	tell	herself	it	 had	nothing	to	do	with	 a	heightened	awareness	of
the	man.	He	was	excruciatingly	handsome;	that	was	fact,	not	opinion.	She
couldn’t	imagine	 that	every	woman	didn’t	 notice	him	immediately.

      He	arrived	late.	Not	 very—the	soprano	couldn’t	 have	been	more	than	a
dozen	bars	into	her	piece.	But	late	enough	so	that	he	tried	to	be	quiet	as	he
slipped	into	a	chair	toward	the	front	 near	his	family.	Kate	remained	motionless
in	her	position	at	the	back,	fairly	 certain	that	he	didn’t	see	her	as	he	settled	in	for
the	performance.	He	didn’t	look	 her	way,	and	besides,	several	candles	had	been
snuffed,	leaving	the	room	bathed	in	a	dim,	romantic	glow.	 The	shadows	surely
obscured	her	face.

      Kate	tried	to	keep	her	eyes	on	Miss	Rosso	throughout	the	performance.
Kate’s	disposition	was	not	improved,	 however,	by	the	fact	that	the	singer	could
not	take	her	eyes	off	of	Lord	Bridgerton.	 At	 first	Kate	had	thought	she	must	be
imagining	Miss	 Rosso’s	fascination	with	the	viscount,	 but	by	the	time	the
soprano	was	halfway	done,	there	could	be	no	doubt.	Maria	Rosso	was	issuing
the	viscount	a	sultry	invitation	 with	 her	eyes.

      Why	 this	bothered	Kate	so	much,	she	didn’t	know.	After	 all,	it	 was	just
another	piece	of	proof	that	he	was	every	bit	the	licentious	rake	she’d	always

104
another	piece	of	proof	that	he	was	every	bit	the	licentious	rake	she’d	always
known	him	to	be.	She	should	have	felt	smug.	She	should	have	felt	vindicated.

      Instead,	all	she	felt	was	disappointment.	It	was	a	heavy,	uncomfortable
feeling	around	her	heart,	one	that	left	her	slumping	slightly	 in	her	chair.

      When	the	performance	was	done,	she	couldn’t	help	but	notice	that	the
soprano,	after	graciously	accepting	her	applause,	walked	brazenly	up	to	the
viscount	and	offered	him	one	of	those	seductive	smiles—the	sort	Kate	would
never	learn	to	do	if	she	had	a	dozen	opera	singers	trying	to	teach	her.	There	was
no	mistaking	what	the	singer	meant	by	that	smile.

      Good	heavens,	the	man	didn’t	even	need	to	chase	women.	They	practically
dropped	at	his	feet.

      It	was	disgusting.	Really,	 truly	disgusting.

      And	yet	Kate	 couldn’t	stop	watching.

      Lord	 Bridgerton	offered	the	opera	singer	a	mysterious	half-smile	 of	his	own.
Then	he	reached	out	and	actually	tucked	an	errant	lock	of	her	raven	hair	behind
her	ear.

      Kate	shivered.

      Now	 he	was	leaning	forward,	whispering	something	in	 her	ear.	Kate	felt	her
own	ears	straining	in	their	direction,	 even	though	it	was	quite	obviously
impossible	for	her	to	hear	a	thing	from	 so	far	away.

      But	still,	 was	it	truly	 a	crime	to	be	ravenously	curious?	And—

      Good	heavens,	did	he	just	kiss	her	neck?	Surely	he	wouldn’t	do	that	in	his
mother’s	home.	Well,	she	supposed	Bridgerton	House	was	technically	his	home,
but	his	mother	lived	here,	as	did	many	of	his	siblings.	 Truly,	the	man	should
know	better	than	that.	A	little	 decorum	in	the	company	of	his	family	 would	 not
be	remiss.

      “Kate?	Kate?”

      It	may	have	been	a	small	kiss,	just	a	feather-light	brush	of	his	lips	 against	the
opera	singer’s	skin,	but	it	was	still	 a	kiss.

105
      “Kate!”

      “Right!	 Yes?”	 Kate	nearly	jumped	half	a	foot	 as	she	whirled	around	to	face
Mary,	who	was	watching	 her	with	a	decidedly	irritated	 expression.

      “Stop	watching	 the	viscount,”	 Mary	hissed.

      “I	 wasn’t—well,	 all	 right,	I	 was,	but	did	you	see	him?”	Kate	whispered
urgently.	“He’s	 shameless.”

      She	looked	back	over	at	him.	He	was	still	 flirting	 with	 Maria	Rosso,	and	he
obviously	didn’t	 care	who	saw	them.

      Mary’s	 lips	pursed	into	a	tight	 line	before	she	said,	“I’m	 sure	his	behavior
isn’t	any	of	our	 business.”

      “Of	 course	it’s	our	business.	He	wants	to	marry	Edwina.”

      “We	 don’t	know	 that	for	sure.”

      Kate	thought	back	over	her	conversations	with	 Lord	Bridgerton.	 “I’d	 say	it’s
a	very,	very	good	bet.”

      “Well,	 stop	watching	 him.	I’m	 certain	he	wants	nothing	to	do	with	 you	after
that	fiasco	in	Hyde	Park.	And	besides,	there	are	any	number	of	eligible
gentlemen	here.	You’d	do	well	 to	stop	thinking	of	 Edwina	all	the	time	 and	start
looking	around	for	 yourself.”

      Kate	felt	 her	shoulders	sag.	The	mere	thought	of	trying	to	attract	a	suitor	was
exhausting.	They	were	all	interested	in	Edwina,	anyway.	And	 even	though	she
wanted	nothing	to	do	with	 the	viscount,	it	still	 stung	when	Mary	said	she	was
certain	he	wanted	nothing	to	do	with	 her.

      Mary	 grasped	her	arm	with	a	grip	that	brooked	no	protest.	“Come	now,
Kate,”	she	said	quietly.	“Let	 us	go	forward	to	greet	our	hostess.”

      Kate	swallowed.	 Lady	Bridgerton?	She	had	to	meet	Lady	Bridgerton?	The
viscount’s	mother?	It	was	hard	enough	to	believe	that	a	creature	such	as	he	even
had	a	mother.

      But	manners	were	manners,	and	no	matter	how	much	Kate	would	have	liked

106
      But	manners	were	manners,	and	no	matter	how	much	Kate	would	have	liked
to	slip	out	into	the	hall	 and	depart,	she	knew	she	must	thank	her	hostess	for
staging	such	a	lovely	performance.

      And	it	 had	been	lovely.	Much	as	Kate	was	loath	to	admit	it,	 especially	while
the	woman	in	question	was	hanging	all	over	the	viscount,	Maria	 Rosso	did
possess	the	voice	of	an	angel.

      With	 Mary’s	 arm	firmly	 guiding	 her,	Kate	reached	the	front	of	the	room	and
waited	her	turn	to	meet	the	viscountess.	She	seemed	a	lovely	woman,	with	fair
hair	and	light	eyes,	and	rather	petite	to	have	mothered	such	large	sons.	The	late
viscount	must	have	been	a	tall	man,	Kate	decided.

      Finally	 they	reached	the	front	of	the	small	crowd,	and	the	viscountess
grasped	Mary’s	hand.	“Mrs.	 Sheffield,”	 she	said	warmly,	“what	a	delight	 to	see
you	again.	I	so	enjoyed	our	meeting	at	the	Hartside	ball	last	week.	I	am	very	glad
you	decided	to	accept	my	invitation.”

      “We	 would	not	dream	of	spending	the	evening	anywhere	else,”	Mary
replied.	“And	 may	I	present	my	daughter?”	She	motioned	to	Kate,	who	stepped
forward	and	bobbed	a	dutiful	curtsy.

      “It	 is	a	pleasure	to	meet	you,	Miss	Sheffield,”	 Lady	Bridgerton	 said.

      “And	 I	am	likewise	 honored,”	Kate	replied.

      Lady	Bridgerton	 motioned	to	a	young	lady	 at	her	side.	“And	this	is	my
daughter,	Eloise.”

      Kate	smiled	warmly	 at	the	girl,	 who	looked	to	be	about	the	same	age	as
Edwina.	Eloise	Bridgerton	 had	the	exact	same	color	hair	as	her	older	brothers,
and	her	face	was	lit	by	a	friendly,	wide	 smile.	Kate	liked	 her	instantly.

      “How	 do	you	do,	Miss	 Bridgerton,”	 Kate	said.	“Is	this	 your	first	season?”

      Eloise	nodded.	“I’m	 not	officially	  out	until	 next	year,	but	my	mother	has
been	allowing	me	to	attend	functions	here	at	Bridgerton	House.”

      “How	 lucky	 for	you,”	 Kate	replied.	“I	 should	have	loved	to	have	attended	a
few	parties	last	year.	Everything	was	so	new	when	I	arrived	in	 London	this
spring.	The	mind	boggles	at	the	simple	attempt	to	remember	everyone’s	name.”

107
      Eloise	grinned.	“Actually,	  my	sister	Daphne	came	out	two	years	ago,	and
she	always	described	everyone	and	everything	to	me	in	such	detail,	I	feel	as	if	I
already	recognize	almost	everyone.”

      “Daphne	is	your	 eldest	daughter?”	Mary	asked	Lady	Bridgerton.

      The	viscountess	nodded.	“She	married	the	Duke	of	Hastings	last	year.”

      Mary	 smiled.	“You	 must	have	been	delighted.”

      “Indeed.	He	is	a	duke,	but	more	importantly,	 he	is	a	good	man	and	loves	my
daughter.	I	only	hope	the	rest	of	my	children	make	such	excellent	matches.”
Lady	Bridgerton	 cocked	her	head	slightly	to	the	side	and	turned	back	to	Kate.	“I
understand,	Miss	Sheffield,	that	your	sister	was	not	able	to	attend	this	evening.”

      Kate	fought	a	groan.	Clearly	 Lady	Bridgerton	 was	already	pairing	up
Anthony	and	Edwina	for	 a	walk	down	the	aisle.	“I’m	  afraid	she	caught	a	chill
last	week.”

      “Nothing	 serious,	I	hope?”	the	viscountess	said	to	Mary,	in	 a	rather	mother-
to-mother	sort	of	tone.

      “No,	 not	at	all,”	 Mary	replied.	 “In	fact,	 she	is	nearly	back	to	sorts.	But	I
thought	she	should	have	one	more	day	of	recuperation	before	venturing	out.	It
would	not	do	for	 her	to	suffer	a	relapse.”

      “No,	 of	course	not.”	Lady	 Bridgerton	paused,	then	smiled.	“Well,	 that	is	too
bad.	I	was	so	looking	forward	to	 meeting	her.	Edwina	is	her	name,	yes?”

      Kate	and	Mary	both	 nodded.

      “I’ve	 heard	she	is	lovely.”	 But	even	as	Lady	Bridgerton	 said	the	words,	she
was	glancing	at	her	son—who	was	flirting	 madly	with	 the	Italian	opera	singer—
and	frowning.

      Kate	felt	 something	very	uneasy	in	her	stomach.	According	to	recent	issues
of	Whistledown,	Lady	Bridgerton	 was	on	a	mission	to	get	her	son	married	off.
And	while	 the	viscount	didn’t	 seem	the	sort	of	man	to	bend	to	his	mother’s	will
(or	anyone’s,	for	that	matter),	Kate	had	a	feeling	that	Lady	 Bridgerton	would	 be
able	to	exert	quite	a	bit	of	pressure	if	she	so	chose.

108
      After	 a	few	more	moments	of	polite	chatter,	Mary	 and	Kate	left	Lady
Bridgerton	to	greet	the	rest	of	her	guests.	They	were	soon	accosted	by	Mrs.
Featherington,	who,	as	the	mother	of	three	unmarried	young	women	herself,
always	had	a	lot	to	say	to	Mary	on	a	wide	variety	 of	topics.	But	as	the	stout
woman	bore	down	on	them,	her	eyes	were	focused	firmly	on	Kate.

      Kate	immediately	 began	to	assess	possible	escape	routes.

      “Kate!”	  Mrs.	Featherington	boomed.	She	had	long	since	declared	herself	on
a	first-name	basis	with	the	Sheffields.	“What	 a	surprise	to	see	you	here.”

      “And	 why	is	 that,	Mrs.	Featherington?”	Kate	asked,	puzzled.

      “Surely	 you	read	Whistledown	this	morning.”

      Kate	smiled	weakly.	 It	was	either	that	or	wince.	“Oh,	 you	mean	that	little
incident	involving	 my	dog?”

      Mrs.	Featherington’s	 brows	rose	a	good	half	inch.	“From	 what	I	hear,	it	was
more	than	a	‘little	 incident.’	”

      “It	 was	of	little	 consequence,”	Kate	said	firmly,	 although	truth	be	told,	she
was	finding	it	 difficult	 not	to	growl	 at	the	meddlesome	woman.	“And	 I	must	say
I	resent	Lady	Whistledown	 referring	to	Newton	 as	a	dog	of	indeterminate	breed.
I’ll	 have	you	know	he	is	a	full-blooded	 corgi.”

      “It	 was	truly	of	 no	matter,”	Mary	 said,	finally	 coming	to	Kate’s	 defense.
“I’m	 surprised	it	even	warranted	a	mention	in	the	column.”

      Kate	offered	Mrs.	 Featherington	her	blandest	smile,	fully	 aware	that	both	she
and	Mary	were	lying	 through	their	teeth.	Dunking	 Edwina	(and	nearly	dunking
Lord	Bridgerton)	 in	The	Serpentine	was	not	an	incident	of	“little	  consequence,”
but	if	Lady	 Whistledown	hadn’t	 seen	fit	to	report	the	full	 details,	Kate	certainly
wasn’t	about	to	fill	 the	gap.

      Mrs.	Featherington	opened	her	mouth,	a	sharp	intake	of	breath	telling	Kate
that	she	was	preparing	to	launch	into	a	lengthy	monologue	on	the	topic	of	the
importance	of	good	deportment	(or	good	manners,	or	good	breeding,	or	good
whatever	the	day’s	topic	was),	so	Kate	quickly	 blurted	out,	“May	 I	fetch	 you	two
some	lemonade?”

109
      The	two	matrons	said	yes	and	thanked	her,	and	Kate	slipped	away.	Once	she
returned,	however,	she	smiled	innocently	and	said,	“But	I	 have	only	two	hands,
so	now	I	must	return	for	a	glass	for	myself.”

      And	with	 that,	she	took	her	leave.

      She	stopped	briefly	at	the	lemonade	table,	just	in	case	Mary	was	looking,
then	darted	out	of	the	room	and	into	the	hall,	where	she	sank	onto	a	cushioned
bench	about	ten	yards	from	the	music	room,	eager	to	get	a	bit	of	air.	Lady
Bridgerton	had	left	the	music	room’s	 French	doors	open	to	the	small	garden	at
the	back	of	the	house,	but	it	was	such	a	crush	that	the	air	was	stifling,	even	with
the	slight	breeze	from	outside.

      She	remained	where	she	sat	for	several	minutes,	more	than	pleased	that	the
other	guests	had	not	chosen	to	spill	out	into	the	hall.	But	then	she	heard	one
particular	voice	rise	slightly	 above	the	low	rumble	 of	the	crowd,	followed	 by
decidedly	musical	laughter,	and	Kate	realized	with	 horror	that	Lord	Bridgerton
and	his	would-be	mistress	were	leaving	the	music	room	and	entering	the	hall.

      “Oh,	 no,”	she	groaned,	trying	to	keep	her	voice	to	herself.	The	last	thing	she
wanted	was	for	the	viscount	to	stumble	across	her	sitting	alone	in	the	hall.	She
knew	she	was	by	herself	by	choice,	but	he’d	probably	think	 she’d	fled	the
gathering	because	she	was	a	social	failure	and	all	the	ton	shared	his	opinion	of
her—that	she	was	an	impertinent,	unattractive	menace	to	society.

      Menace	to	society?	Kate’s	teeth	clamped	together.	It	would	 take	a	long,	long
time	before	she’d	forgive	him	 that	insult.

      But	still,	 she	was	tired,	and	she	didn’t	feel	like	 facing	him	just	then,	so	she
hitched	up	her	skirts	by	a	few	inches	to	save	her	from	tripping	 and	ducked	into
the	doorway	next	to	her	bench.	With	any	luck,	 he	and	his	paramour	would	walk
on	by,	and	she	could	scoot	back	into	the	music	room,	no	one	being	the	wiser.

      Kate	looked	around	quickly	 as	she	shut	the	door.	There	was	a	lighted	lantern
on	a	desk,	and	as	her	eyes	adjusted	to	the	dimness,	she	realized	she	was	in	some
sort	of	office.	The	walls	 were	lined	with	 books,	although	not	enough	for	this	to
be	the	Bridgertons’	library,	 and	the	room	was	dominated	by	a	massive	oak	desk.
Papers	lay	on	top	in	neat	piles,	and	a	quill	and	inkpot	still	 sat	on	the	blotter.

      Clearly	 this	office	was	not	just	for	 show.	Someone	actually	worked	here.

110
      Kate	wandered	toward	the	desk,	her	curiosity	getting	the	better	of	 her,	and
idly	ran	her	fingers	along	the	wooden	rim.	 The	air	still	 smelled	faintly	 of	ink,
and	maybe	the	slightest	hint	of	pipe	smoke.

      All	 in	all,	 she	decided,	it	was	a	lovely	room.	Comfortable	and	practical.	 A
person	could	spend	hours	here	in	lazy	contemplation.

      But	just	as	Kate	leaned	back	against	the	desk,	savoring	her	quiet	solitude,
she	heard	an	awful	sound.

      The	click	 of	a	doorknob.

      With	 a	frantic	gasp,	she	dove	under	the	desk,	squeezing	herself	into	the
empty	cube	of	space	and	thanking	the	heavens	that	the	desk	was	completely
solid,	rather	than	the	sort	that	rested	on	four	spindly	legs.

      Barely	breathing,	she	listened.

      “But	 I	had	heard	this	would	be	the	year	we	would	finally	  see	the	notorious
Lord	Bridgerton	 fall	into	 the	parson’s	mousetrap,”	came	a	lilting	feminine	 voice.

      Kate	bit	her	lip.	 It	was	a	lilting	 feminine	 voice	with	 an	Italian	 accent.

      “And	 where	did	you	hear	that?”	came	the	unmistakable	voice	of	the
viscount,	followed	 by	another	awful	click	 of	the	doorknob.

      Kate	shut	her	eyes	in	agony.	She	was	trapped	in	the	office	with	a	pair	of
lovers.	Life	simply	 could	not	get	any	worse	than	this.

      Well,	 she	could	be	discovered.	That	would	be	worse.	Funny	how	that	didn’t
make	her	feel	much	better	about	her	present	predicament,	though.

      “It	 is	all	over	town,	 my	lord,”	 Maria	 replied.	“Everyone	 is	saying	you	have
decided	to	settle	down	and	choose	a	bride.”

      There	was	a	silence,	but	Kate	could	swear	she	could	hear	him	shrug.

      Some	footsteps,	most	probably	drawing	the	lovers	closer	together,	then
Bridgerton	murmured,	“It	 is	probably	 past	time.”

      “You	 are	breaking	my	heart,	did	you	know	 that?”

111
      “You	 are	breaking	my	heart,	did	you	know	 that?”

      Kate	thought	she	might	gag.

      “Now,	 now,	my	 sweet	signorina”—the	sound	of	lips	 on	skin—“we	 both
know	that	your	heart	is	impervious	 to	any	of	my	machinations.”

      Next	came	a	rustling	sound,	which	 Kate	took	to	be	Maria	pulling	 coyly
away,	followed	by,	 “But	 I	am	not	inclined	for	 a	dalliance,	my	lord.	 I	do	not	look
for	marriage,	of	course—that	would	 be	most	foolish.	But	when	I	 next	choose	a
protector,	it	shall	be	for,	shall	 we	say,	the	long	term.”

      Footsteps.	Perhaps	Bridgerton	was	closing	the	distance	between	them	again?

      His	voice	 was	low	and	husky	as	he	said,	“I	fail	to	 see	the	problem.”

      “Your	 wife	 may	see	a	problem.”

      Bridgerton	 chuckled.	“The	only	 reason	to	give	up	one’s	mistress	is	if	one
happens	to	love	one’s	wife.	And	as	I	do	not	intend	to	choose	a	wife	with	 whom	I
might	fall	 in	love,	I	 see	no	reason	to	deny	myself	the	pleasures	of	a	lovely
woman	like	you.”

      And	you	want	to	marry	 Edwina?	It	 was	all	Kate	could	do	not	to	scream.
Truly,	if	 she	weren’t	squatting	like	 a	frog	with	her	hands	wrapped	around	her
ankles,	she	probably	would	have	emerged	like	a	Fury	and	tried	to	murder	the
man.

      Then	followed	 a	few	unintelligible	 sounds,	which	Kate	 dearly	prayed	were
not	the	prelude	to	something	considerably	more	intimate.	After	 a	moment,
though,	the	viscount’s	voice	emerged	clearly.	“Would	 you	 care	for	something	to
drink?”

      Maria	murmured	 her	assent,	and	Bridgerton’s	forceful	stride	echoed	along
the	floor,	growing	 closer	and	closer,	until…

      Oh,	no.

      Kate	spied	the	decanter,	sitting	on	the	windowsill,	 directly	 opposite	her
hiding	spot	under	the	desk.	If	he	just	kept	his	face	to	the	window	 as	he	poured,
she	might	escape	detection,	but	if	he	turned	so	much	as	halfway…

112
      She	froze.	Utterly	 froze.	Completely	stopped	breathing.

      Eyes	wide	and	unblinking	 (could	eyelids	make	a	sound?)	she	watched	with
utter	and	complete	horror	as	Bridgerton	came	into	view,	his	athletic	 frame
displayed	to	surprising	benefit	from	 her	vantage	point	on	the	floor.

      The	tumblers	clinked	 slightly	 together	as	he	set	them	down,	then	he	pulled
the	stopper	from	the	decanter	and	poured	two	fingers	of	amber	liquid	into	 each
glass.

      Don’t	 turn	around.	 Don’t	 turn	around.

      “Is	 everything	all	right?”	 Maria	 called	out.

      “Perfect,”	 Bridgerton	 answered,	although	he	sounded	vaguely	distracted.	He
lifted	the	glasses,	humming	slightly	 to	himself	as	his	body	slowly	 began	to	turn.

      Keep	walking.	Keep	walking.	 If	he	walked	away	from	 her	while	 he	turned,
he’d	go	back	to	Maria	and	she’d	be	safe.	But	if	he	turned,	and	then	walked,	Kate
was	as	good	as	dead.

      And	she	had	no	doubt	that	he	would	kill	 her.	Frankly,	she	was	surprised	he
hadn’t	made	an	attempt	last	week	at	The	Serpentine.

      Slowly,	 he	turned.	And	turned.	And	didn’t	 walk.

      And	Kate	 tried	to	think	 of	all	the	reasons	why	dying	at	the	age	of	twenty-one
was	really	not	such	a	bad	thing.
                                                                	

Anthony	knew	quite	well	why	he’d	brought	Maria	Rosso	back	to	his	study.	Surely	no	warm-blooded	man
could	be	immune	to	her	charms.	Her	body	was	lush,	her	voice	was	intoxicating,	and	he	knew	from
experience	that	her	touch	was	equally	potent.

      But	even	as	he	took	in	that	silky	 sable	hair	and	those	full,	pouting	lips,	even
as	his	muscles	tightened	at	the	memory	of	other	full,	pouting	parts	of	her	body,
he	knew	that	he	was	using	her.

      He	felt	 no	guilt	that	he	would	be	using	her	for	 his	own	pleasure.	In	that
regard,	she	was	using	him	as	well.	And	she	at	least	would	be	compensated	for	it,
whereas	he	would	be	out	several	jewels,	a	quarterly	allowance,	and	the	rent	on	a
fashionable	townhouse	in	a	fashionable	(but	not	too	fashionable)	part	of	town.

113
fashionable	townhouse	in	a	fashionable	(but	not	too	fashionable)	part	of	town.

      No,	if	 he	felt	uneasy,	if	he	felt	frustrated,	 if	he	felt	like	 he	wanted	to	put	his
damned	fist	through	a	brick	wall,	 it	was	because	he	was	using	Maria	to	banish
the	nightmare	that	was	Kate	Sheffield	from	 his	mind.	He	never	wanted	to	wake
up	hard	and	tortured	again,	knowing	that	Kate	Sheffield	 was	the	cause.	He
wanted	to	drown	himself	in	 another	woman	until	the	very	memory	 of	the	dream
dissolved	and	faded	into	nothingness.

      Because	God	knew	he	was	never	going	to	act	on	that	particular	erotic
fantasy.	He	didn’t	even	like	Kate	 Sheffield.	The	thought	of	 bedding	her	made
him	break	out	in	a	cold	sweat,	even	as	it	swirled	a	ripple	of	 desire	right	through
his	gut.

      No,	the	only	 way	that	dream	was	going	to	come	true	was	if	he	were	delirious
with	fever…and	maybe	she’d	have	to	be	delirious	as	well…and	 perhaps	they
would	both	have	to	be	stranded	on	a	desert	isle,	or	sentenced	to	be	executed	in
the	morning,	or…

      Anthony	 shuddered.	It	simply	wasn’t	 going	to	happen.

      But	bloody	 hell,	the	woman	must	have	bewitched	him.	There	could	 be	no
other	explanation	for	the	dream—no,	make	that	a	nightmare—and	besides	that,
even	now	he	could	swear	that	he	could	smell	her.	It	was	that	maddening
combination	of	lilies	 and	soap,	that	beguiling	scent	that	had	washed	over	him
while	they	were	out	in	 Hyde	Park	last	week.

      Here	he	was,	pouring	a	glass	of	the	finest	whiskey	for	 Maria	Rosso,	one	of
the	few	women	of	his	acquaintance	who	knew	how	to	appreciate	both	a	fine
whiskey	and	the	devilish	intoxication	 that	followed,	 and	all	he	could	smell	 was
the	damned	scent	of	Kate	Sheffield.	He	knew	she	was	in	the	house—and	he	was
half	ready	to	kill	 his	mother	for	 that—but	this	was	ridiculous.

      “Is	 everything	all	right?”	 Maria	 called	out.

      “Perfect,”	 Anthony	 said,	his	voice	sounding	tight	to	his	ears.	He	began	to
hum,	something	he’d	always	done	to	relax	himself.

      He	turned	and	started	to	take	a	step	forward.	Maria	was	waiting	for	 him,
after	all.

114
      But	there	was	that	damned	scent	again.	Lilies.	He	could	swear	it	was	lilies.
And	soap.	The	lilies	were	intriguing,	 but	the	soap	made	sense.	A	practical	sort	of
woman	like	Kate	Sheffield	 would	scrub	herself	clean	with	 soap.

      His	foot	 hesitated	in	midair,	and	his	step	forward	proved	to	be	a	small	one
instead	of	his	usual	long	stride.	He	couldn’t	 quite	escape	the	smell,	and	he	kept
turning,	his	nose	instinctively	 twisting	 his	eyes	toward	where	he	knew	there
couldn’t	be	lilies,	 and	yet	the	scent	was,	impossibly,	there.

      And	then	he	saw	her.

      Under	his	desk.

      It	was	impossible.

      Surely	this	was	a	nightmare.	Surely	if	 he	closed	his	eyes	and	opened	them
again,	she’d	be	gone.

      He	blinked.	 She	was	still	there.

      Kate	Sheffield,	 the	most	maddening,	irritating,	 diabolical	woman	in	 all
England,	was	crouching	like	a	frog	under	his	desk.

      It	was	a	wonder	he	didn’t	 drop	the	whiskey.

      Their	eyes	met,	and	he	saw	hers	widen	with	panic	and	fright.	Good,	he
thought	savagely.	She	should	be	frightened.	He	was	going	to	tan	her	bloody	hide
until	her	hide	was	bloody	well	 bloody.

      What	the	hell	was	she	doing	here?	Wasn’t	dousing	him	with	 the	filthy	 water
of	The	Serpentine	enough	for	her	bloodthirsty	spirit?	 Wasn’t	she	satisfied	with
her	attempts	to	stymie	his	courtship	of	her	sister?	Did	she	need	to	spy	on	him	as
well?

      “Maria,”	  he	said	smoothly,	moving	forward	 toward	the	desk	until	he	was
stepping	on	Kate’s	hand.	He	didn’t	step	hard,	but	he	heard	her	squeak.

      This	gave	him	immense	satisfaction.

      “Maria,”	  he	repeated,	“I	have	suddenly	remembered	an	urgent	matter	of

115
business	that	must	be	dealt	with	immediately.”

      “This	 very	night?”	 she	asked,	sounding	quite	dubious.

      “I’m	  afraid	so.	Euf!”

      Maria	blinked.	 “Did	 you	just	 grunt?”

      “No,”	 Anthony	 lied,	trying	 not	to	choke	on	the	word.	 Kate	had	removed	her
glove	and	wrapped	her	hand	around	his	knee,	digging	her	nails	straight	through
his	breeches	and	into	his	skin.	Hard.

      At	 least	he	hoped	it	was	her	nails.	It	could	have	been	her	teeth.

      “Are	 you	sure	there	is	nothing	amiss?”	Maria	inquired.

      “Nothing…at”—whatever	  body	 part	Kate	was	sinking	into	his	leg	 sank	a
little	farther—“all!”	   The	last	word	came	out	as	more	of	a	howl,	and	he	kicked	his
foot	forward,	 connecting	with	something	he	had	a	sneaking	suspicion	was	her
stomach.

      Normally,	 Anthony	 would	die	before	striking	 a	woman,	but	this	truly
seemed	to	be	an	exceptional	case.	In	fact,	he	took	not	a	little	bit	of	pleasure	in
kicking	her	while	 she	was	down.

      She	was	biting	his	leg,	after	all.

      “Allow	  me	to	walk	you	 to	the	door,”	he	said	to	Maria,	shaking	Kate	off	 his
ankle.

      But	Maria’s	 eyes	were	curious,	and	she	took	a	few	steps	forward.	“Anthony,
is	there	an	animal	under	your	desk?”

      Anthony	 let	out	a	bark	of	laughter.	“You	 could	say	that.”

      Kate’s	fist	 came	down	on	his	foot.

      “Is	 it	a	dog?”

      Anthony	 seriously	considered	answering	in	the	affirmative,	 but	even	he	was
not	that	cruel.	Kate	obviously	 appreciated	his	uncharacteristic	tact,	because	she
let	go	of	his	leg.

116
let	go	of	his	leg.

      Anthony	 took	advantage	of	his	release	to	quickly	step	out	from	behind	the
desk.	“Would	I	 be	unforgivably	 rude,”	he	asked,	striding	to	Maria’s	 side	and
taking	her	arm,	“if	 I	merely	 walked	you	to	the	door	and	not	back	to	the	music
room?”

      She	laughed,	a	low,	sultry	sound	that	should	have	seduced	him.	“I	am	a
grown	woman,	my	lord.	 I	believe	I	can	manage	the	short	distance.”

      “Forgive	 me?”

      She	stepped	through	the	door	he	held	open	for	her.	“I	suspect	there	isn’t	a
woman	alive	who	could	deny	you	 forgiveness	for	that	smile.”

      “You	 are	a	rare	woman,	Maria	Rosso.”

      She	laughed	again.	“But	not,	apparently,	rare	enough.”

      She	floated	out,	and	Anthony	shut	the	door	with	 a	decisive	click.	Then,	some
devil	on	his	shoulder	surely	prodding	 him,	he	turned	the	key	in	the	lock	and
pocketed	it.

      “You,”	  he	boomed,	eliminating	the	distance	to	the	desk	in	four	long	strides.
“Show	yourself.”

      When	Kate	didn’t	 scramble	out	quickly	 enough,	he	reached	down,	clamped
his	hand	around	her	upper	arm,	and	hauled	her	to	her	feet.

      “Explain	 yourself,”	 he	hissed.

      Kate’s	legs	nearly	buckled	 as	the	blood	rushed	back	to	her	knees,	which	had
been	bent	for	nearly	a	quarter	of	an	hour.	“It	was	an	accident,”	she	said,	grabbing
on	to	the	edge	of	the	desk	for	support.

      “Funny	 how	those	words	seem	to	emerge	from	your	mouth	with	startling
frequency.”

      “It’s	 true!”	 she	protested.	“I	was	sitting	in	 the	hall,	and—”	 She	gulped.	He
had	stepped	forward	and	was	now	very,	very	close.	“I	was	sitting	 in	the	hall,”
she	said	again,	her	voice	sounding	crackly	and	hoarse,	“and	I	heard	you	coming.

117
she	said	again,	her	voice	sounding	crackly	and	hoarse,	“and	I	heard	you	coming.
I	was	just	trying	to	 avoid	you.”

      “And	 so	you	invaded	my	private	office?”

      “I	 didn’t	 know	it	 was	your	office.	I—”	  Kate	sucked	in	her	breath.	He’d
moved	even	closer,	his	crisp,	wide	lapels	now	only	inches	from	 the	bodice	of	her
dress.	She	knew	his	proximity	was	deliberate,	that	he	sought	to	intimidate	rather
than	seduce,	but	that	didn’t	do	anything	to	quell	the	frantic	 beating	of	her	heart.

      “I	 think	perhaps	you	did	know	 that	this	was	my	office,”	 he	murmured,
letting	his	forefinger	 trail	down	 the	side	of	her	cheek.	“Perhaps	you	did	not	seek
to	avoid	me	at	all.”

      Kate	swallowed	 convulsively,	long	 past	the	point	of	trying	 to	maintain	her
composure.

      “Mmmm?”	  His	finger	 slid	along	the	line	of	 her	jaw.	“What	 do	you	say	to
that?”

      Kate’s	lips	 parted,	but	she	couldn’t	have	uttered	a	word	if	her	life	 had
depended	on	it.	He	wore	no	gloves—he	must	have	removed	them	during	his	tryst
with	Maria—and	 the	touch	of	his	skin	against	hers	was	so	powerful	it	seemed	to
control	her	body.	She	breathed	when	he	paused,	stopped	when	he	moved.	She
had	no	doubt	that	her	heart	was	beating	in	time	to	his	pulse.

      “Maybe,”	 he	whispered,	so	close	now	that	his	breath	kissed	her	lips,	“you
desired	something	else	altogether.”

      Kate	tried	to	shake	her	head,	but	her	muscles	refused	to	obey.

      “Are	 you	sure?”

      This	time,	 her	head	betrayed	her	and	gave	a	little	shake.

      He	smiled,	and	they	both	knew	he	had	won.

118
Chapter	     7


Also	in	attendance	at	Lady	Bridgerton’s	 musicale:	Mrs.	 Featherington	and	the
three	elder	Featherington	daughters	(Prudence,	Philippa,	 and	Penelope,	none	of
whom	wore	colors	beneficial	to	 their	complexions);	Mr.	 Nigel	 Berbrooke	(who,
as	usual,	had	much	to	say,	although	no	one	save	Philippa	Featherington	seemed
interested);	and,	of	course,	Mrs.	Sheffield	and	Miss	Katharine	 Sheffield.

      This	Author	 assumes	that	the	Sheffields’	invitation	had	also	included	Miss
Edwina	Sheffield,	but	she	was	not	present.	Lord	Bridgerton	seemed	in	fine	spirits
despite	the	younger	Miss	Sheffield’s	absence,	but	alas,	his	mother	appeared
disappointed.

      But	then	again,	Lady	Bridgerton’s	  matchmaking	tendencies	are	legendary,
and	surely	she	must	be	at	loose	ends	now	that	her	daughter	has	married	the
Duke	of	Hastings.

                                                     LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	27	APRIL	1814



Anthony	  knew	he	had	to	be	insane.

      There	could	be	no	other	explanation.	He’d	 meant	to	scare	her,	terrify	her,
make	her	understand	that	she	could	never	hope	to	meddle	in	his	affairs	and	win,
and	instead…

      He	kissed	her.

      Intimidation	 had	been	his	intention,	and	so	he’d	moved	closer	and	closer
until	she,	an	innocent,	could	only	be	cowed	by	his	presence.	She	wouldn’t	know
what	it	was	like	to	 have	a	man	so	near	that	the	heat	of	his	body	seeped	through
her	clothes,	so	close	that	she	couldn’t	tell	where	his	breath	ended	and	hers	began.

      She	wouldn’t	 recognize	the	first	prickles	of	 desire,	nor	would	she	understand
that	slow,	swirling	 heat	in	the	core	of	her	being.

      And	that	slow,	 swirling	 heat	was	there.	He	could	see	it	in	her	face.

119
      But	she,	a	complete	innocent,	would	never	comprehend	what	he	could	see
with	one	look	of	 his	experienced	eyes.	All	she	would	know	was	that	he	was
looming	over	her,	that	he	was	stronger,	more	powerful,	and	that	she	had	made	a
dreadful	mistake	by	invading	his	 private	sanctuary.

      He	was	going	to	stop	right	 there	and	leave	her	bothered	and	breathless.	But
when	there	was	barely	an	inch	between	them,	the	pull	grew	too	strong.	Her	scent
was	too	beguiling,	the	sound	of	her	breath	too	arousing.	The	prickles	of	desire
he’d	meant	to	spark	within	her	suddenly	ignited	 within	 him,	sending	a	warm
claw	of	need	to	the	very	tips	of	his	toes.	And	the	finger	 he’d	been	trailing	 along
her	cheek—just	to	torture	her,	he	told	himself—suddenly	 became	a	hand	that
cupped	the	back	of	her	head	as	his	lips	took	hers	in	an	explosion	of	anger	and
desire.

      She	gasped	against	his	mouth,	and	he	took	advantage	of	her	parted	lips	by
sliding	his	tongue	between	them.	She	was	stiff	in	his	arms,	but	it	seemed	more	to
do	with	surprise	than	anything	else,	and	so	Anthony	pressed	his	suit	further	by
allowing	one	of	his	 hands	to	slide	down	her	back	and	cup	the	gentle	curve	of	her
derriere.

      “This	 is	madness,”	he	whispered	against	her	ear.	But	he	made	no	move	to	let
her	go.

      Her	reply	 was	an	incoherent,	confused	moan,	and	her	body	became	slightly
more	pliant	in	his	arms,	allowing	 him	to	mold	 her	even	closer	to	his	form.	He
knew	he	should	stop,	knew	he	damned	well	shouldn’t	have	started,	but	his	blood
was	racing	with	need,	and	she	felt	so…so…

      So	good.

      He	groaned,	his	lips	leaving	hers	to	taste	the	slightly	salty	 skin	of	her	neck.
There	was	something	about	her	that	suited	him	like	no	woman	ever	had	before,
as	if	his	body	had	discovered	something	his	mind	utterly	refused	to	consider.

      Something	about	her	was…right.

      She	felt	right.	 She	smelled	right.	She	tasted	right.	And	he	knew	that	if	he
stripped	off	all	 of	her	clothes	and	took	her	there	on	the	carpet	on	the	floor	of	his
study,	she	would	fit	underneath	him,	fit	 around	him—just	 right.

      It	occurred	to	Anthony	 that	when	she	wasn’t	arguing	with	 him,	Kate

120
      It	occurred	to	Anthony	 that	when	she	wasn’t	arguing	with	 him,	Kate
Sheffield	might	 bloody	well	 be	the	finest	woman	in	England.

      Her	arms,	which	had	been	imprisoned	in	his	embrace,	slowly	 edged	up,	until
her	hands	were	hesitantly	resting	on	his	back.	And	then	her	lips	moved.	It	was	a
tiny	thing,	actually,	 a	movement	barely	felt	on	the	thin	 skin	of	his	forehead,	but
she	was	definitely	kissing	him	 back.

      A	low,	 triumphant	 growl	emerged	from	Anthony’s	 mouth	as	he	moved	his
mouth	back	to	hers,	kissing	her	fiercely,	daring	her	to	continue	 what	she’d
begun.	“Oh,	Kate,”	 he	moaned,	nudging	her	back	until	she	was	leaning	against
the	edge	of	the	desk.	“God,	you	taste	so	good.”

      “Bridgerton?”	  Her	voice	was	tremulous,	the	word	more	of	a	question	than
anything	else.

      “Don’t	 say	anything,”	 he	whispered.	“Whatever	you	 do,	don’t	say	anything.”

      “But—”

      “Not	 a	word,”	 he	interrupted,	pressing	a	finger	to	her	lips.	The	last	thing	he
wanted	was	for	her	to	ruin	this	perfectly	 good	moment	by	opening	her	mouth
and	arguing.

      “But	 I—”	 She	planted	her	hands	on	his	chest	and	wrenched	herself	away,
leaving	him	off	 balance	and	panting.

      Anthony	 let	out	a	curse,	and	not	a	mild	one.

      Kate	scurried	away,	not	all	 the	way	across	the	room,	but	over	to	a	tall
wingback	chair,	far	enough	away	so	that	she	was	not	in	arms’	reach.	She	gripped
the	stiff	back	of	the	chair,	then	darted	around	it,	thinking	 that	it	 might	be	a	good
idea	to	have	a	nice	solid	piece	of	furniture	between	them.

      The	viscount	didn’t	 look	 to	be	in	the	best	of	tempers.

      “Why	 did	you	 do	that?”	she	said,	her	voice	so	low	it	was	almost	a	whisper.

      He	shrugged,	suddenly	looking	a	little	 less	angry	and	a	little	more	uncaring.
“Because	I	wanted	to.”

      Kate	just	gaped	at	him	for	a	moment,	unable	to	believe	that	he	could	have

121
      Kate	just	gaped	at	him	for	a	moment,	unable	to	believe	that	he	could	have
such	a	simple	answer	to	what	was,	despite	its	simple	phrasing,	such	a
complicated	question.	Finally,	 she	blurted	out,	“But	you	 can’t	have.”

      He	smiled.	Slowly.	 “But	 I	did.”

      “But	 you	don’t	 like	me!”

      “True,”	 he	allowed.

      “And	 I	don’t	 like	 you.”

      “So	you’ve	 been	telling	me,”	 he	said	smoothly.	“I’ll	  have	to	take	your	word
for	it,	since	it	 wasn’t	particularly	 apparent	a	few	seconds	ago.”

      Kate	felt	 her	cheeks	flush	with	shame.	She	had	responded	to	his	wicked	kiss,
and	she	hated	herself	for	it,	almost	as	much	as	she	hated	him	for	initiating	the
intimacy.

      But	he	didn’t	 have	to	taunt	her.	That	was	the	act	of	a	cad.	She	gripped	the
back	of	the	chair	until	her	knuckles	 turned	white,	no	longer	certain	if	 she	was
using	it	as	a	defense	against	Bridgerton	or	as	a	means	to	stop	herself	from
lunging	forward	 to	strangle	him.

      “I	 am	not	going	to	let	you	 marry	Edwina,”	 she	said	in	a	very	low	voice.

      “No,”	 he	murmured,	moving	 slowly	 forward	until	 he	was	just	on	the	other
side	of	the	chair.	“I	 didn’t	think	 you	were.”

      Her	chin	lifted	 a	notch.	“And	 I	am	certainly	 not	going	to	marry	 you.”

      He	planted	his	hands	on	the	armrests	and	leaned	forward	until	his	face	was
only	a	few	inches	from	hers.	“I	 don’t	 recall	asking.”

      Kate	lurched	backward.	“But	 you	just	 kissed	me!”

      He	laughed.	“If	 I	offered	 marriage	to	every	woman	I’d	 kissed,	I’d	have	been
thrown	into	jail	 for	 bigamy	long	ago.”

      Kate	could	feel	 herself	begin	to	shake,	and	she	held	on	to	the	back	of	the
chair	for	dear	life.	“You,	 sir,”	 she	nearly	spat	out,	“have	no	honor.”

122
      His	eyes	blazed	and	one	of	his	hands	shot	out	to	grip	her	chin.	He	held	her
that	way	for	several	seconds,	forcing	her	to	meet	his	gaze.	“That,”	he	said	in	a
deadly	voice,	“is	not	true,	and	were	you	a	man,	I’d	 call	you	out	for	 it.”

      Kate	remained	still	 for	what	seemed	like	a	very	long	time,	 her	eyes	locked
on	his,	the	skin	on	her	cheek	burning	where	his	powerful	fingers	 held	her
motionless.	Finally	she	did	the	one	thing	she’d	sworn	she	would	never	do	with
this	man.

      She	begged.

      “Please,”	she	whispered,	“let	 me	go.”

      He	did,	his	hand	releasing	her	with	a	startling	 abruptness.	“My	apologies,”
he	said,	sounding	the	slightest	bit…surprised?

      No,	that	was	impossible.	Nothing	 could	surprise	this	man.

      “I	 didn’t	 mean	to	hurt	you,”	he	added	softly.

      “Didn’t	  you?”

      He	gave	his	head	a	small	shake.	“No.	To	scare	you,	perhaps.	But	not	to	hurt
you.”

      Kate	stepped	backward	on	shaky	legs.	“You’re	 nothing	but	a	rake,”	she	said,
wishing	her	voice	had	emerged	with	a	bit	more	disdain	and	a	bit	less	quavering.

      “I	 know,”	 he	said	with	a	shrug,	the	intense	fire	in	his	eyes	draining	down	to
light	amusement.	“It’s	 in	my	nature.”

      Kate	took	another	step	back.	She	didn’t	have	the	energy	to	try	to	keep	up
with	his	abrupt	changes	of	mood.	“I’m	 leaving	 now.”

      “Go,”	 he	said	affably,	waving	 toward	the	door.

      “You	 can’t	stop	me.”

      He	smiled.	“I	 wouldn’t	 dream	of	it.”

      She	began	to	edge	away,	walking	slowly	backward,	afraid	 that	if	she	took
her	eyes	off	him	for	one	second	he	might	pounce.	“I’m	 leaving	now,”	 she	said

123
her	eyes	off	him	for	one	second	he	might	pounce.	“I’m	 leaving	now,”	 she	said
again,	unnecessarily.

      But	when	her	hand	was	an	inch	away	from	the	doorknob,	he	said,	“I	 suppose
I’ll	 see	you	next	time	I	call	upon	Edwina.”

      Kate	went	white.	 Not	that	she	could	actually	see	her	face,	of	course,	but	for
the	first	time	in	 her	life,	she	actually	felt	 the	blood	drain	from	her	skin.	 “You
said	you	were	going	to	leave	her	alone,”	she	said	accusingly.

      “No,”	 he	replied,	leaning	 rather	insolently	against	the	side	of	the	chair,	“I
said	that	I	didn’t	 think	you	were	likely	 to	‘let’	  me	marry	her.	Which	doesn’t
really	signify,	 as	I	have	no	plans	to	let	you	manage	my	life.”

      Kate	suddenly	felt	 as	if	a	cannonball	were	lodged	in	her	throat.	“But	 you
can’t	possibly	want	to	marry	 her	after	you—after	I—”

      He	took	a	few	steps	toward	her,	his	movements	slow	and	sleek	like	a	cat.
“After	 you	kissed	me?”

      “I	 didn’t—”	  But	the	words	burned	the	back	of	her	throat,	because	they	were
so	obviously	a	lie.	She	had	not	initiated	the	kiss,	but	she	had,	in	the	end,
participated	in	it.

      “Oh,	 come	now,	Miss	Sheffield,”	 he	said,	standing	up	straight	and	crossing
his	arms.	“Let’s	not	 go	down	that	road.	We	don’t	like	 each	other,	that	much	is
true,	but	I	do	respect	you	in	an	odd,	perverted	sort	of	way,	and	I	know	you’re	 not
a	liar.”

      She	said	nothing.	Really,	what	could	 she	say?	How	did	one	respond	to	a
statement	that	contained	the	words	“respect”	and	“perverted”?

      “You	 kissed	me	back,”	he	said	with	a	small,	satisfied	smile.	 “Not	 with	any
great	enthusiasm,	I’ll	admit,	 but	that	would	be	just	a	matter	of	time.”

      She	shook	her	head,	unable	to	believe	what	she	was	hearing.	“How	can	you
talk	of	such	things	not	even	a	minute	after	declaring	your	intention	 to	court	my
sister?”

      “This	 does	put	a	bit	of	a	crimp	in	my	 plans,	that	is	true,”	he	commented,	his
voice	light	and	thoughtful,	 as	if	he	were	considering	the	purchase	of	a	new	horse,

124
voice	light	and	thoughtful,	 as	if	he	were	considering	the	purchase	of	a	new	horse,
or	perhaps	deciding	which	neckcloth	to	wear.

      Maybe	it	 was	his	casual	posture,	maybe	it	was	the	way	he	stroked	his	chin	as
if	pretending	to	give	 the	matter	some	thought.	But	something	ignited	a	fuse
inside	of	Kate,	and	without	 even	thinking,	she	launched	forward,	all	the	furies	 of
the	world	collecting	 in	her	soul	as	she	threw	herself	against	him,	pounding	his
chest	with	her	fists.	“You	 will	 never	marry	her!”	 she	cried	out.	“Never!	 Do	you
hear	me?”

      He	raised	one	arm	to	ward	off	a	blow	 to	his	face.	“I’d	 have	to	be	deaf	not
to.”	Then	he	expertly	captured	her	wrists,	holding	 her	arms	immobile	while	 her
body	heaved	and	shook	with	rage.

      “I	 won’t	 let	you	make	her	unhappy.	I	won’t	 let	you	ruin	 her	life,”	 she	said,
the	words	choking	in	her	throat.	“She	is	everything	 that	is	good	and	honorable
and	pure.	And	she	deserves	better	than	you.”

      Anthony	 watched	her	closely,	his	eyes	trained	on	her	face,	somehow
rendered	beautiful	by	the	force	of	her	anger.	Her	cheeks	were	high	with	color,
her	eyes	shone	with	tears	she	was	fighting	hard	to	keep	off	her	face,	and	he	was
beginning	to	feel	like	 he	might	be	the	worst	sort	of	cad.

      “Why,	 Miss	Sheffield,”	  he	said	softly,	“I	 do	believe	you	truly	 love	your
sister.”

      “Of	 course	I	love	her!”	 she	burst	out.	“Why	 do	you	think	I	 have	gone	to	such
efforts	to	keep	her	away	from	you?	Did	you	 think	I	 did	it	for	 amusement?
Because	I	can	assure	you,	my	lord,	I	can	think	of	many	things	more	amusing
than	being	held	captive	in	your	study.”

      Abruptly,	 he	let	go	of	her	wrists.

      “I	 should	think,”	 she	said	with	a	sniffle,	 rubbing	her	reddened,	abused	flesh,
“that	my	love	 for	Edwina	would	 be	the	one	thing	about	me	you	could	understand
with	perfect	clarity.	 You,	who	 are	supposedly	so	devoted	to	your	own	family.”

      Anthony	 said	nothing,	just	watched	her,	and	wondered	if	perhaps	there	was	a
great	deal	more	to	this	woman	than	he’d	originally	 estimated.

      “If	 you	were	Edwina’s	 brother,”	 Kate	said	with	deadly	accuracy,	“would	 you
allow	her	to	marry	a	man	like	 you?”

125
allow	her	to	marry	a	man	like	 you?”

      He	did	not	speak	for	a	very	long	 moment,	long	enough	so	that	the	silence
rang	awkwardly	in	 his	own	ears.	Finally	he	said,	“That	is	beside	the	point.”

      To	her	credit,	she	did	not	smile.	She	did	not	crow,	 nor	did	she	taunt.	When
she	spoke,	her	words	were	quiet	and	true.	“I	believe	I	have	my	answer.”	Then
she	turned	on	her	heel	and	began	to	walk	away.

      “My	 sister,”	 he	said,	loudly	enough	to	halt	her	progress	toward	the	door,
“married	the	Duke	of	 Hastings.	Are	you	familiar	 with	 his	reputation?”

      She	paused,	but	she	did	not	turn	around.	“He	is	reputed	to	be	quite	devoted
to	his	wife.”

      Anthony	 chuckled.	“Then	you	 are	not	familiar	with	 his	reputation.	At	 least
not	as	it	was	before	he	married.”

      Kate	turned	slowly	 around.	“If	 you	are	attempting	to	convince	me	that
reformed	rakes	make	the	best	husbands,	you	will	meet	with	no	success.	It	was	in
this	very	room,	not	fifteen	 minutes	ago,	that	you	told	Miss	Rosso	that	you	saw
no	reason	to	give	up	a	mistress	for	a	wife.”

      “I	 believe	I	said	that	was	the	case	only	if	one	does	not	love	one’s	wife.”

      A	funny	 little	 sound	emerged	from	her	nose—not	quite	a	snort,	but	more
than	a	breath,	and	it	was	abundantly	clear,	in	that	moment	at	least,	that	she	had
no	respect	for	him.	With	 a	sharp	amusement	in	her	eyes,	she	asked,	“And	do	you
love	my	sister,	Lord	Bridgerton?”

      “Of	 course	not,”	he	replied.	“And	 I	 would	never	insult	your	 intelligence	by
saying	otherwise.	But,”	he	said	loudly,	 warding	off	 the	interruption	he	knew	was
sure	to	come,	“I	have	known	your	sister	but	a	week.	I	have	no	reason	to	believe
that	I	would	not	come	to	love	 her	were	we	to	spend	many	years	in	holy
matrimony.”

      She	crossed	her	arms.	“Why	is	it	that	I	cannot	believe	a	word	out	 of	your
mouth?”

      He	shrugged.	“I’m	 sure	I	do	not	know.”	 But	 he	did	know.	The	very	reason
he’d	selected	Edwina	for	his	wife	 was	that	he	knew	he’d	never	come	to	love	her.

126
he’d	selected	Edwina	for	his	wife	 was	that	he	knew	he’d	never	come	to	love	her.
He	liked	her,	he	respected	her,	and	he	was	confident	that	she’d	make	an
excellent	mother	to	his	heirs,	but	he’d	never	love	her.	The	spark	simply	 was	not
there.

      She	shook	her	head,	disappointment	in	her	eyes.	Disappointment	that
somehow	made	him	feel	less	of	a	man.	“I	hadn’t	thought	you	 a	liar,	either,”	 she
said	softly.	“A	 rake	and	a	rogue,	and	perhaps	a	whole	host	of	other	things,	but
not	a	liar.”

      Anthony	 felt	her	words	like	 blows.	Something	unpleasant	squeezed	around
his	heart—something	that	made	him	want	to	lash	out,	to	hurt	her,	or	at	least	to
show	her	she	hadn’t	the	power	to	hurt	him.	“Oh,	 Miss	Sheffield,”	 he	called	out,
his	voice	a	rather	cruel	drawl,	“you	 won’t	 get	far	without	 this.”

      Before	she	had	a	chance	to	react,	he	reached	into	his	pocket,	pulled	out	the
key	to	the	study,	and	tossed	it	in	her	direction,	deliberately	aiming	 it	at	her	feet.
Given	no	warning,	her	reflexes	were	not	sharp,	and	when	she	thrust	out	her
hands	to	catch	the	key,	she	missed	it	entirely.	Her	hands	made	a	hollow	clapping
sound	as	they	connected,	followed	by	the	dull	thud	of	the	key	hitting	 the	carpet.

      She	stood	there	for	a	moment,	staring	at	the	key,	and	he	could	tell	the	instant
she	realized	he	had	not	intended	for	her	to	catch	it.	She	remained	utterly	still,
and	then	she	brought	her	eyes	to	his.	They	were	blazing	with	hatred,	and
something	worse.

      Disdain.

      Anthony	 felt	as	if	he’d	 been	punched	in	the	gut.	He	fought	the	most
ridiculous	impulse	to	 leap	forward	and	grab	the	key	from	the	carpet,	to	get	down
on	one	knee	and	hand	it	to	her,	to	apologize	for	his	conduct	and	beg	her
forgiveness.

      But	he	would	 do	none	of	those	things.	He	did	not	want	to	mend	this	breach;
he	did	not	want	her	favorable	opinion.

      Because	that	elusive	spark—the	one	so	noticeably	absent	with	her	sister,
whom	he	intended	to	marry—crackled	and	burned	so	strongly	it	 seemed	the
room	ought	to	be	as	light	as	day.

      And	nothing	 could	have	terrified	 him	more.

127
      And	nothing	 could	have	terrified	 him	more.

      Kate	remained	motionless	for	far	 longer	than	he	would	have	thought,
obviously	loath	to	kneel	before	him,	 even	if	it	 was	to	gather	up	the	key	that
would	provide	her	with	 the	escape	she	so	obviously	desired.

      Anthony	 just	forced	a	smile,	lowering	 his	gaze	to	the	floor	and	then	back	up
to	her	face.	“Don’t	 you	want	to	leave,	Miss	Sheffield?”	 he	said,	too	smoothly.

      He	watched	as	her	chin	trembled,	as	her	throat	worked	a	convulsive
swallow.	And	 then,	abruptly,	she	crouched	down	and	scooped	up	the	key.	“You
will	 never	marry	my	sister,”	 she	vowed,	her	low,	intense	voice	sending	chills	to
his	very	bones.	“Never.”

      And	then,	with	 a	decisive	click	 of	the	lock,	she	was	gone.
                                                                	

Two	days	later,	Kate	was	still	furious.	It	didn’t	help	that	the	afternoon	following	the	musicale,	a	large
bouquet	of	flowers	had	arrived	for	Edwina,	the	card	reading,	“With	my	wishes	for	a	speedy	recovery.	Last
night	was	dull	indeed	without	your	shining	presence.—Bridgerton.”

      Mary	 had	ooohed	and	aahed	over	the	note—so	poetic,	she’d	sighed,	so
lovely,	so	obviously	 the	words	of	a	man	truly	smitten.	But	 Kate	had	known	the
truth.	The	note	was	more	of	an	insult	toward	her	than	it	was	a	compliment
toward	Edwina.

      Dull	 indeed,	she	fumed,	eyeing	that	note—enshrined	now	on	a	table	in	the
sitting	room—and	wondering	 how	she	might	make	it	look	 an	accident	if	it
somehow	found	itself	torn	into	 pieces.	She	might	not	know	very	much	about
matters	of	the	heart	and	the	affairs	of	men	and	women,	but	she’d	bet	her	life	that
whatever	the	viscount	had	been	feeling	that	night	in	the	study,	it	had	not	been
boredom.

      He	hadn’t,	however,	 come	to	call.	Kate	couldn’t	 imagine	why,	since	taking
Edwina	out	for	a	drive	 would	be	an	even	bigger	slap	in	the	face	than	the	note	had
been.	In	her	most	fanciful	moments,	she	liked	to	flatter	 herself	that	he	hadn’t
stopped	by	because	he	was	afraid	to	face	her,	but	she	knew	that	was	patently
untrue.

      That	man	wasn’t	afraid	 of	anyone.	Least	of	all,	a	plain,	aging	spinster	he’d
probably	kissed	out	of	a	mix	of	 curiosity,	anger,	and	pity.

      Kate	crossed	over	to	a	window	and	gazed	out	over	Milner	 Street;	not	the

128
      Kate	crossed	over	to	a	window	and	gazed	out	over	Milner	 Street;	not	the
most	picturesque	view	in	London,	but	 at	least	it	stopped	her	from	staring	at	the
note.	It	was	the	pity	that	truly	 ate	at	her.	She	prayed	that	whatever	had	gone	into
that	kiss,	the	curiosity	and	the	anger	had	outweighed	the	pity.

      She	didn’t	think	 she	could	bear	it	if	he	pitied	 her.

      But	Kate	didn’t	 have	very	long	 to	obsess	over	the	kiss	and	what	it	might	and
might	not	have	meant,	because	that	afternoon—the	afternoon	after	the	flowers—
arrived	an	invitation	 far	more	unsettling	than	anything	Lord	 Bridgerton	might
have	issued	himself.	The	Sheffields’	presence,	it	seemed,	was	desired	at	a
country	house	party	being	rather	spontaneously	hosted	in	one	week’s	time	by
Lady	Bridgerton.

      The	mother	of	the	devil	 himself.

      And	there	was	no	way	that	Kate	could	 possibly	get	out	of	going.	Nothing
short	of	an	earthquake	combined	with	a	hurricane	combined	with	a	tornado—
none	of	which	were	likely	 to	occur	in	 Great	Britain,	although	Kate	was	still
holding	out	hope	for	the	hurricane,	as	long	as	there	was	no	thunder	or	lightning
involved—would	 prevent	Mary	 from	showing	 up	on	the	Bridgertons’	bucolic
doorstep	with	Edwina	in	 tow.	And	Mary	 certainly	 wasn’t	going	to	allow	 Kate	to
remain	alone	in	London,	left	 to	her	own	devices.	Not	to	mention	that	there	was
no	way	Kate	was	going	to	allow	 Edwina	to	go	without	 her.

      The	viscount	had	no	scruples.	He’d	probably	 kiss	Edwina	just	as	he’d	kissed
Kate,	and	Kate	couldn’t	imagine	 that	Edwina	would	have	the	fortitude	 to	resist
such	an	advance.	She’d	probably	think	it	beyond	romantic	and	fall	 in	love	with
him	on	the	spot.

      Even	Kate	had	had	difficulty	 keeping	her	head	when	his	lips	had	been	on
hers.	For	one	blissful	moment,	she’d	forgotten	everything.	 She’d	known	nothing
but	an	exquisite	sensation	of	being	cherished	and	wanted—no,	needed—and	it
had	been	heady	stuff,	indeed.

      Almost	 enough	to	make	a	lady	forget	that	the	man	doing	the	kissing	was	a
worthless	cad.

      Almost…but	 not	quite.

129
Chapter	     8


As	any	regular	reader	of	this	column	 knows,	there	are	two	sects	in	London	who
shall	forever	remain	in	 the	utmost	opposition:	Ambitious	 Mamas	and
Determined	Bachelors.

      The	Ambitious	Mama	has	daughters	of	marriageable	 age.	The	Determined
Bachelor	does	not	want	a	wife.	The	crux	of	the	conflict	 should	be	obvious	to
those	with	half	a	brain,	 or,	in	other	words,	 approximately	fifty	 percent	of	This
Author’s	readership.

      This	Author	 has	not	yet	seen	a	guest	list	for	Lady	Bridgerton’s	country	 house
party,	but	informed	sources	indicate	that	 nearly	every	eligible	 young	lady	of
marriageable	age	will	 be	gathering	in	Kent	 next	week.

      This	surprises	no	one.	Lady	Bridgerton	 has	never	made	a	secret	of	her
desire	to	see	her	sons	favorably	married.	This	sentiment	has	made	her	a	favorite
among	the	Ambitious	Mama	set,	who	despairingly	view	the	Bridgerton	 brothers
as	the	worst	sort	of	Determined	Bachelors.

      If	one	is	to	trust	 the	betting	books,	then	at	least	one	of	the	Bridgerton
brothers	shall	be	witness	to	wedding	bells	before	the	year	is	through.

      As	much	as	it	pains	This	Author	to	agree	with	 the	betting	books	(they	are
written	by	men,	and	thus	inherently	flawed),	This	 Author	must	concur	in	the
prediction.

      Lady	Bridgerton	 will	 soon	have	her	daughter-in-law.	 But	who	she	will	be—
and	to	which	brother	she	shall	find	 herself	married—ah,	Gentle	Reader,	that	is
still	anyone’s	guess.

                                                     LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	29	APRIL	1814



One	 week	later,	Anthony	 was	in	Kent—in	 his	private	suite	of	 offices,	to	be
precise—awaiting	the	start	of	his	mother’s	 country	house	party.

      He’d	 seen	the	guest	list.	There	could	be	no	doubt	that	his	mother	had

130
      He’d	 seen	the	guest	list.	There	could	be	no	doubt	that	his	mother	had
decided	to	host	this	party	for	one	reason	and	one	reason	only:	to	get	one	of	her
sons	married	off,	preferably	him.	 Aubrey	Hall,	 the	ancestral	seat	of	the
Bridgertons,	would	be	filled	 to	the	brim	 with	eligible	 young	ladies,	each	lovelier
and	more	empty-headed	than	the	last.	To	keep	numbers	even,	Lady	Bridgerton
had	had	to	invite	a	number	of	gentlemen,	to	be	sure,	but	none	were	as	wealthy	or
well	connected	as	her	own	sons,	save	for	the	few	who	were	married.

      His	mother,	Anthony	 thought	ruefully,	 had	never	been	known	for	her
subtlety.	At	least	not	when	the	well-being	 (her	definition	 of	well-being,	 that	is)
of	her	children	was	concerned.

      He	had	not	been	surprised	to	see	that	an	invitation	had	been	extended	to	the
Misses	Sheffield.	His	mother	had	mentioned—several	times—how	 much	she
liked	Mrs.	Sheffield.	 And	 he	had	been	forced	to	listen	to	his	mother’s	“Good
Parents	Make	Good	Children”	theory	too	 many	times	not	to	know	what	that
meant.

      He’d	 actually	felt	a	resigned	sort	of	satisfaction	upon	the	sight	of	 Edwina’s
name	on	the	list.	He	was	eager	to	propose	to	her	and	be	done	with	it.	He	did	feel
a	measure	of	uneasiness	over	what	had	happened	with	Kate,	but	there	seemed
little	to	be	done	now	unless	he	wanted	to	go	to	the	trouble	of	finding	 another
prospective	bride.

      Which	 he	did	not.	Once	Anthony	made	a	decision—in	this	 case	to	finally	get
married—he	saw	no	reason	in	courting	delays.	Procrastination	was	for	those
with	a	bit	more	time	 to	live	out	their	 lives.	Anthony	 might	have	avoided	the
parson’s	mousetrap	for	nearly	a	decade,	but	now	that	he’d	decided	it	was	time
for	a	bride,	there	seemed	little	sense	in	tarrying.

      Marry,	 procreate,	and	die.	Such	was	the	life	of	a	noble	Englishman,	even	one
whose	father	and	uncle	had	not	dropped	unexpectedly	dead	at	the	ages	of	thirty-
eight	and	thirty-four,	 respectively.

      Clearly,	all	 he	could	do	at	this	point	was	to	avoid	Kate	 Sheffield.	An	 apology
would	probably	also	be	in	order.	It	 wouldn’t	 be	easy,	since	the	last	thing	he
wanted	to	do	was	humble	himself	to	that	woman,	but	the	whispers	of	his
conscience	had	risen	to	a	dull	roar,	and	he	knew	she	deserved	the	words,	“I’m
sorry.”

      She	probably	deserved	more,	but	Anthony	was	unwilling	 to	contemplate

131
      She	probably	deserved	more,	but	Anthony	was	unwilling	 to	contemplate
what	that	might	be.

      Not	to	mention	 that	unless	he	went	and	spoke	to	her,	she	was	likely	to	block
a	union	between	him	and	Edwina	to	her	dying	breath.

      Now	 was	clearly	the	time	to	take	action.	If	 there	ever	was	aromantic	spot	for
a	proposal	of	marriage,	Aubrey	Hall	 was	it.	Built	 in	the	early	1700s	of	warm
yellow	stone,	it	sat	comfortably	 on	a	wide	green	lawn,	surrounded	by	sixty	acres
of	parkland,	a	full	 ten	of	which	were	flowering	 gardens.	Later	in	the	summer	the
roses	would	be	out,	but	now	the	grounds	were	carpeted	with	grape	hyacinths	and
the	brilliant	 tulips	his	mother	had	had	imported	from	 Holland.

      Anthony	 gazed	across	the	room	and	out	the	window,	where	ancient	elms
rose	majestically	around	the	house.	They	shaded	the	drive	and,	he	liked	to	think,
made	the	hall	seem	a	bit	more	like	it	was	a	part	of	nature	and	a	bit	less	like	the
typical	country	 homes	of	the	aristocracy—man-made	monuments	to	wealth,
position,	and	power.	There	were	several	ponds,	a	creek,	and	countless	hills	and
hollows,	each	one	with	its	own	special	memories	of	 childhood.

      And	his	father.

      Anthony	 closed	his	eyes	and	exhaled.	He	loved	coming	home	to	Aubrey
Hall,	but	the	familiar	 sights	and	smells	brought	his	father	to	mind	 with	a	clarity
so	vivid	it	 was	almost	painful.	Even	now,	nearly	 twelve	years	after	Edmund
Bridgerton’s	death,	Anthony	 still	 expected	to	see	him	come	bounding	around	the
corner,	the	smallest	of	the	Bridgerton	children	screaming	with	 delight	as	he	rode
on	his	father’s	shoulders.

      The	image	made	Anthony	grin.	 The	child	on	the	shoulders	might	be	a	boy	or
a	girl;	Edmund	had	never	discriminated	between	his	children	when	it	 came	to
horseplay.	But	no	matter	who	held	the	coveted	spot	at	the	top	of	the	world,	they
would	surely	be	chased	after	by	a	nurse,	insisting	that	they	stop	this	nonsense	at
once,	and	that	a	child’s	place	was	in	the	nursery	and	certainly	not	on	her	father’s
shoulders.

      “Oh,	 Father,”	Anthony	 whispered,	looking	up	at	the	portrait	 of	Edmund	that
hung	over	the	fireplace,	“how	 on	earth	will	I	 ever	live	up	to	your	 achievements?”

      And	surely	 that	had	to	have	been	Edmund	Bridgerton’s	greatest	achievement
—presiding	over	a	family	 filled	 with	 love	and	laughter	and	everything	that	was

132
—presiding	over	a	family	 filled	 with	 love	and	laughter	and	everything	that	was
so	often	absent	from	aristocratic	life.

      Anthony	 turned	away	from	his	father’s	 portrait	and	crossed	over	to	the
window,	watching	 the	coaches	pull	up	the	drive.	The	afternoon	had	brought	a
steady	stream	of	arrivals,	and	every	conveyance	seemed	to	carry	yet	another
fresh-faced	young	lady,	her	eyes	alight	with	happiness	at	having	been	gifted	with
an	invitation	to	the	Bridgerton	 house	party.

      Lady	Bridgerton	 didn’t	 often	elect	to	fill	 her	country	 home	with	guests.
When	she	did,	it	was	always	the	event	of	the	season.

      Although,	 truth	be	told,	none	of	the	Bridgertons	 spent	much	time	at	Aubrey
Hall	any	longer.	Anthony	 suspected	that	his	mother	suffered	the	same	malady	he
did—memories	of	Edmund	around	every	corner.	The	younger	children	 had	few
memories	of	the	place,	having	been	raised	primarily	in	London.	 They	certainly
didn’t	recall	 the	long	hikes	across	fields,	or	the	fishing,	or	the	treehouse.

      Hyacinth,	 who	was	now	just	eleven,	had	never	even	been	held	in	her	father’s
arms.	Anthony	had	tried	to	fill	 the	gap	as	best	as	he	could,	but	he	knew	he	was	a
very	pale	comparison.

      With	 a	weary	sigh,	Anthony	leaned	heavily	 against	the	window	frame,	trying
to	decide	whether	or	not	he	wanted	to	pour	himself	a	drink.	He	was	staring	out
over	the	lawn,	his	eyes	focusing	on	absolutely	nothing,	when	a	carriage
decidedly	shabbier	than	the	rest	rolled	down	the	drive.	Not	that	there	was
anything	shoddy	about	it;	it	 was	obviously	well	 made	and	sturdy.	But	it	lacked
the	gilded	crests	that	graced	the	other	carriages,	and	it	seemed	to	bump	along	a
tiny	bit	more	than	the	rest,	as	if	it	weren’t	 quite	well	 sprung	enough	for	comfort.

      This	would	 be	the	Sheffields,	Anthony	 realized.	Everyone	else	on	the	guest
list	was	in	possession	of	a	respectable	fortune.	Only	the	Sheffields	would	have
had	to	hire	a	carriage	for	the	season.

      Sure	enough,	when	one	of	the	Bridgerton	footmen,	dressed	in	stylish
powder-blue	livery,	 leaped	forward	to	open	the	door,	out	stepped	Edwina
Sheffield,	looking	 a	veritable	vision	in	 a	pale	yellow	traveling	 dress	and
matching	bonnet.	Anthony	was	not	close	enough	to	see	her	face	clearly,	but	it
was	easy	enough	to	imagine.	Her	cheeks	would	be	soft	and	pink,	and	her
exquisite	eyes	would	mirror	the	cloudless	sky.

133
      The	next	to	emerge	was	Mrs.	Sheffield.	It	 was	only	when	she	took	her	place
next	to	Edwina	that	he	realized	how	closely	they	resembled	one	another.	Both
were	charmingly	graceful	and	petite,	and	as	they	spoke,	he	could	see	that	they
held	themselves	in	the	same	manner.	The	tilt	of	the	head	was	identical,	as	were
their	posture	and	stance.

      Edwina	would	 not	outgrow	her	beauty.	This	would	 clearly	be	a	good
attribute	in	a	wife,	although—Anthony	  threw	a	rueful	glance	at	his	father’s
portrait—he	wasn’t	 likely	 to	be	around	to	watch	her	age.

      Finally,	 Kate	stepped	down.

      And	Anthony	 realized	he’d	been	holding	 his	breath.

      She	didn’t	move	 like	the	two	other	Sheffield	 women.	They	had	been	dainty,
leaning	on	the	footman,	putting	their	 hands	in	his	with	a	graceful	arch	of	the
wrist.

      Kate,	on	the	other	hand,	practically	hopped	right	 down.	She	took	the
footman’s	proffered	arm,	but	 she	certainly	didn’t	appear	to	need	his	assistance.
As	soon	as	her	feet	touched	the	ground,	she	stood	tall	and	lifted	her	face	to	gaze
at	the	facade	of	Aubrey	Hall.	Everything	 about	her	was	direct	and
straightforward,	and	Anthony	 had	no	doubt	that	if	he	were	close	enough	to	gaze
into	her	eyes,	he	would	find	them	utterly	 forthright.

      Once	she	saw	him,	however,	they	would	fill	 with	 disdain,	and	perhaps	a
touch	of	hatred	as	well.

      Which	 was	really	all	he	deserved.	A	gentleman	did	not	treat	a	lady	as	he	had
Kate	Sheffield	and	expect	her	continued	good	favor.

      Kate	turned	to	her	mother	and	sister	and	said	something,	causing	Edwina	to
laugh	and	Mary	to	smile	indulgently.	 Anthony	 realized	he	hadn’t	had	much
opportunity	to	watch	the	three	of	them	interact	 before.	They	were	a	true	family,
comfortable	in	each	other’s	presence,	and	there	was	a	warmth	one	sensed	in	their
faces	when	they	conversed.	It	was	especially	fascinating	since	he	knew	that
Mary	and	Kate	were	not	blood	relatives.

      There	were	some	bonds,	he	was	coming	to	realize,	that	were	stronger	than
those	of	blood.	These	were	not	bonds	he	had	room	for	in	his	life.

134
      Which	 was	why,	when	he	married,	the	face	behind	the	veil	would	 have	to	be
Edwina	Sheffield’s.
                                                                	

Kate	had	expected	to	be	impressed	by	Aubrey	Hall.	She	had	not	expected	to	be	enchanted.

      The	house	was	smaller	than	she’d	expected.	Oh,	it	was	still	far,	far	larger
than	anything	she’d	ever	had	the	honor	to	call	home,	but	the	country	manor	was
not	a	hulking	behemoth	rising	out	of	 the	landscape	like	a	misplaced	medieval
castle.

      Rather,	Aubrey	Hall	 seemed	almost	cozy.	It	seemed	a	bizarre	word	to	use	to
describe	a	house	with	surely	fifty	rooms,	but	 its	fanciful	 turrets	and	crenellations
almost	made	it	seem	like	something	out	of	a	fairy	story,	 especially	with	the	late
afternoon	sun	giving	the	yellow	 stone	an	almost	reddish	glow.	There	was
nothing	austere	or	imposing	about	Aubrey	Hall,	 and	Kate	liked	it	 immediately.

      “Isn’t	 it	 lovely?”	 Edwina	whispered.

      Kate	nodded.	“Lovely	 enough	to	make	a	week	spent	in	the	company	of	that
awful	man	almost	bearable.”

      Edwina	laughed	and	Mary	 scolded,	but	even	Mary	could	not	resist	an
indulgent	smile.	But	 she	did	say,	casting	an	eye	to	the	footman,	who	had	gone
around	the	back	of	the	coach	to	unload	their	luggage,	“You	should	not	say	such
things,	Kate.	One	never	knows	who	is	listening,	and	it	 is	unbecoming	to	speak
thusly	about	our	host.”

      “Have	 no	fear,	he	didn’t	hear	me,”	Kate	replied.	 “And	 besides,	I	thought
Lady	Bridgerton	 was	our	hostess.	She	did	issue	the	invitation.”

      “The	 viscount	owns	the	house,”	Mary	returned.

      “Very	 well,”	 Kate	acceded,	motioning	to	 Aubrey	Hall	 with	a	dramatic	wave
of	her	arm.	“The	moment	I	 enter	those	hallowed	halls,	I	shall	be	nothing	but
sweetness	and	light.”

      Edwina	snorted.	“That	 will	 certainly	be	a	sight	to	behold.”

      Mary	 shot	Kate	a	knowing	look.	 “	‘Sweetness	and	light’	 applies	to	the
gardens	as	well,”	she	said.

135
gardens	as	well,”	she	said.

      Kate	just	smiled.	“Truly,	  Mary,	 I	shall	be	on	my	best	behavior.	I	promise.”

      “Just	do	your	best	to	avoid	the	viscount.”

      “I	 will,”	  Kate	promised.	As	long	as	he	does	his	best	to	avoid	Edwina.

      A	footman	 appeared	at	their	side,	his	arm	sweeping	toward	the	hall	in	a
splendid	arc.	“If	 you	will	 step	inside,”	he	said,	“Lady	 Bridgerton	 is	eager	to	greet
her	guests.”

      The	three	Sheffields	immediately	 turned	and	made	their	way	to	the	front
door.	As	they	mounted	the	shallow	steps,	however,	Edwina	turned	to	Kate	with	 a
mischievous	grin	and	whispered,	“Sweetness	and	light	begins	here,	sister	mine.”

      “If	 we	weren’t	 in	public,”	 Kate	returned,	her	voice	equally	 hushed,	“I	might
have	to	hit	you.”

      Lady	Bridgerton	 was	in	the	main	hall	when	 they	stepped	inside,	and	Kate
could	see	the	ribboned	hems	of	walking	dresses	disappearing	up	the	stairs	as	the
previous	carriage’s	occupants	made	their	way	to	their	rooms.

      “Mrs.	 Sheffield!”	 Lady	 Bridgerton	called	 out,	crossing	over	toward	them.
“How	 lovely	to	see	you.	And	Miss	 Sheffield,”	 she	added,	turning	to	Kate,	“I	 am
so	glad	you	were	able	to	join	us.”

      “It	 was	kind	of	 you	to	invite	 us,”	Kate	replied.	“And	 it	 is	truly	a	pleasure	to
escape	the	city	for	a	week.”

      Lady	Bridgerton	 smiled.	“You	 are	a	country	girl	 at	heart,	then?”

      “I’m	  afraid	so.	London	is	exciting,	 and	always	worth	a	visit,	but	I	 do	prefer
the	green	fields	and	fresh	air	of	the	countryside.”

      “My	 son	is	much	the	same	way,”	Lady	 Bridgerton	said.	“Oh,	 he	spends	his
time	in	the	city,	 but	a	mother	knows	the	truth.”

      “The	 viscount?”	Kate	asked	doubtfully.	 He	seemed	such	the	consummate
rake,	and	everyone	knew	a	rake’s	natural	habitat	was	the	city.

      “Yes,	 Anthony.	We	lived	 here	almost	exclusively	when	he	was	a	child.	We

136
      “Yes,	 Anthony.	We	lived	 here	almost	exclusively	when	he	was	a	child.	We
went	to	London	during	 the	season,	of	course,	since	I	do	love	to	attend	parties	and
balls,	but	never	for	more	than	a	few	weeks.	It	was	only	after	 my	husband	passed
away	that	we	moved	our	primary	residence	to	town.”

      “I’m	  sorry	for	your	loss,”	 Kate	murmured.

      The	viscountess	turned	to	her	with	a	wistful	 expression	in	her	blue	eyes.
“That	is	very	 sweet	of	you.	He	has	been	gone	for	many	years,	but	I	do	still	miss
him	each	and	every	day.”

      Kate	felt	 a	lump	forming	 in	her	throat.	She	remembered	how	well	Mary	and
her	father	had	loved	each	other,	and	she	knew	that	she	was	in	the	presence	of
another	woman	who	had	experienced	true	love.	And	suddenly	she	felt	so	very
sad.	Because	Mary	had	lost	her	husband	and	the	viscountess	had	lost	hers	as
well,	and…

      And	maybe	most	of	 all	because	she	would	probably	never	know	the	bliss	of
true	love	herself.

      “But	 we’re	becoming	so	maudlin,”	 Lady	 Bridgerton	suddenly	said,	smiling	 a
little	too	brightly	 as	she	turned	back	to	Mary,	“and	here	I	haven’t	 even	met	your
other	daughter.”

      “Have	 you	not?”	Mary	 asked,	her	brow	furrowing.	 “I	 suppose	that	must	be
true.	Edwina	was	not	able	to	attend	your	musicale.”

      “I	 have,	of	course,	seen	you	from	afar,”	Lady	Bridgerton	 said	to	Edwina,
bestowing	upon	her	a	dazzling	smile.

      Mary	 made	the	introductions,	and	Kate	could	not	help	but	notice	the
appraising	manner	in	which	Lady	Bridgerton	 regarded	Edwina.	There	could	be
no	doubt	about	it.	She’d	decided	Edwina	would	 make	an	excellent	addition	to
her	family.

      After	 a	few	more	moments	of	chitchat,	Lady	 Bridgerton	offered	 them	tea
while	their	bags	were	being	delivered	to	their	 rooms,	but	they	declined,	as	Mary
was	tired	and	wanted	to	lie	down.

      “As	 you	wish,”	 Lady	Bridgerton	 said,	signaling	to	a	housemaid.	“I	shall
have	Rose	show	you	to	your	rooms.	Dinner	is	at	eight.	Is	there	anything	else	I
may	do	for	you	before	you	retire?”

137
may	do	for	you	before	you	retire?”

      Mary	 and	Edwina	both	shook	their	heads	no,	and	Kate	started	to	follow	suit,
but	at	the	last	minute	she	blurted	out,	“Actually,	 if	 I	might	 ask	you	a	question.”

      Lady	Bridgerton	 smiled	warmly.	 “Of	 course.”

      “I	 noticed	when	we	arrived	that	you	have	extensive	flower	 gardens.	Might	I
explore	them?”

      “Then	 you	are	a	gardener	as	well?”	Lady	Bridgerton	inquired.

      “Not	 a	very	good	one,”	Kate	admitted,	“but	 I	do	admire	 the	hand	of	an
expert.”

      The	viscountess	blushed.	“I	should	be	honored	if	you	 explored	the	gardens.
They	are	my	pride	and	joy.	I	don’t	 have	much	a	hand	in	them	now,	but	when
Edmund	was	al—”	She	stopped	and	cleared	her	throat.	“That	is	to	say,	when	I
spent	more	time	here,	I	was	always	up	to	my	elbows	in	dirt.	It	 used	to	drive	my
mother	positively	mad.”

      “And	 the	gardener,	too,	I	imagine,”	 Kate	said.

      Lady	Bridgerton’s	 smile	 erupted	into	laughter.	“Oh,	indeed!	He	 was	a
terrible	sort.	Always	 saying	that	the	only	thing	women	 knew	about	flowers	was
how	to	accept	them	as	a	gift.	But	he	had	the	greenest	thumb	you	could	ever
imagine,	so	I	learned	to	put	up	with	him.”

      “And	 he	learned	to	put	up	with	you?”

      Lady	Bridgerton	 smiled	wickedly.	 “No,	 he	never	did,	actually.	But	 I	didn’t
let	that	stop	me.”

      Kate	grinned,	instinctively	  warming	to	the	older	woman.

      “But	 don’t	 let	me	keep	you	any	longer,”	Lady	 Bridgerton	said.	“Let	 Rose
take	you	up	and	get	you	settled	in.	And	Miss	Sheffield,”	 she	said	to	Kate,	“if	 you
like,	I	should	be	happy	to	give	you	 a	tour	of	the	gardens	later	in	the	week.	I’m
afraid	I’m	 too	busy	greeting	guests	right	now,	but	I	would	 be	delighted	to	make
time	for	you	at	a	later	date.”

      “I	 would	like	 that,	thank	you,”	 Kate	said,	and	then	she	and	Mary	and	Edwina

138
      “I	 would	like	 that,	thank	you,”	 Kate	said,	and	then	she	and	Mary	and	Edwina
followed	the	maid	up	the	stairs.
                                                                	

Anthony	emerged	from	his	position	behind	his	ever-so-slightly	ajar	door	and	strode	down	the	hall	toward
his	mother.	“Was	that	the	Sheffields	I	saw	you	greeting?”	he	asked,	even	though	he	knew	very	well	it	was.
But	his	offices	were	too	far	down	the	hall	for	him	to	have	heard	anything	the	quartet	of	women	had	actually
said,	so	he	decided	that	a	brief	interrogation	was	in	order.

      “Indeed	it	 was,”	Violet	 replied.	“Such	 a	lovely	family,	 don’t	 you	think?”

      Anthony	 just	grunted.

      “I’m	  so	glad	I	invited	them.”

      Anthony	 said	nothing,	although	he	considered	grunting	again.

      “They	 were	a	last-minute	addition	to	the	guest	list.”

      “I	 didn’t	 realize,”	he	murmured.

      Violet	 nodded.	“I	 had	to	scrounge	up	three	more	gentlemen	from	the	village
to	even	the	numbers.”

      “So	we	may	expect	the	vicar	at	supper	this	eve?”

      “And	 his	brother,	who	is	visiting	 for	 a	spell,	and	his	son.”

      “Isn’t	 young	John	only	 sixteen?”

      Violet	 shrugged.	“I	was	desperate.”

      Anthony	 pondered	this.	His	mother	was	indeed	desperate	to	have	the
Sheffields	join	the	house	party	if	 it	meant	inviting	 a	spotty-faced	sixteen-year-
old	to	supper.	Not	that	she	wouldn’t	 have	invited	him	for	 a	family	 meal;	when
not	formally	 entertaining,	the	Bridgertons	broke	with	 accepted	standards	and	had
all	the	children	eat	in	the	dining	 room,	regardless	of	age.	Indeed,	the	first	time
Anthony	had	gone	to	visit	a	friend,	 he’d	been	shocked	that	he	was	expected	to
take	his	meals	in	the	nursery.

      But	still,	 a	house	party	was	a	house	party,	and	even	Violet	Bridgerton	did	not
allow	children	 at	the	table.

139
allow	children	 at	the	table.

      “I	 understand	you’ve	made	the	acquaintance	of	both	Sheffield	girls,”	 Violet
said.

      Anthony	 nodded.

      “I	 find	them	both	 delightful	 myself,”	 she	continued.	“They	haven’t	much	in
the	way	of	fortune,	but	I’ve	 always	maintained	that	when	choosing	a	spouse,
fortune	is	not	as	important	as	character,	provided,	of	course,	that	one	isn’t	in
desperate	straits.”

      “Which	 I,”	 Anthony	 drawled,	“as	I	am	sure	you	are	about	to	point	out,	am
not.”

      Violet	 sniffed	and	shot	him	a	haughty	look.	 “I	 should	not	be	so	quick	to
mock	me,	my	son.	I	merely	point	 out	the	truth.	You	should	be	down	on	your
hands	and	knees	thanking	your	maker	every	day	that	you	don’t	have	to	marry	an
heiress.	Most	men	don’t	have	the	luxury	of	 free	will	 when	it	comes	to	marriage,
you	know.”

      Anthony	 just	smiled.	“I	 should	be	thanking	my	maker?	Or	my	 mother?”

      “You	 are	a	beast.”

      He	clucked	her	gently	under	the	chin.	“A	 beast	you	raised.”

      “And	 it	wasn’t	 an	easy	task,”	she	muttered.	“I	can	assure	you	of	that.”

      He	leaned	forward	and	dropped	a	kiss	on	her	cheek.	“Have	fun	greeting	your
guests,	Mother.”

      She	scowled	at	him,	but	her	heart	clearly	wasn’t	in	 it.	“Where	 are	you
going?”	she	asked	as	he	started	to	move	away.

      “For	 a	walk.”

      “Really?”

      He	turned	around,	a	bit	bewildered	over	her	interest.	“Yes,	 really.	Is	there	a
problem	with	that?”

140
      “Not	 at	all,”	 she	replied.	“Just	that	you	haven’t	taken	a	walk—for	 the	simple
sake	of	taking	a	walk—in	 ages.”

      “I	 haven’t	been	in	the	country	in	 ages,”	he	commented.

      “True,”	 she	conceded.	“In	that	case,	you	should	really	head	out	to	the	flower
gardens.	The	early	species	are	just	beginning	to	bloom,	and	it’s	simply
spectacular.	Like	nothing	you	can	ever	see	in	London.”

      Anthony	 nodded.	“I	shall	see	you	for	supper.”

      Violet	 beamed	and	waved	him	off,	watching	as	he	disappeared	back	into	his
offices,	which	wrapped	around	the	corner	of	Aubrey	 Hall	 and	had	French	doors
leading	out	to	the	side	lawn.

      Her	eldest	son’s	interest	in	the	Sheffields	was	most	intriguing.	 Now,	 if	she
could	only	figure	 out	which	Sheffield	 he	was	interested	in….
                                                                	

About	a	quarter	of	an	hour	later,	Anthony	was	out	strolling	through	his	mother’s	flower	gardens,	enjoying
the	contradiction	of	the	warm	sun	and	the	cool	breeze,	when	he	heard	the	light	sound	of	a	second	set	of
footsteps	on	a	nearby	path.	This	piqued	his	curiosity.	The	guests	were	all	settling	in	their	rooms,	and	it	was
the	gardener’s	day	off.	Frankly,	he’d	been	anticipating	solitude.

      He	turned	toward	the	direction	 of	the	footfall,	 moving	 silently	until	 he
reached	the	end	of	his	path.	He	looked	to	the	right,	then	to	the	left,	and	then	he
saw…

      Her.

      Why,	 he	wondered,	was	he	surprised?

      Kate	Sheffield,	 dressed	in	a	pale	lavender	frock,	blending	in	charmingly	 with
the	irises	and	grape	hyacinths.	She	was	standing	beside	a	decorative	wooden
arch,	which,	later	in	the	year,	would	 be	covered	with	climbing	 pink	and	white
roses.

      He	watched	her	for	a	moment	as	she	trailed	her	fingers	along	some	fuzzy
plant	he	could	never	remember	the	name	of,	then	bent	down	to	sniff	at	a	Dutch
tulip.

      “They	 don’t	have	a	scent,”	he	called	out,	slowly	 making	his	way	toward	 her.

141
      “They	 don’t	have	a	scent,”	he	called	out,	slowly	 making	his	way	toward	 her.

      She	straightened	immediately,	her	entire	body	reacting	before	she’d	turned
to	see	him.	He	could	tell	she’d	recognized	his	voice,	which	 left	him	 feeling
rather	oddly	satisfied.

      As	he	approached	her	side,	he	motioned	to	the	brilliant	red	bloom	and	said,
“They’re	 lovely	and	somewhat	rare	in	an	English	garden,	but	alas,	with	no
perfume.”

      She	waited	longer	to	reply	than	he	would	 have	expected,	then	she	said,	“I’ve
never	seen	a	tulip	before.”

      Something	about	that	made	him	smile.	“Never?”

      “Well,	 not	in	 the	ground,”	she	explained.	“Edwina	 has	received	many
bouquets,	and	the	bulb	flowers	are	quite	the	rage	this	time	of	year.	But	I’ve
never	actually	seen	one	growing.”

      “They	 are	my	mother’s	favorite,”	 Anthony	 said,	reaching	down	and	plucking
one.	“That	and	hyacinths,	of	course.”

      She	smiled	curiously.	“Of	 course?”	she	echoed.

      “My	 youngest	sister	is	named	Hyacinth,”	 he	said,	handing	her	the	flower.
“Or	didn’t	 you	know	 that?”

      She	shook	her	head.	“I	didn’t.”

      “I	 see,”	he	murmured.	“We	are	quite	famously	 named	in	alphabetical	order,
from	Anthony	 right	down	 to	Hyacinth.	But	 then,	perhaps	I	know	a	great	deal
more	about	you	than	you	know	of	me.”

      Kate’s	eyes	widened	in	surprise	at	his	enigmatic	statement,	but	all	she	said
was,	“That	may	very	well	 be	true.”

      Anthony	 quirked	a	brow.	“I’m	  shocked,	Miss	Sheffield.	I	 had	donned	all	my
armor	and	was	expecting	you	to	return	with,	‘I	 know	 quite	enough.’	”

      Kate	tried	not	to	 make	a	face	at	his	imitation	of	her	voice.	But	 her	expression
was	wry	in	the	extreme	as	she	said,	“I	promised	Mary	I	 would	be	on	my	best
behavior.”

142
behavior.”

      Anthony	 let	out	a	loud	hoot	of	laughter.

      “Strangely	 enough,”	Kate	muttered,	“Edwina	 had	a	similar	reaction.”

      He	leaned	one	hand	against	the	arch,	carefully	avoiding	the	thorns	on	the
climbing	rose	vine.	“I	 find	 myself	insanely	curious	as	to	what	constitutes	good
behavior.”

      She	shrugged	and	fiddled	with	the	tulip	 in	her	hand.	“I	 expect	I	shall	figure
that	out	as	I	go	along.”

      “But	 you’re	not	 supposed	to	argue	with	your	host,	correct?”

      Kate	shot	him	an	arch	look.	“There	 was	some	debate	over	whether	or	not
you	qualify	 as	our	host,	my	lord.	After	 all,	the	invitation	 was	issued	by	your
mother.”

      “True,”	 he	acceded,	“but	I	do	own	the	house.”

      “Yes,”	 she	muttered,	“Mary	 said	as	much.”

      He	grinned.	“This	 is	killing	 you,	 isn’t	it?”

      “Being	 nice	to	you?”

      He	nodded.

      “It’s	 not	the	easiest	thing	I’ve	 ever	done.”

      His	expression	changed	slightly,	as	if	 he	might	be	done	teasing	her.	As	if	he
might	have	something	entirely	different	 on	his	mind.	“But	 it’s	 not	the	hardest
thing,	either,	now,	is	it?”	 he	murmured.

      “I	 don’t	like	 you,	my	 lord,”	she	blurted	out.

      “No,”	 he	said	with	 an	amused	smile.	“I	didn’t	 think	you	 did.”

      Kate	started	to	feel	very	strange,	much	like	she	had	in	his	study,	right	 before
he’d	kissed	her.	Her	throat	suddenly	felt	a	bit	tight,	 and	her	palms	grew	very
warm.	And	her	insides—well,	 there	was	really	nothing	to	describe	the	tense,

143
warm.	And	her	insides—well,	 there	was	really	nothing	to	describe	the	tense,
prickly	 feeling	that	tightened	through	her	abdomen.	Instinctively,	 and	perhaps
out	of	self-preservation,	she	took	a	step	back.

      He	looked	amused,	as	if	he	knew	exactly	what	she	was	thinking.

      She	fiddled	with	 the	flower	 some	more,	then	blurted	out,	“You	shouldn’t
have	picked	this.”

      “You	 should	have	a	tulip,”	 he	said	matter-of-factly.	 “It	 isn’t	right	 that
Edwina	receives	all	the	flowers.”

      Kate’s	stomach,	already	tense	and	prickly,	did	a	little	 flip.	 “Nonetheless,”
she	managed	to	say,	“your	gardener	will	surely	not	appreciate	the	mutilation	of
his	work.”

      He	smiled	devilishly.	 “He’ll	  blame	one	of	my	younger	siblings.”

      She	couldn’t	help	but	 smile.	“I	 should	think	less	of	you	for	 such	a	ploy,”	she
said.

      “But	 you	don’t?”

      She	shook	her	head.	“But	then	again,	it’s	not	as	if	my	 opinion	of	 you	could
sink	very	much	lower.”

      “Ouch.”	 He	shook	a	finger	at	her.	“I	 thought	you	were	supposed	to	be	on
your	best	behavior.”

      Kate	looked	around.	“It	 doesn’t	count	if	 there	is	no	one	nearby	to	hear	me,
right?”

      “I	 can	hear	you.”

      “You	certainly	 don’t	count.”

      His	head	dipped	a	little	 closer	in	her	direction.	“I	 should	think	 I	was	the	only
one	who	did.”

      Kate	said	nothing,	not	wanting	 even	to	meet	his	eyes.	Whenever	she	allowed
herself	one	glimpse	into	those	velvety	depths,	her	stomach	started	flipping	anew.

144
      “Miss	 Sheffield?”	 he	murmured.

      She	looked	up.	Big	mistake.	Her	stomach	flipped	 again.

      “Why	 did	you	 seek	me	out?”	she	asked.

      Anthony	 pushed	off	the	wooden	post	and	stood	straight.	“I	didn’t,	 actually.	I
was	just	as	surprised	to	see	you	as	you	were	me.”	Although,	he	thought
acerbically,	he	shouldn’t	have	been.	He	should	have	realized	his	mother	was	up
to	something	the	moment	she	actually	suggested	where	he	take	his	walk.

      But	could	 she	possibly	be	steering	him	to	the	wrong	Miss	Sheffield?	Surely
she	wouldn’t	choose	Kate	over	Edwina	as	a	prospective	daughter-in-law.

      “But	 now	that	I	have	found	you,”	 he	said,	“I	 did	have	something	I	wanted	to
say.”

      “Something	 you	haven’t	already	said?”	she	quipped.	“I	 can’t	imagine.”

      He	ignored	her	jibe.	“I	 wanted	to	apologize.”

      That	got	her	attention.	Her	lips	 parted	with	shock,	and	her	eyes	grew	round.
“I	beg	your	pardon?”	 she	said.	Anthony	thought	her	voice	sounded	rather	like	a
frog.

      “I	 owe	you	an	apology	for	 my	behavior	the	other	night,”	 he	said.	“I	treated
you	most	rudely.”

      “You’re	 apologizing	 for	the	kiss?”	 she	asked,	still	looking	rather	dazed.

      The	kiss?	He	hadn’t	even	considered	apologizing	for	 the	kiss.	He’d	never
apologized	for	a	kiss,	never	before	kissed	someone	for	whom	an	apology	might
be	necessary.	He’d	actually	been	thinking	more	of	the	unpleasant	things	he’d
said	to	her	after	the	kiss.	“Er,	yes,”	he	lied,	“the	 kiss.	And	for	 what	I	said,	as
well.”

      “I	 see,”	she	murmured.	“I	didn’t	 think	 rakes	apologized.”

      His	hand	flexed,	then	made	a	tight	fist.	 It	was	damned	annoying,	this	habit	of
hers	always	to	jump	to	conclusions	about	him.	“This	 rake	does,”	he	said	in
clipped	tones.

145
clipped	tones.

      She	took	a	deep	breath,	then	let	it	out	in	a	long,	steady	exhale.	“Then	I
accept	your	apology.”

      “Excellent,”	  he	said,	offering	his	most	winning	 smile.	“May	 I	escort	you
back	to	the	house?”

      She	nodded.	“But	don’t	 think	this	 means	that	I	will	suddenly	change	my
mind	about	you	and	Edwina.”

      “I	 would	never	dream	of	considering	 you	so	easily	swayed,”	he	said,	quite
honestly.

      She	turned	to	him,	her	eyes	startlingly	direct,	 even	for	her.	“The	fact	remains
that	you	kissed	me,”	she	said	bluntly.

      “And	 you	kissed	me,”	he	could	not	resist	returning.

      Her	cheeks	turned	a	delightful	shade	of	pink.	“The	 fact	remains,”	 she
repeated	determinedly,	“that	it	happened.	And	should	you	marry	Edwina—
regardless	of	your	reputation,	which	I	do	not	 consider	inconsequential—”

      “No,”	 he	murmured,	interrupting	 her	with	 velvet	soft	tones,	“I	 didn’t	 think
you	would.”

      She	glared	at	him.	“Regardless	of	your	reputation,	it	 would	always	be
between	us.	Once	something	happens,	you	can’t	take	it	away.”

      The	devil	 in	Anthony	 nearly	compelled	him	to	drawl	 the	word,	“It?”	 forcing
her	to	repeat	the	words,	“The	kiss,”	but	instead	he	took	pity	 on	her	and	let	it	go.
Besides,	she	had	a	good	point.	The	kiss	would	always	be	between	them.	Even
now,	with	her	cheeks	pinkened	by	embarrassment	and	her	lips	pursed	with
irritation,	 he	found	himself	wondering	 how	she’d	feel	if	 he	pulled	her	into	his
arms,	how	she’d	taste	if	he	traced	the	outline	of	her	lips	with	 his	tongue.

      Would	 she	smell	like	the	garden?	Or	would	that	maddening	scent	of	lilies
and	soap	still	cling	to	her	skin?

      Would	 she	melt	into	his	embrace?	Or	would	she	push	him	away	and	run	for
the	house?

146
      There	was	only	one	way	to	find	 out,	and	doing	so	would	ruin	 his	chances
with	Edwina	 forever.

      But	as	Kate	had	pointed	out,	maybe	marrying	Edwina	 would	bring	 with	it	 far
too	many	complications.	It	 would	not	do	to	be	lusting	 after	one’s	sister-in-law,
after	all.

      Maybe	the	time	had	come	to	search	out	a	new	bride,	tedious	though	the
prospect	may	be.

      Maybe	the	time	was	right	 to	kiss	Kate	Sheffield	again,	here	in	the	perfect
beauty	of	Aubrey	Hall’s	 gardens,	with	the	flowers	 grazing	their	legs	and	the
smell	of	lilac	 hanging	in	the	air.

      Maybe…

      Maybe…

147
Chapter	    9


Men	are	contrary	creatures.	Their	heads	and	their	hearts	are	never	in
agreement.	And	as	women	know	all	too	well,	their	actions	are	usually	governed
by	a	different	aspect	altogether.

                                                 LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	29	APRIL	1814



Or	 maybe	not.

      Just	as	Anthony	was	plotting	the	best	course	to	her	lips,	he	heard	the
perfectly	awful	sound	of	his	younger	brother’s	voice.

      “Anthony!”	Colin	shouted	out.	“There	you	are.”

      Miss	Sheffield,	blissfully	unaware	of	how	close	she’d	come	to	having	been
kissed	utterly	senseless,	turned	to	watch	Colin	approach.

      “One	of	these	days,”	Anthony	muttered,	“I’m	going	to	have	to	kill	him.”

      Kate	turned	back.	“Did	you	say	something,	my	lord?”

      Anthony	ignored	her.	It	was	probably	his	best	option,	since	not	ignoring	her
tended	to	leave	him	rather	desperately	lusting	after	her,	which	was,	as	he	well
knew,	a	short,	straight	road	to	utter	disaster.

      In	all	truth,	he	probably	should	have	thanked	Colin	for	his	untimely
interruption.	A	few	more	seconds,	and	he	would	have	kissed	Kate	Sheffield,
which	would	have	been	the	greatest	mistake	of	his	life.

      One	kiss	with	Kate	could	probably	be	excused,	especially	considering	how
far	she’d	provoked	him	the	other	night	in	his	study.	But	two…well,	two	would
have	required	any	man	of	honor	to	withdraw	his	courtship	of	Edwina	Sheffield.

      And	Anthony	wasn’t	quite	ready	to	give	up	on	the	concept	of	honor.

      He	couldn’t	believe	how	close	he’d	come	to	tossing	aside	his	plan	to	marry

148
      He	couldn’t	 believe	how	close	he’d	come	to	tossing	aside	his	plan	to	marry
Edwina.	What	was	he	thinking?	She	was	the	perfect	bride	for	his	purposes.	It
was	only	when	her	meddlesome	sister	was	around	that	his	brain	grew	confused.

      “Anthony,”	  Colin	 said	again	as	he	drew	near,	“and	Miss	Sheffield.”	He	eyed
them	curiously;	he	well	 knew	they	didn’t	 get	along.	“What	 a	surprise.”

      “I	 was	just	exploring	your	 mother’s	gardens,”	Kate	said,	“and	I	 stumbled
upon	your	brother.”

      Anthony	 gave	a	single	nod	of	agreement.

      “Daphne	and	Simon	are	here,”	Colin	 said.

      Anthony	 turned	to	Kate	and	explained,	“My	 sister	and	her	husband.”

      “The	 duke?”	she	inquired	politely.

      “The	 very	one,”	he	grumbled.

      Colin	 laughed	at	his	brother’s	pique.	“He	was	opposed	to	the	marriage,”	he
said	to	Kate.	“It	 kills	him	 that	they’re	happy.”

      “Oh,	 for	the	love	of—”	 Anthony	 snapped,	catching	himself	just	before	he
blasphemed	in	front	of	Kate.	“I’m	  very	happy	that	my	sister	is	happy,”	 he
ground	out,	not	sounding	particularly	 happy.	“It’s	 simply	 that	I	should	have	had
one	more	opportunity	to	beat	the	tar	out	of	that	bas—bounder	before	they
embarked	on	‘happily	ever	after.’	 ”

      Kate	choked	on	a	laugh.	“I	 see,”	she	said,	fairly	certain	that	she	had	not	kept
the	straight	face	she’d	been	aiming	for.

      Colin	 shot	her	a	grin	before	turning	back	to	his	brother.	“Daff	 suggested	a
game	of	Pall	Mall.	 What	do	you	say?	We	haven’t	played	for	ages.	And,	if	 we	set
off	soon,	we	can	escape	the	milksop	misses	Mother	has	invited	for	us.”	He
turned	back	to	Kate	with	the	sort	of	grin	 that	could	win	 forgiveness	for	anything.
“Present	company	excluded,	of	course.”

      “Of	 course,”	she	murmured.

      Colin	 leaned	forward,	his	green	eyes	flashing	with	mischief.	 “No	one	would

149
make	the	mistake	of	calling	you	a	milksop	 miss,”	he	added.

      “Is	 that	a	compliment?”	she	asked	acerbically.

      “Without	 a	doubt.”

      “Then	 I	shall	accept	it	with	 grace	and	good	favor.”

      Colin	 laughed	and	said	to	Anthony,	“I	 like	her.”

      Anthony	 didn’t	 look	amused.

      “Have	 you	ever	played	Pall	Mall,	 Miss	Sheffield?”	 Colin	 asked.

      “I’m	  afraid	not.	I’m	 not	even	sure	what	it	is.”

      “It’s	 a	lawn	game.	Brilliant	 fun.	 More	popular	in	 France	than	it	is	here,
although	they	call	it	Paille	 Maille.”

      “How	 does	one	play?”	Kate	asked.

      “We	 set	out	wickets	on	a	course,”	Colin	explained,	“then	 hit	wooden	balls
through	them	with	mallets.”

      “That	 sounds	simple	enough,”	she	mused.

      “Not,”	 he	said	with	 a	laugh,	“when	you’re	 playing	with	 the	Bridgertons.”

      “And	 what	does	that	mean?”

      “It	 means,”	Anthony	 cut	in,	“that	 we’ve	never	seen	the	need	to	set	out	a
regulation	course.	Colin	sets	out	the	wickets	over	tree	roots—”

      “And	 you	aimed	yours	toward	the	lake,”	 Colin	 interrupted.	“We	 never	did
find	the	red	ball	after	Daphne	sank	it.”

      Kate	knew	she	shouldn’t	be	committing	 herself	to	an	afternoon	in	the
company	of	Viscount	Bridgerton,	 but	dash	it	all,	Pall	 Mall	 sounded	fun.	“Might
there	be	room	for	one	more	player?”	she	inquired.	“Since	we’ve	 already
excluded	me	from	the	ranks	of	the	milksops?”

      “Of	 course!”	Colin	 said.	“I	 suspect	you’ll	fit	 right	 in	with	 the	rest	of	us

150
      “Of	course!”	Colin	said.	“I	suspect	you’ll	fit	right	in	with	the	rest	of	us
schemers	and	cheaters.”

      “Coming	from	you,”	Kate	said	with	a	laugh,	“I	know	that	was	a
compliment.”

      “Oh,	for	certain.	Honor	and	honesty	has	its	time	and	place,	but	not	in	a	game
of	Pall	Mall.”

      “And,”	Anthony	cut	in,	a	smug	expression	on	his	face,	“we	shall	have	to
invite	your	sister	as	well.”

      “Edwina?”	Kate	choked	out.	Drat.	She’d	just	played	right	into	his	hand.
She’d	been	doing	her	best	to	keep	the	two	of	them	apart,	and	now	she’d
practically	arranged	an	afternoon	out.	There	was	no	way	she	could	exclude
Edwina	after	all	but	inviting	herself	into	the	game.

      “Do	you	have	another	sister?”	he	asked	mildly.

      She	just	scowled	at	him.	“She	might	not	wish	to	play.	I	think	she	was	resting
in	her	room.”

      “I’ll	 instruct	the	maid	to	knock	very	lightly	on	her	door,”	Anthony	said,
obviously	lying.

      “Excellent!”	Colin	said	brightly.	“We	shall	be	evenly	matched.	Three	men
and	three	women.”

      “Does	one	play	on	teams?”	Kate	asked.

      “No,”	he	replied,	“but	my	mother	has	always	been	adamant	that	one	must	be
evenly	matched	in	all	things.	She’ll	be	quite	disturbed	if	we	go	out	in	odd
numbers.”

      Kate	couldn’t	imagine	the	lovely	and	gracious	woman	she’d	chatted	with
just	an	hour	earlier	getting	upset	over	a	game	of	Pall	Mall,	but	she	figured	it
wasn’t	her	place	to	comment.

      “I’ll	 see	to	fetching	Miss	Sheffield,”	Anthony	murmured,	looking
insufferably	smug.	“Colin,	why	don’t	you	see	this	Miss	Sheffield	down	to	the
field	and	I’ll	meet	you	there	in	half	an	hour?”

151
      Kate	opened	her	mouth	to	protest	the	arrangements	that	would	leave	Edwina
alone	in	the	viscount’s	company,	even	for	so	short	a	time	as	a	walk	down	to	the
field,	but	in	 the	end	she	remained	silent.	There	was	no	reasonable	excuse	she
could	give	to	prevent	it,	and	she	knew	it.

      Anthony	 caught	her	fishlike	spluttering	 and	quirked	one	corner	of	his	mouth
in	the	most	obnoxious	manner	before	he	said,	“I’m	 pleased	to	see	you	agree	with
me,	Miss	Sheffield.”

      She	just	grumbled.	If	 she’d	formed	words,	they	wouldn’t	 have	been	polite
ones.

      “Excellent,”	  Colin	said.	“We’ll	  see	you	then.”

      And	then	he	looped	his	arm	through	hers	and	led	her	away,	leaving	Anthony
smirking	behind	them.
                                                                	

Colin	and	Kate	walked	about	a	quarter	of	a	mile	from	the	house	to	a	somewhat	uneven	clearing	bordered	on
one	side	by	a	lake.

      “Home	 of	the	prodigal	red	ball,	 I	presume?”	Kate	queried,	motioning	 to	the
water.

      Colin	 laughed	and	nodded.	“It’s	a	pity,	 because	we	used	to	have	equipment
enough	for	eight	players;	Mother	had	insisted	on	our	purchasing	a	set	that	could
accommodate	all	of	her	children.”

      Kate	wasn’t	 certain	whether	to	smile	or	frown.	 “Yours	 is	a	very	close	family,
isn’t	it?”

      “The	 best,”	Colin	said	simply,	 walking	 over	to	a	nearby	shed.

      Kate	trailed	after	 him,	tapping	her	hand	idly	 against	her	thigh.	“Do	you
know	what	time	it	 is?”	she	called	out.

      He	paused,	pulled	out	his	pocket	watch,	and	flipped	it	 open.	“Ten	minutes
past	three.”

      “Thank	 you,”	Kate	 replied,	making	a	mental	note	of	it.	 They’d	probably	 left
Anthony	at	five	 to	three,	and	he’d	promised	to	deliver	Edwina	 to	the	Pall	Mall
field	within	 thirty	 minutes,	so	they	should	be	down	at	twenty-five	 past	the	hour.

152
field	within	 thirty	 minutes,	so	they	should	be	down	at	twenty-five	 past	the	hour.

      Half	 three	at	the	very	latest.	Kate	was	willing	 to	be	generous	and	allow	for
unavoidable	delays.	If	the	viscount	had	Edwina	down	 by	half	three,	she	wouldn’t
quibble.

      Colin	 resumed	his	trek	to	the	shed,	Kate	watching	with	interest	as	he
wrenched	open	the	door.	“It	sounds	rusty,”	she	commented.

      “It’s	 been	a	while	since	we’ve	been	out	here	to	play,”	 he	said.

      “Really?	 If	I	 had	a	house	like	Aubrey	Hall,	I	 would	never	go	to	London.”

      Colin	 turned	around,	his	hand	still	on	the	half-open	door	to	the	shed.
“You’re	 a	lot	like	 Anthony,	did	 you	know	that?”

      Kate	gasped.	“Surely	you’re	 joking.”

      He	shook	his	head,	a	strange	little	smile	on	his	lips.	“Perhaps	it’s	 because
you’re	both	the	eldest.	The	Lord	knows	I’m	 thankful	 every	day	I	wasn’t	 born	in
Anthony’s	 shoes.”

      “What	 do	you	mean?”

      Colin	 shrugged.	“I	simply	 wouldn’t	 want	his	responsibilities,	 that’s	all.	The
title,	the	family,	 the	fortune—it’s	 a	great	deal	to	fit	on	one	man’s	shoulders.”

      Kate	didn’t	 particularly	 want	to	hear	how	well	 the	viscount	had	assumed	the
responsibilities	of	his	title;	 she	didn’t	want	 to	hear	anything	that	might	change
her	opinion	of	him,	 although	she	had	to	confess	that	she’d	been	impressed	by	the
apparent	sincerity	of	his	apology	earlier	that	afternoon.	“What	 has	this	to	do	with
Aubrey	Hall?”	 she	inquired.

      Colin	 stared	at	her	blankly	for	a	moment,	as	if	he’d	forgotten	 that	the
conversation	had	started	with	her	innocent	comment	about	how	lovely	his
country	home	was.	“Nothing,	 I	suppose,”	he	said	finally.	 “And	 everything	as
well.	Anthony	 loves	it	here.”

      “But	 he	spends	all	his	time	in	London,”	 Kate	said.	“Doesn’t	 he?”

      “I	 know.”	 Colin	 shrugged.	“Odd,	isn’t	it?”

153
      “I	know.”	Colin	shrugged.	“Odd,	isn’t	it?”

      Kate	had	no	reply,	so	she	just	watched	as	he	pulled	the	door	to	the	shed	all
the	way	open.	“Here	we	are,”	he	said,	pulling	out	a	wheeled	cart	that	had	been
specially	constructed	to	fit	eight	mallets	and	wooden	balls.	“A	bit	musty,	but
none	the	worse	for	the	wear.”

      “Except	for	the	loss	of	the	red	ball,”	Kate	said	with	a	smile.

      “I	blame	that	entirely	on	Daphne,”	Colin	replied.	“I	blame	everything	on
Daphne.	It	makes	my	life	much	easier.”

      “I	heard	that!”

      Kate	turned	to	see	an	attractive	young	couple	approaching.	The	man	was
devastatingly	handsome,	with	dark,	dark	hair	and	light,	light	eyes.	The	woman
could	only	be	a	Bridgerton,	with	the	same	chestnut	hair	as	both	Anthony	and
Colin.	Not	to	mention	the	same	bone	structure	and	smile.	Kate	had	heard	that	all
the	Bridgertons	looked	rather	alike,	but	she’d	never	fully	believed	it	until	now.

      “Daff!”	 Colin	called	out.	“You’re	just	in	time	to	help	us	put	out	the	wickets.”

      She	gave	him	an	arch	smile.	“You	didn’t	think	I’d	let	you	set	up	the	course
yourself,	do	you?”	She	turned	to	her	husband.	“I	don’t	trust	him	as	far	as	I	can
throw	him.”

      “Don’t	listen	to	her,”	Colin	said	to	Kate.	“She’s	very	strong.	I’d	wager	she
could	toss	me	clear	into	the	lake.”

      Daphne	rolled	her	eyes	and	turned	to	Kate.	“Since	I’m	sure	my	miserable
brother	won’t	do	the	honors,	I’ll	introduce	myself.	I	am	Daphne,	Duchess	of
Hastings,	and	this	is	my	husband	Simon.”

      Kate	bobbed	a	quick	curtsy.	“Your	grace,”	she	murmured,	then	turned	to	the
duke	and	said	again,	“Your	grace.”

      Colin	waved	his	hand	toward	her	as	he	bent	down	to	retrieve	the	wickets
from	the	Pall	Mall	cart.	“This	is	Miss	Sheffield.”

      Daphne	looked	confused.	“I	just	passed	by	Anthony	at	the	house.	I	thought
he	said	he	was	on	his	way	to	fetch	Miss	Sheffield.”

154
      “My	sister,”	Kate	explained.	“Edwina.	I	am	Katharine.	Kate	to	my	friends.”

      “Well,	if	you	are	brave	enough	to	play	Pall	Mall	with	the	Bridgertons,	I
definitely	want	you	as	my	friend,”	Daphne	said	with	a	wide	smile.	“Therefore
you	must	call	me	Daphne.	And	my	husband	Simon.	Simon?”

      “Oh,	of	course,”	he	said,	and	Kate	had	the	distinct	impression	that	he	would
have	said	the	same	had	she	just	declared	the	sky	orange.	Not	that	he	wasn’t
listening	to	her,	just	that	it	was	clear	he	adored	her	to	distraction.

      This,	Kate	thought,	was	what	she	wanted	for	Edwina.

      “Let	me	take	half	of	those,”	Daphne	said,	reaching	for	the	wickets	in	her
brother’s	hand.	“Miss	Sheffield	andI…that	is,	Kate	and	I”—she	flashed	Kate	a
friendly	grin—“will	 set	up	three	of	them,	and	you	and	Simon	can	do	the	rest.”

      Before	Kate	could	even	venture	an	opinion,	Daphne	had	taken	her	by	the
arm	and	was	leading	her	toward	the	lake.

      “We	have	to	make	absolutely	certain	that	Anthony	loses	his	ball	in	the
water,”	Daphne	muttered.	“I	have	never	forgiven	him	for	last	time.	I	thought
Benedict	and	Colin	were	going	to	die	laughing.	And	Anthony	was	the	worst.	He
just	stood	there	smirking.	Smirking!”	She	turned	to	Kate	with	a	most
beleaguered	expression.	“No	one	smirks	quite	like	my	eldest	brother.”

      “I	know,”	Kate	muttered	under	her	breath.

      Thankfully,	the	duchess	hadn’t	heard	her.	“If	I	could	have	killed	him,	I	vow
I	would	have.”

      “What	will	happen	once	all	your	balls	are	lost	in	the	lake?”	Kate	couldn’t
resist	asking.	“I	haven’t	played	with	you	lot	yet,	but	you	do	seem	rather
competitive,	and	it	seems…”

      “That	it	would	be	inevitable?”	Daphne	finished	for	her.	She	grinned.
“You’re	probably	right.	We	have	no	sense	of	sportsmanship	when	it	comes	to
Pall	Mall.	When	a	Bridgerton	picks	up	a	mallet,	we	become	the	worst	sorts	of
cheaters	and	liars.	Truly,	the	game	is	less	about	winning	than	making	sure	the
other	players	lose.”

      Kate	fought	for	words.	“It	sounds…”

155
      Kate	fought	for	 words.	“It	 sounds…”

      “Awful?”	  Daphne	grinned.	“It’s	 not.	 You’ll	 never	have	more	fun,	I
guarantee	it.	But	at	the	rate	we’re	going,	the	entire	set	will	 end	up	in	the	lake	ere
long.	I	suppose	we’ll	 have	to	send	to	France	for	another	set.”	She	jammed	a
wicket	into	 the	ground.	“It	seems	a	waste,	I	know,	but	worth	it	 to	humiliate	 my
brothers.”

      Kate	tried	not	to	 laugh,	but	she	didn’t	succeed.

      “Do	 you	have	any	brothers,	Miss	Sheffield?”	 Daphne	asked.

      Since	the	duchess	had	forgotten	to	use	her	given	name,	Kate	deemed	it	best
to	revert	to	formal	manners.	“None,	your	 grace,”	she	replied.	“Edwina	 is	my
only	sibling.”

      Daphne	shaded	her	eyes	with	her	hand	and	scanned	the	area	for	a	devilish
wicket	location.	 When	she	spied	one—sitting	right	atop	a	tree	root—she
marched	away,	leaving	Kate	no	choice	but	to	follow.

      “Four	 brothers,”	Daphne	said,	shoving	the	wicket	into	 the	ground,	“provide
quite	a	marvelous	education.”

      “The	 things	you	must	have	learned,”	Kate	said,	quite	impressed.	“Can	you
give	a	man	a	black	eye?	Knock	him	to	the	ground?”

      Daphne	grinned	wickedly.	 “Ask	 my	husband.”

      “Ask	 me	what?”	the	duke	called	out	from	 where	he	and	Colin	were	placing	a
wicket	on	a	tree	root	on	the	opposite	side	of	the	tree.

      “Nothing,”	  the	duchess	called	out	innocently.	“I’ve	 also	learned,”	she
whispered	to	Kate,	“when	it’s	 best	just	to	keep	one’s	mouth	shut.	Men	are	much
easier	to	manage	once	you	understand	a	few	basic	facts	about	their	nature.”

      “Which	 are?”	Kate	prompted.

      Daphne	leaned	forward	and	whispered	behind	her	cupped	hand,	“They’re
not	as	smart	as	we	are,	they’re	not	as	intuitive	as	we	are,	and	they	certainly	don’t
need	to	know	about	fifty	 percent	of	what	we	do.”	She	looked	around.	“He	 didn’t
hear	that,	did	he?”

156
      Simon	stepped	out	from	behind	the	tree.	“Every	 word.”

      Kate	choked	on	a	laugh	as	Daphne	jumped	a	foot.	“But	it’s	 true,”	 Daphne
said	archly.

      Simon	crossed	his	arms.	“I’ll	 let	 you	think	so.”	 He	turned	to	Kate.	“I’ve
learned	a	thing	or	two	about	women	over	the	years.”

      “Really?”	 Kate	asked,	fascinated.

      He	nodded	and	leaned	in,	as	if	imparting	a	grave	state	secret.	“They’re	much
easier	to	manage	if	one	allows	them	to	believe	that	they	are	smarter	and	more
intuitive	 than	men.	And,”	he	added	with	a	superior	glance	at	his	wife,	“our	 lives
are	much	more	peaceful	if	we	pretend	that	we’re	only	aware	of	about	fifty
percent	of	what	they	do.”

      Colin	 approached,	swinging	a	mallet	in	a	low	arc.	“Are	 they	having	a	spat?”
he	asked	Kate.

      “A	 discussion,”	Daphne	corrected.

      “God	 save	me	from	such	discussions,”	Colin	muttered.	“Let’s	 choose
colors.”

      Kate	followed	 him	back	to	the	Pall	 Mall	set,	her	fingers	drumming	 against
her	thigh.	“Do	 you	have	the	time?”	she	asked	him.

      Colin	 pulled	out	his	pocket	watch.	“A	 bit	 after	half	three,	why?”

      “I	 just	thought	that	Edwina	 and	the	viscount	would	be	down	by	now,	that’s
all,”	she	said,	trying	not	 to	look	too	concerned.

      Colin	 shrugged.	“They	should	be.”	Then,	completely	 oblivious	 to	her
distress,	he	motioned	to	the	Pall	Mall	set.	“Here.	You’re	 the	guest.	You	choose
first.	What	color	 do	you	want?”

      Without	 giving	 it	much	thought,	Kate	reached	in	and	grabbed	a	mallet.	It
was	only	when	it	was	in	her	hand	that	she	realized	it	was	black.

      “The	 mallet	of	death,”	Colin	 said	approvingly.	 “I	 knew	she’d	make	a	fine
player.”

157
player.”

      “Leave	the	pink	 one	for	Anthony,”	 Daphne	said,	reaching	for	the	green
mallet.

      The	duke	pulled	the	orange	mallet	out	of	 the	set,	turning	to	Kate	as	he	said,
“You	 are	my	witness	that	I	had	nothing	to	do	with	 Bridgerton’s	 pink	mallet,
yes?”

      Kate	smiled	wickedly.	 “I	 noticed	that	you	didn’t	 choose	the	pink	mallet.”

      “Of	 course	not,”	he	returned,	his	grin	even	more	devious	than	hers.	“My
wife	had	already	chosen	it	for	him.	 I	could	not	gainsay	her,	now,	could	I?”

      “Yellow	  for	me,”	 Colin	said,	“and	blue	for	 Miss	Edwina,	 don’t	you	think?”

      “Oh,	 yes,”	Kate	replied.	“Edwina	 loves	blue.”

      The	foursome	stared	down	at	the	two	mallets	left:	 pink	and	purple.

      “He’s	 not	going	to	like	 either	one,”	Daphne	said.

      Colin	 nodded.	“But	he’ll	 like	 pink	even	less.”	And	 with	that,	he	picked	up
the	purple	mallet	and	tossed	it	into	the	shed,	then	reached	down	and	sent	the
purple	ball	in	after	it.

      “I	 say,”	the	duke	said,	“where	is	Anthony?”

      “That’s	 a	very	good	question,”	Kate	 muttered,	tapping	her	hand	against	her
thigh.

      “I	 suppose	you’ll	want	 to	know	what	time	 it	is,”	 Colin	said	slyly.

      Kate	flushed.	She’d	already	asked	him	to	check	his	pocket	watch	twice.	 “I’m
fine,	thank	you,”	 she	answered,	lacking	a	witty	retort.

      “Very	 well.	 It’s	just	 that	I’ve	learned	that	once	you	start	moving	your	 hand
like	that—”

      Kate’s	hand	froze.

      “—you’re	  usually	about	ready	to	ask	me	what	time	it	is.”

158
      “You’ve	 learned	quite	a	lot	 about	me	in	the	past	hour,”	Kate	said	dryly.

      He	grinned.	“I’m	  an	observant	fellow.”

      “Obviously,”	  she	muttered.

      “But	 in	case	you	wanted	to	know,	it’s	 a	quarter	of	an	hour	before	four.”

      “They’re	 past	due,”	Kate	said.

      Colin	 leaned	forward	and	whispered,	“I	highly	 doubt	that	my	 brother	is
ravishing	your	sister.”

      Kate	lurched	back.	“Mr.	 Bridgerton!”

      “What	 are	you	two	talking	 about?”	Daphne	asked.

      Colin	 grinned.	“Miss	 Sheffield	is	worried	 that	Anthony	 is	compromising	the
other	Miss	Sheffield.”

      “Colin!”	  Daphne	exclaimed.	“That	 isn’t	the	least	bit	funny.”

      “And	 certainly	 not	true,”	Kate	protested.	Well,	 almost	not	true.	She	didn’t
think	the	viscount	was	compromising	 Edwina,	but	he	was	probably	doing	his
very	best	to	charm	her	silly.	And	 that	was	dangerous	in	and	of	itself.

      Kate	pondered	the	mallet	in	her	hand	and	tried	to	figure	out	 how	she	might
bring	it	down	 upon	the	viscount’s	head	and	make	it	look	like	 an	accident.

      The	mallet	of	 death,	indeed.
                                                                	

Anthony	checked	the	clock	on	the	mantel	in	his	study.	Almost	half	three.	They	were	going	to	be	late.

      He	grinned.	Oh,	well,	 nothing	to	do	about	it.

      Normally	 he	was	a	stickler	for	punctuality,	 but	when	tardiness	resulted	in	the
torture	of	Kate	Sheffield,	 he	didn’t	much	mind	 a	late	arrival.

      And	Kate	 Sheffield	was	surely	writhing	 in	agony	by	 now,	horrified	 at	the
thought	of	her	precious	younger	sister	in	his	evil	 clutches.

159
      Anthony	 looked	down	at	his	evil	 clutches—hands,	he	reminded	himself,
hands—and	grinned	anew.	He	hadn’t	had	this	much	fun	in	ages,	and	all	he	was
doing	was	loitering	about	his	office,	 picturing	 Kate	Sheffield	 with	her	jaw
clenched	together,	steam	pouring	from	her	ears.

      It	was	a	highly	 entertaining	image.

      Not,	of	 course,	that	this	was	even	his	fault.	He	would	have	left	right	 on	time
if	he	hadn’t	had	to	wait	 for	Edwina.	She’d	sent	word	down	 with	the	maid	that
she	would	join	him	 in	ten	minutes.	That	was	twenty	minutes	ago.	He	couldn’t
help	it	if	 she	was	late.

      Anthony	 had	a	sudden	image	of	the	rest	of	his	life—waiting	 for	Edwina.
Was	she	the	sort	who	was	chronically	late?	That	might	grow	vexing	 after	a
while.

      As	if	 on	cue,	he	heard	the	patter	of	footsteps	in	the	hall,	and	when	he	looked
up,	Edwina’s	exquisite	form	 was	framed	by	the	doorway.

      She	was,	he	thought	dispassionately,	a	vision.	Utterly	lovely	 in	every	way.
Her	face	was	perfection,	her	posture	the	epitome	of	grace,	and	her	eyes	were	the
most	radiant	shade	of	blue,	so	vivid	that	one	could	not	help	but	be	surprised	by
their	hue	every	time	she	blinked.

      Anthony	 waited	for	some	sort	of	reaction	to	rise	up	within	 him.	 Surely	no
man	could	be	immune	to	her	beauty.

      Nothing.	 Not	even	the	slightest	urge	to	kiss	her.	It	almost	seemed	a	crime
against	nature.

      But	maybe	this	was	a	good	thing.	After	 all,	he	didn’t	 want	a	wife	 with	whom
he’d	fall	in	 love.	Desire	would	 have	been	nice,	but	desire	could	be	dangerous.
Desire	certainly	had	a	greater	chance	of	sliding	into	love	than	did	disinterest.

      “I’m	  terribly	sorry	 I’m	 late,	my	lord,”	 Edwina	said	prettily.

      “It	 was	no	trouble	whatsoever,”	he	replied,	feeling	 a	bit	brightened	by	his
recent	set	of	rationalizations.	She’d	still	 work	just	fine	 as	a	bride.	No	need	to
look	elsewhere.	“But	we	should	be	on	our	way.	 The	others	will	have	the	course
set	up	already.”

160
      He	took	her	arm	and	they	strolled	out	of	 the	house.	He	remarked	on	the
weather.	She	remarked	on	the	weather.	He	remarked	on	the	previous	day’s
weather.	She	agreed	with	whatever	he’d	said	(he	couldn’t	even	remember,	one
minute	later).

      After	 exhausting	all	possible	weather-related	topics,	they	fell	 into	silence,
and	then	finally,	after	a	full	 three	minutes	of	neither	of	 them	having	anything	to
say,	Edwina	blurted	out,	“What	 did	you	study	at	university?”

      Anthony	 looked	at	her	oddly.	He	couldn’t	 remember	ever	being	asked	such	a
question	by	a	young	lady.	“Oh,	the	usual,”	 he	replied.

      “But	 what,”	 she	ground	out,	looking	most	uncharacteristically	 impatient,	“is
the	usual?”

      “History,	 mostly.	 A	bit	 of	literature.”

      “Oh.”	 She	pondered	that	for	a	moment.	“I	love	 to	read.”

      “Do	 you?”	He	eyed	her	with	 renewed	interest.	He	wouldn’t	have	taken	her
for	a	bluestocking.	“What	 do	you	like	 to	read?”

      She	seemed	to	relax	as	she	answered	the	question.	“Novels	if	I’m	feeling
fanciful.	Philosophy	 if	I’m	 in	 the	mood	for	self-improvement.”

      “Philosophy,	 eh?”	Anthony	 queried.	“Never	could	 stomach	the	stuff
myself.”

      Edwina	let	 out	one	of	her	charmingly	musical	laughs.	“Kate	 is	the	same	way.
She	is	forever	telling	me	that	she	knows	perfectly	well	 how	to	live	 her	life	and
doesn’t	need	a	dead	man	to	give	her	instructions.”

      Anthony	 thought	about	his	experiences	reading	Aristotle,	Bentham,	and
Descartes	at	university.	Then	he	thought	about	his	experiences	avoiding	reading
Aristotle,	Bentham,	and	Descartes	at	university.	“I	 think,”	 he	murmured,	“that	 I
would	have	to	agree	with	your	sister.”

      Edwina	grinned.	 “You,	agree	with	Kate?	I	feel	I	 should	find	a	notebook	and
record	the	moment.	Surely	this	must	be	a	first.”

      He	gave	her	a	sideways,	assessing	sort	of	glance.	“You’re	more	impertinent

161
      He	gave	her	a	sideways,	assessing	sort	of	glance.	“You’re	more	impertinent
than	you	let	on,	aren’t	you?”

      “Not	 half	as	much	as	Kate.”

      “That	 was	never	in	doubt.”

      He	heard	Edwina	let	out	a	little	 giggle,	and	when	he	looked	over	at	her,	she
appeared	to	be	trying	her	hardest	to	maintain	a	straight	face.	They	rounded	the
final	corner	to	the	field,	 and	as	they	came	over	the	rise,	they	saw	the	rest	of	the
Pall	Mall	 party	waiting	 for	them,	idly	 swinging	their	 mallets	to	and	fro	as	they
waited.

      “Oh,	 bloody	hell,”	 Anthony	 swore,	completely	forgetting	 that	he	was	in	the
company	of	the	woman	he	planned	to	make	his	wife.	“She’s	got	 the	mallet	of
death.”

162
Chapter	    10


The	country	house	party	is	a	very	dangerous	event.	Married	persons	often	find
themselves	enjoying	the	company	of	one	other	than	one’s	spouse,	and	unmarried
persons	often	return	to	town	as	rather	hastily	engaged	persons.

      Indeed,	the	most	surprising	betrothals	are	announced	on	the	heels	of	these
spells	of	rustication.

                                                    LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	2	MAY	1814



“You	  certainly	took	your	time	getting	here,”	Colin	remarked	as	soon	as
Anthony	and	Edwina	reached	the	group.	“Here,	we’re	ready	to	go.	Edwina,
you’re	blue.”	He	handed	her	a	mallet.	“Anthony,	you’re	pink.”

      “I’m	pink	and	she”—he	jabbed	a	finger	toward	Kate—“gets	to	have	the
mallet	of	death?”

      “I	gave	her	first	pick,”	Colin	said.	“She	is	our	guest,	after	all.”

      “Anthony	is	usually	black,”	Daphne	explained.	“In	fact,	he	gave	the	mallet
its	name.”

      “You	shouldn’t	have	to	be	pink,”	Edwina	said	to	Anthony.	“It	doesn’t	suit
you	at	all.	Here”—she	held	out	her	mallet—“why	don’t	we	trade?”

      “Don’t	be	silly,”	Colin	interjected.	“We	specifically	decided	that	you	must
be	blue.	To	match	your	eyes.”

      Kate	thought	she	heard	Anthony	groan.

      “I	will	 be	pink,”	Anthony	announced,	grabbing	the	offending	mallet	rather
forcefully	from	Colin’s	hand,	“and	I	will	still	win.	Let’s	begin,	shall	we?”

      As	soon	as	the	necessary	introductions	were	made	between	the	duke	and
duchess	and	Edwina,	they	all	plopped	their	wooden	balls	down	near	the	starting
point	and	prepared	to	play.

163
point	and	prepared	to	play.

      “Shall	 we	play	youngest	to	oldest?”	Colin	 suggested,	with	a	gallant	bow	in
Edwina’s	direction.

      She	shook	her	head.	“I	should	rather	go	last,	so	that	I	might	have	a	chance	to
observe	the	play	of	those	more	experienced	than	I.”

      “A	 wise	woman,”	 Colin	murmured.	 “Then	we	shall	play	 oldest	to	youngest.
Anthony,	I	 believe	you’re	the	most	ancient	among	us.”

      “Sorry,	 brother	dear,	but	Hastings	has	a	few	months	on	me.”

      “Why,”	  Edwina	whispered	in	Kate’s	 ear,	“do	I	get	the	feeling	I	 am	intruding
upon	a	family	spat?”

      “I	 think	the	Bridgertons	 take	Pall	Mall	 very	seriously,”	 Kate	whispered	back.
The	three	Bridgerton	siblings	had	assumed	bulldog	faces,	and	they	all	appeared
rather	single-mindedly	determined	to	win.

      “Eh	 eh	eh!”	Colin	 scolded,	waving	a	finger	at	them.	“No	 collusion	allowed.”

      “We	 wouldn’t	 even	begin	to	know	where	to	collude,”	 Kate	commented,	“as
no	one	has	seen	fit	to	even	explain	to	us	the	rules	of	play.”

      “Just	follow	 along,”	 Daphne	said	briskly.	“You’ll	   figure	it	 out	as	you	go.”

      “I	 think,”	 Kate	whispered	to	Edwina,	 “that	the	object	is	to	sink	your
opponents’	balls	into	the	lake.”

      “Really?”

      “No.	 But	I	think	 that’s	how	 the	Bridgertons	see	it.”

      “You’re	 still	 whispering!”	  Colin	called	out	without	 sparing	a	glance	in	their
direction.	Then,	to	the	duke,	he	barked,	“Hastings,	hit	the	bloody	 ball.	We
haven’t	all	day.”

      “Colin,”	  Daphne	cut	in,	“don’t	 curse.	There	are	ladies	present.”

      “You	 don’t	 count.”

      “There	are	two	ladies	present	who	are	not	me,”	she	ground	out.

164
      “There	are	two	ladies	present	who	are	not	me,”	she	ground	out.

      Colin	 blinked,	then	turned	to	the	Sheffield	 sisters.	“Do	you	mind?”

      “Not	 at	all,”	 Kate	replied,	utterly	 fascinated.	Edwina	just	shook	her	head.

      “Good.”	 Colin	 turned	back	to	the	duke.	“Hastings,	get	moving.”

      The	duke	nudged	his	ball	a	bit	forward	 from	the	rest	of	the	pile.	 “You	 do
realize,”	he	said	to	no	one	in	particular,	“that	 I	have	never	played	Pall	Mall
before?”

      “Just	give	the	ball	 a	good	whack	in	that	direction,	darling,”	 Daphne	said,
pointing	to	the	first	 wicket.

      “Isn’t	 that	the	last	wicket?”	 Anthony	 asked.

      “It’s	 the	first.”

      “It	 ought	to	be	the	last.”

      Daphne’s	jaw	jutted	 out.	“I	 set	up	the	course,	and	it’s	the	first.”

      “I	 think	this	 might	get	bloody,”	 Edwina	whispered	to	Kate.

      The	duke	turned	to	Anthony	 and	flashed	him	a	false	smile.	“I	 believe	I’ll
take	Daphne’s	word	for	it.”

      “She	did	set	up	the	course,”	Kate	cut	in.

      Anthony,	 Colin,	Simon,	 and	Daphne	all	looked	at	her	in	shock,	as	if	they
couldn’t	quite	 believe	she’d	had	the	nerve	to	enter	the	conversation.

      “Well,	 she	did,”	 Kate	said.

      Daphne	looped	her	arm	through	hers.	“I	do	believe	I	 adore	you,	Kate
Sheffield,”	 she	announced.

      “God	 help	me,”	Anthony	 muttered.

      The	duke	drew	back	his	mallet,	let	 fly,	and	soon	the	orange	ball	was	hurtling
along	the	lawn.

165
along	the	lawn.

      “Well	 done,	Simon!”	 Daphne	cried	out.

      Colin	 turned	and	looked	at	his	sister	with	disdain.	“One	never	cheers	one’s
opponents	in	Pall	Mall,”	 he	said	archly.

      “He’s	 never	played	before,”	she	said.	“He’s	not	 likely	 to	win.”

      “Doesn’t	 matter.”

      Daphne	turned	to	Kate	and	Edwina	and	explained,	“Bad	sportsmanship	is	a
requirement	in	Bridgerton	Pall	 Mall,	 I’m	 afraid.”

      “I’d	 gathered,”	Kate	 said	dryly.

      “My	 turn,”	 Anthony	 barked.	He	gave	the	pink	ball	a	disdainful	 glance,	then
gave	it	a	good	whack.	It	sailed	splendidly	over	 the	grass,	only	to	slam	into	a	tree
and	drop	like	a	stone	to	the	ground.

      “Brilliant!”	   Colin	 exclaimed,	getting	ready	to	take	his	turn.

      Anthony	 muttered	a	few	things	under	his	breath,	none	of	which	were
suitable	for	gentle	ears.

      Colin	 sent	the	yellow	ball	toward	 the	first	wicket,	 then	stepped	aside	to	let
Kate	try	her	hand.

      “Might	 I	 have	a	practice	swing?”	she	inquired.

      “No.”	 It	 was	a	rather	loud	no,	coming,	as	it	did,	from	 three	mouths.

      “Very	 well,”	 she	grumbled.	“Stand	back,	all	 of	you.	I	won’t	 be	held
responsible	if	I	injure	 anyone	on	the	first	try.”	 She	drew	back	on	her	mallet	with
all	her	might	and	slammed	it	into	 the	ball.	It	sailed	through	the	air	in	 a	rather
impressive	arc,	then	smacked	into	the	same	tree	that	had	foiled	Anthony	and
plopped	on	the	ground	right	next	to	his	ball.

      “Oh,	 dear,”	Daphne	said,	setting	her	aim	by	drawing	back	on	her	mallet	a
few	times	without	 actually	hitting	 the	ball.

      “Why	 ‘oh,	 dear’?”	Kate	asked	worriedly,	 not	reassured	by	the	duchess’s

166
      “Why	 ‘oh,	 dear’?”	Kate	asked	worriedly,	 not	reassured	by	the	duchess’s
faintly	pitying	 smile.

      “You’ll	  see.”	Daphne	took	her	turn,	then	marched	off	in	 the	direction	of	her
ball.

      Kate	looked	over	at	Anthony.	 He	looked	very,	 very	pleased	with	the	current
state	of	affairs.

      “What	 are	you	going	to	do	to	me?”	she	asked.

      He	leaned	forward	devilishly.	 “What	 am	I	not	going	 to	do	to	you	might	 be	a
more	appropriate	question.”

      “I	 believe	it’s	 my	turn,”	 Edwina	said,	stepping	up	to	the	starting	point.	She
gave	her	ball	an	anemic	hit,	then	groaned	when	it	traveled	only	a	third	as	far	as
the	rest.

      “Put	a	bit	 more	muscle	into	it	next	time,”	 Anthony	 said	before	stalking	over
to	his	ball.

      “Right,”	  Edwina	muttered	at	his	back.	“I	 never	would	have	figured	that	out.”

      “Hastings!”	 Anthony	 yelled.	“It’s	  your	turn.”

      While	 the	duke	tapped	his	ball	toward	the	next	wicket,	Anthony	 leaned
against	the	tree	with	crossed	arms,	his	ridiculous	pink	mallet	hanging	from	 one
hand,	and	waited	for	Kate.

      “Oh,	 Miss	Sheffield,”	 he	finally	 called	out.	“Play	 of	the	game	dictates	that
one	follow	one’s	ball!”

      He	watched	her	tromp	over	to	his	side.	“There,”	 she	grumbled.	“Now	 what?”

      “You	 really	ought	 to	treat	me	with	more	respect,”	he	said,	offering	her	a
slow,	sly	smile.

      “After	 you	 tarried	with	Edwina?”	 she	shot	back.	“What	I	ought	 to	do	is	have
you	drawn	and	quartered.”

      “Such	a	bloodthirsty	 wench,”	he	mused.	“You’ll	  do	well	 at	Pall	Mall…
eventually.”

167
eventually.”

      He	watched,	utterly	entertained,	as	her	face	grew	red,	then	white.	“What	 do
you	mean?”	she	asked.

      “For	 the	love	of	God,	Anthony,”	 Colin	 yelled.	“Take	 your	bloody	 turn.”

      Anthony	 looked	down	to	where	the	wooden	balls	sat	kissing	on	the	grass,
hers	black,	his	appallingly	pink.	 “Right,”	 he	murmured.	“Wouldn’t	  want	to	keep
dear,	sweet	Colin	waiting.”	 And	with	 that,	he	put	his	foot	atop	his	ball,	drew
back	his	mallet—

      “What	 are	you	doing?”	Kate	shrieked.

      —and	let	fly.	 His	ball	 remained	firmly	 in	place	under	his	boot.	Hers	went
sailing	down	the	hill	 for	what	 seemed	like	miles.

      “You	 fiend,”	 she	growled.

      “All’s	  fair	in	 love	and	war,”	he	quipped.

      “I	 am	going	to	kill	 you.”

      “You	 can	try,”	 he	taunted,	“but	you’ll	 have	to	catch	up	with	me	first.”

      Kate	pondered	the	mallet	of	death,	then	pondered	his	foot.

      “Don’t	 even	think	 about	it,”	 he	warned.

      “It’s	 so	very,	very	 tempting,”	she	growled.

      He	leaned	forward	menacingly.	 “We	have	witnesses.”

      “And	 that	is	the	only	thing	 saving	your	life	 right	now.”

      He	merely	smiled.	“I	 believe	your	 ball	is	down	the	hill,	 Miss	 Sheffield.	I’m
sure	we’ll	see	you	in	a	half	hour	or	so,	when	you	catch	up.”

      Just	then	Daphne	marched	by,	following	 her	ball,	which	had	sailed
unnoticed	past	their	feet.	“That	was	why	I	 said	‘oh,	dear,’	”	 she	said—rather
unnecessarily,	in	Kate’s	opinion.

168
      “You’ll	  pay	for	 this,”	Kate	hissed	at	Anthony.

      His	smirk	 said	more	than	words	ever	could.

      And	then	she	marched	down	the	hill,	 letting	out	a	loud	and	extremely
unladylike	curse	when	she	realized	her	ball	was	lodged	under	a	hedge.
                                                                	

Half	an	hour	later	Kate	was	still	two	wickets	behind	the	next-to-last	player.	Anthony	was	winning,	which
irked	her	to	no	end.	The	only	saving	grace	was	that	she	was	so	far	behind	she	couldn’t	see	his	gloating	face.

      Then	as	she	was	twiddling	her	thumbs	and	waiting	for	 her	turn	(there	was
precious	little	else	to	do	while	 waiting	for	 her	turn,	as	no	other	players	were
remotely	near	her),	she	heard	Anthony	let	out	an	aggrieved	shout.

      This	immediately	 got	her	attention.

      Beaming	with	 anticipation	at	his	possible	demise,	she	looked	eagerly	about
until	she	saw	the	pink	ball	hurtling	 along	the	grass,	straight	at	her.

      “Urp!”	  Kate	gurgled,	jumping	 up	and	darting	quickly	 to	the	side	before	she
lost	a	toe.

      Looking	 back	up,	she	saw	Colin	leaping	into	the	air,	his	mallet	 swinging
wildly	 above	him,	as	he	cried	out	exultantly,	“Woo-hoo!”

      Anthony	 looked	as	if	he	might	disembowel	 his	brother	on	the	spot.

      Kate	would	 have	done	a	little	victory	 dance	herself—if	she	couldn’t	 win,	the
next	best	thing	was	knowing	that	he	wouldn’t—except	 now	it	 seemed	that	he’d
be	stuck	back	with	her	for	a	few	turns.	And	 while	her	solitude	wasn’t	 terribly
entertaining,	it	was	better	than	having	to	make	conversation	with	him.

      Still,	 it	was	difficult	  not	to	look	just	a	little	 bit	 smug	when	he	came	tromping
over	toward	her,	scowling	as	if	a	thundercloud	had	just	lodged	itself	 in	his	brain.

      “Bad	 luck	there,	my	lord,”	 Kate	murmured.

      He	glared	at	her.

      She	sighed—just	for	effect,	 of	course.	“I’m	 sure	you’ll	 still	 manage	to	place
second	or	third.”

169
second	or	third.”

      He	leaned	forward	menacingly	 and	made	a	sound	suspiciously	like	a	growl.

      “Miss	 Sheffield!”	 came	Colin’s	 impatient	holler	 from	up	the	hill.	 “It’s	 your
turn!”

      “So	it	 is,”	Kate	said,	analyzing	 her	possible	shots.	She	could	aim	for	the	next
wicket	or	she	could	attempt	to	sabotage	Anthony	even	further.	Unfortunately,	 his
ball	wasn’t	touching	 hers,	so	she	couldn’t	attempt	the	foot-on-the-ball	maneuver
he’d	used	on	her	earlier	in	the	game.	Which	was	probably	for	the	best.	With	 her
luck,	she’d	end	up	missing	the	ball	entirely	 and	instead	breaking	her	foot.

      “Decisions,	 decisions,”	she	murmured.

      Anthony	 crossed	his	arms.	“The	only	way	you’re	 going	to	ruin	 my	game	is
to	ruin	yours	as	well.”

      “True,”	 she	acceded.	If	she	wanted	to	send	him	into	oblivion,	she’d	have	to
send	herself	there	as	well,	since	she’d	have	to	hit	hers	with	all	she	was	worth	just
to	get	his	to	move.	And	since	she	couldn’t	hold	 hers	in	place,	heaven	only	knew
where	she’d	end	up.

      “But,”	 she	said,	looking	 up	at	him	and	smiling	innocently,	 “I	 really	have	no
chance	of	winning	the	game,	anyway.”

      “You	 could	come	in	second	or	third,”	 he	tried.

      She	shook	her	head.	“Unlikely,	 don’t	you	 think?	I’m	 so	far	behind	as	it	is,
and	we	are	nearing	the	end	of	play.”

      “You	 don’t	 want	to	do	this,	Miss	Sheffield,”	 he	warned.

      “Oh,”	 she	said	with	great	feeling,	“I	 do.	I	 really,	really	 do.”	And	 then,	with
quite	the	most	evil	grin	her	lips	 had	ever	formed,	she	drew	back	her	mallet	and
smacked	her	ball	with	every	ounce	of	every	single	emotion	within	 her.	It
knocked	into	his	with	 stunning	force,	sending	it	hurtling	 even	farther	down	the
hill.

      Farther…

      Farther…

170
      Farther…

      Right	into	 the	lake.

      Openmouthed	with	delight,	 Kate	just	stared	for	a	moment	as	the	pink	ball
sank	into	the	lake.	Then	something	rose	up	within	her,	some	strange	and
primitive	 emotion,	and	before	she	knew	what	she	was	about,	she	was	jumping
about	like	a	crazy	woman,	yelling,	 “Yes!	 Yes!	I	win!”

      “You	 don’t	 win,”	 Anthony	snapped.

      “Oh,	 it	feels	like	I’ve	 won,”	 she	reveled.

      Colin	 and	Daphne,	who	had	come	dashing	down	the	hill,	skidded	to	a	halt
before	them.	“Well	 done,	Miss	Sheffield!”	 Colin	 exclaimed.	“I	 knew	you	were
worthy	of	 the	mallet	of	death.”

      “Brilliant,”	   Daphne	agreed.	“Absolutely	brilliant.”

      Anthony,	 of	course,	had	no	choice	but	to	cross	his	arms	and	scowl	mightily.

      Colin	 gave	her	a	congenial	pat	on	the	back.	“Are	you	certain	you’re	not	 a
Bridgerton	in	disguise?	You	 have	truly	lived	 up	to	the	spirit	of	the	game.”

      “I	 couldn’t	 have	done	it	without	you,”	 Kate	said	graciously.	“If	  you	hadn’t
hit	his	ball	down	 the	hill…”

      “I	 had	been	hoping	you	would	pick	 up	the	reins	of	his	destruction,”	Colin
said.

      The	duke	finally	 approached,	Edwina	at	his	side.	“A	 rather	stunning
conclusion	to	the	game,”	he	commented.

      “It’s	 not	over	yet,”	 Daphne	said.

      Her	husband	gave	her	a	faintly	amused	glance.	“To	continue	the	play	now
seems	rather	anticlimactic,	don’t	you	think?”

      Surprisingly,	 even	Colin	agreed.	“I	 certainly	can’t	imagine	 anything	topping
it.”

      Kate	beamed.

171
      Kate	beamed.

      The	duke	glanced	up	at	the	sky.	“Furthermore,	it’s	 starting	to	cloud	over.	I
want	to	get	Daphne	in	before	it	starts	to	rain.	Delicate	condition	 and	all,	you
know.”

      Kate	looked	in	 surprise	at	Daphne,	who	had	started	to	blush.	She	didn’t	look
the	least	bit	pregnant.

      “Very	 well,”	 Colin	 said.	“I	 move	we	end	the	game	and	declare	Miss
Sheffield	the	winner.”

      “I	 was	two	wickets	behind	the	rest	of	you,”	 Kate	demurred.

      “Nevertheless,”	 Colin	said,	“any	 true	aficionado	of	Bridgerton	 Pall	Mall
understands	that	sending	Anthony	into	the	lake	is	far	more	important	than
actually	sending	one’s	ball	through	all	 the	wickets.	Which	 makes	you	our
winner,	Miss	Sheffield.”	 He	 looked	about,	then	straight	at	Anthony.	“Does
anyone	disagree?”

      No	one	did,	although	Anthony	 looked	close	to	violence.

      “Excellent,”	  Colin	said.	“In	 that	case,	Miss	Sheffield	is	our	winner,	 and
Anthony,	you	are	our	loser.”

      A	strange,	muffled	 sound	burst	from	Kate’s	mouth,	 half	laugh	and	half
choke.

      “Well,	 someone	has	to	lose,”	Colin	said	with	 a	grin.	“It’s	 tradition.”

      “It’s	 true,”	 Daphne	agreed.	“We’re	a	bloodthirsty	 lot,	but	we	do	like	 to
follow	 tradition.”

      “You’re	 all	 mad	in	the	head	is	what	you	are,”	the	duke	said	affably.	“And	 on
that	note,	Daphne	and	I	must	bid	you	farewell.	I	 do	want	to	get	her	inside	before
it	begins	to	rain.	I	trust	no	one	will	 mind	 if	we	leave	without	 helping	to	clear	the
course?”

      No	one	minded,	of	course,	and	soon	the	duke	and	duchess	were	on	their	way
back	to	Aubrey	Hall.

      Edwina,	who	 had	kept	silent	throughout	the	exchange	(although	she	had

172
      Edwina,	who	 had	kept	silent	throughout	the	exchange	(although	she	had
been	looking	at	the	various	Bridgertons	as	if	they’d	 recently	escaped	from	an
asylum),	suddenly	cleared	her	throat.	“Do	you	think	 we	should	try	to	 retrieve	the
ball?”	she	asked,	squinting	down	the	hill	 toward	the	lake.

      The	rest	of	the	party	just	stared	at	the	calm	waters	as	if	they’d	never
considered	such	a	bizarre	notion.

      “It’s	 not	as	if	it	 landed	in	the	middle,”	 she	added.	“It	just	rolled	 in.	It’s
probably	right	by	 the	edge.”

      Colin	 scratched	his	head.	Anthony	continued	to	glower.

      “Surely	 you	don’t	 want	to	lose	another	ball,”	Edwina	 persisted.	When	no	one
had	a	reply,	she	threw	down	her	mallet	and	threw	up	arms,	saying,	“Fine!	I’ll	  get
the	silly	old	 ball.”

      That	certainly	 roused	the	men	from	their	stupor,	and	they	jumped	to	help
her.

      “Don’t	 be	silly,	 Miss	Sheffield,”	  Colin	said	gallantly	 as	he	started	to	walk
down	the	hill,	 “I’ll	  get	it.”

      “For	 the	love	of	Christ,”	 Anthony	 muttered.	“I’ll	  get	the	bloody	ball.”	 He
strode	down	the	hill,	quickly	 overtaking	 his	brother.	For	all	his	ire,	 he	couldn’t
really	blame	Kate	for	her	actions.	He	would	 have	done	the	very	same	thing,
although	he	would	have	hit	the	ball	with	 enough	force	to	sink	hers	in	the	middle
of	the	lake.

      Still,	 it	was	damned	humiliating	 to	be	bested	by	a	female,	especially	her.

      He	reached	the	edge	of	the	lake	and	peered	in.	The	pink	ball	was	so	brightly
colored	that	it	ought	to	show	through	the	water,	provided	 it	had	settled	at	a
shallow	enough	level.

      “Do	 you	see	it?”	Colin	 asked,	coming	to	a	halt	beside	him.

      Anthony	 shook	his	head.	“It’s	a	stupid	color,	 anyway.	No	one	ever	wanted	to
be	pink.”

      Colin	 nodded	his	agreement.

173
      Colin	 nodded	his	agreement.

      “Even	 the	purple	was	better,”	Anthony	 continued,	moving	a	few	steps	to	the
right	so	that	he	could	inspect	another	stretch	of	shoreline.	He	looked	up
suddenly,	glaring	at	his	brother.	“What	 the	hell	happened	to	the	purple	mallet,
anyway?”

      Colin	 shrugged.	“I’m	 sure	I	have	no	idea.”

      “And	 I’m	 sure,”	Anthony	 muttered,	“that	it	 will	 miraculously	 reappear	in	the
Pall	Mall	 set	tomorrow	evening.”

      “You	 might	very	 well	be	right,”	 Colin	 said	brightly,	 moving	a	bit	past
Anthony,	keeping	his	eyes	on	the	water	the	whole	way.	“Perhaps	even	this
afternoon,	if	we’re	 lucky.”

      “One	of	 these	days,”	Anthony	said	matter-of-factly,	 “I’m	  going	to	kill	 you.”

      “Of	 that	I	have	no	doubt.”	 Colin	scanned	the	water,	then	suddenly	pointed
with	his	index	finger.	 “I	 say!	There	it	is.”

      Sure	enough,	the	pink	ball	sat	in	the	shallow	water,	about	two	 feet	out	from
the	edge	of	the	lake.	It	looked	to	be	only	a	foot	or	so	deep.	Anthony	swore	under
his	breath.	He	was	going	to	have	to	take	off	his	boots	and	wade	in.	It	seemed
Kate	Sheffield	was	forever	forcing	 him	to	take	off	 his	boots	and	wade	into
bodies	of	water.

      No,	he	thought	wearily,	 he	hadn’t	had	time	to	remove	his	boots	when	he’d
charged	into	The	Serpentine	to	save	Edwina.	The	leather	had	been	completely
ruined.	His	valet	had	nearly	fainted	from	 the	horror	of	it.

      With	 a	groan	he	sat	on	a	rock	to	pull	off	his	footwear.	 To	save	Edwina	he
supposed	it	was	worth	a	pair	of	good	boots.	To	save	a	stupid	pink	Pall	Mall	 ball
—frankly,	 it	didn’t	 even	seem	worth	getting	his	feet	wet.

      “You	 seem	to	have	this	well	in	hand,”	 Colin	said,	“so	I’m	 going	 to	go	help
Miss	Sheffield	pull	 up	the	wickets.”

      Anthony	 just	shook	his	head	in	resignation	and	waded	in.

      “Is	 it	cold?”	 came	a	feminine	voice.

174
      Good	God,	it	was	her.	He	turned	around.	Kate	Sheffield	 was	standing	on	the
shore.

      “I	 thought	you	were	pulling	 up	wickets,”	 he	said,	somewhat	testily.

      “That’s	 Edwina.”

      “Too	 bloody	many	Miss	 Sheffields,”	 he	muttered	under	his	breath.	There
ought	to	be	a	law	against	letting	sisters	come	out	in	the	same	season.

      “I	 beg	your	pardon?”	she	asked,	cocking	her	head	to	the	side.

      “I	 said	it’s	freezing,”	 he	lied.

      “Oh.	 I’m	 sorry.”

      That	got	his	attention.	“No,	 you’re	 not,”	he	finally	 said.

      “Well,	 no,”	 she	admitted.	“Not	for	 your	losing,	anyway.	 But	I	didn’t	 intend
for	you	to	freeze	your	toes	off.”

      Anthony	 was	suddenly	gripped	by	the	most	insane	desire	to	see	her	toes.	It
was	a	horrible	thought.	He	had	no	business	lusting	after	this	woman.	He	didn’t
even	like	her.

      He	sighed.	That	wasn’t	true.	He	supposed	he	did	like	her	in	an	odd,
paradoxical	sort	of	way.	And	 he	thought,	strangely	enough,	she	might	be
beginning	to	like	him	 in	much	the	same	manner.

      “You	 would	 have	done	the	same	thing	if	you	were	me,”	she	called	out.

      He	said	nothing,	just	continued	his	 slow	wade.

      “You	 would	 have!”	she	insisted.

      He	leaned	down	and	scooped	up	the	ball,	getting	his	sleeve	wet	in	the
process.	Damn.	“I	know,”	 he	replied.

      “Oh,”	 she	said,	sounding	surprised,	as	if	she	hadn’t	expected	him	to	admit	it.

      He	waded	back	out,	thankful	that	the	ground	by	 the	shore	was	firmly	packed,
so	that	dirt	didn’t	 stick	to	his	feet.

175
so	that	dirt	didn’t	 stick	to	his	feet.

      “Here,”	 she	said,	holding	out	what	looked	like	 a	blanket.	“It	 was	in	the	shed.
I	stopped	by	on	my	way	down.	I	 thought	you	might	 need	something	to	dry	your
feet.”

      Anthony	 opened	his	mouth,	but	oddly	enough,	no	sound	emerged.	Finally,
he	managed,	“Thank	you,”	and	took	the	blanket	from	 her	hands.

      “I’m	  not	such	a	terrible	person,	you	know,”	she	said	with	a	smile.

      “Neither	 am	I.”

      “Perhaps,”	she	allowed,	“but	 you	shouldn’t	 have	tarried	so	long	with
Edwina.	I	know	 you	did	it	 just	to	vex	me.”

      He	lifted	 a	brow	as	he	sat	on	the	rock	so	he	could	dry	his	feet,	dropping	the
ball	onto	the	ground	next	to	him.	“Don’t	  you	think	 it’s	possible	that	my	delay
had	anything	to	do	with	my	 wanting	to	spend	time	with	 the	woman	I’m
considering	making	my	wife?”

      She	colored	slightly,	 but	then	muttered,	“This	has	to	be	the	most	self-
centered	thing	I’ve	ever	said,	but	no,	I	think	 you	just	wanted	to	vex	me.”

      She	was	right,	of	course,	but	he	wasn’t	going	to	tell	 her	so.	“As	it	 happens,”
he	said,	“Edwina	was	delayed.	Why,	I	do	not	 know.	I	deemed	it	impolite	 to	seek
her	out	in	her	room	and	demand	that	she	hurry	along,	so	I	waited	in	my	study
until	she	was	ready.”

      There	was	a	long	moment	of	silence,	then	she	said,	“Thank	you	for	telling
me	that.”

      He	smiled	wryly.	 “I’m	  not	such	a	terrible	person,	you	know.”

      She	sighed.	“I	know.”

      Something	about	her	resigned	expression	made	him	grin.	“But	maybe	a	little
terrible?”	he	teased.

      She	brightened,	their	return	to	levity	 obviously	 making	her	much	more
comfortable	with	 the	conversation.	“Oh,	for	 certain.”

176
      “Good.	 I’d	hate	to	be	boring.”

      Kate	smiled,	watching	 him	as	he	pulled	on	his	stockings	and	boots.	She
reached	down	and	picked	up	the	pink	ball.	“I’d	 better	carry	this	back	to	the
shed.”

      “In	 case	I’m	overcome	by	an	uncontrollable	 urge	to	toss	it	back	in	the	lake?”

      She	nodded.	“Something	like	that.”

      “Very	 well.”	 He	stood.	“I’ll	  take	the	blanket,	then.”

      “A	 fair	 trade.”	She	turned	to	walk	up	the	hill,	 then	spied	Colin	and	Edwina
disappearing	into	the	distance.	“Oh!”

      Anthony	 turned	quickly	 around.	“What	is	it?	 Oh,	I	see.	It	seems	your	sister
and	my	brother	have	decided	to	head	back	without	us.”

      Kate	scowled	at	their	errant	siblings,	 then	shrugged	in	resignation	as	she
started	trudging	up	the	hill.	“I	 suppose	I	can	tolerate	your	company	for	a	few
more	minutes	if	you	can	tolerate	mine.”

      He	didn’t	 say	anything,	which	 surprised	her.	It	seemed	just	the	sort	of
comment	to	which	he’d	have	a	witty	 and	perhaps	even	cutting	comeback.	She
looked	up	at	him,	then	drew	back	slightly	 in	surprise.	He	was	staring	at	her	in	the
oddest	manner…

      “Is—is	 everything	 all	right,	my	 lord?”	she	asked	hesitantly.

      He	nodded.	“Fine.”	 But	he	sounded	rather	distracted.

      The	rest	of	the	trip	to	 the	shed	was	met	with	silence.	Kate	set	the	pink	ball	in
its	spot	in	the	Pall	Mall	 cart,	noting	that	Colin	 and	Edwina	had	cleared	the	course
and	put	everything	neatly	away,	including	 the	errant	purple	mallet	and	ball.	She
stole	a	glance	at	Anthony	and	had	to	smile.	It	was	obvious	from	his	beleaguered
frown	that	he’d	noticed	 as	well.

      “The	 blanket	goes	in	here,	my	lord,”	she	said	with	a	hidden	grin,	 stepping
out	of	his	way.

      Anthony	 shrugged.	“I’ll	 bring	 it	up	to	the	house.	It	probably	needs	a	good

177
      Anthony	shrugged.	“I’ll	bring	it	up	to	the	house.	It	probably	needs	a	good
cleaning.”

      She	nodded	in	agreement,	and	they	shut	the	door	and	were	off.

178
Chapter	     11


There	is	nothing	like	a	spot	of	competition	to	 bring	out	the	worst	in	 a	man—or
the	best	in	a	woman.

                                                        LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	4	MAY	1814



Anthony	  whistled	as	they	ambled	up	the	path	to	the	house,	stealing	glances	at
Kate	when	she	wasn’t	looking.	She	really	was	quite	an	attractive	woman	in	 her
own	right.	He	didn’t	 know	 why	this	always	surprised	him,	 but	it	did.	His
memory	of	her	never	quite	lived	 up	to	the	enchanting	reality	of	her	face.	She	was
always	in	motion,	always	smiling	 or	frowning	 or	pursing	 her	lips.	She’d	never
master	the	placid,	serene	expression	to	which	young	ladies	were	meant	to	aspire.

      He’d	 fallen	into	the	same	trap	as	had	the	rest	of	society—of	thinking	of	 her
only	in	terms	of	her	younger	sister.	And	 Edwina	was	so	stunning,	so	amazingly,
startlingly	beautiful	 that	anyone	near	to	her	couldn’t	help	but	fade	into	 the
background.	It	was,	Anthony	allowed,	 difficult	 to	 look	at	anyone	else	when
Edwina	was	in	the	room.

      And	yet…

      He	frowned.	And	 yet	he’d	barely	spared	Edwina	a	glance	through	the	entire
Pall	Mall	 game.	This	might	have	been	understandable	simply	because	it	was
Bridgerton	Pall	Mall,	 and	it	brought	 out	the	worst	in	anyone	named	Bridgerton;
hell,	he	probably	wouldn’t	 have	spared	a	glance	for	the	Prince	Regent	if	he’d
deigned	to	join	the	game.

      But	that	explanation	wouldn’t	  wash,	for	his	mind	was	filled	 with	 other
images.	Kate	bending	over	her	mallet,	her	face	tense	with	concentration.	Kate
giggling	as	someone	missed	a	shot.	Kate	cheering	on	Edwina	when	her	ball
rolled	through	the	wicket—a	 very	un-Bridgerton-like	  trait,	that.	And,	of	 course,
Kate	smiling	wickedly	 in	 that	last	second	before	she’d	sent	his	ball	flying	into
the	lake.

      Clearly,	even	if	 he	hadn’t	been	able	to	spare	a	glance	for	Edwina,	he’d	been
sparing	plenty	for	Kate.

179
sparing	plenty	for	Kate.

      That	ought	to	have	been	disturbing.

      He	glanced	back	over	at	her	again.	This	time	her	face	was	tilted	slightly
toward	the	sky,	and	she	was	frowning.

      “Is	 something	wrong?”	he	inquired	 politely.

      She	shook	her	head.	“Just	wondering	if	it’s	 going	to	rain.”

      He	looked	up.	“Not	 anytime	soon,	I	imagine.”

      She	nodded	slowly	in	agreement.	“I	 hate	the	rain.”

      Something	about	the	expression	on	her	face—rather	reminiscent	of	a
frustrated	three-year-old—made	him	laugh.	“You	 live	 in	the	wrong	country,
then,	Miss	Sheffield.”

      She	turned	to	him	with	 a	sheepish	smile.	“I	don’t	mind	 a	gentle	rain.	It’s	just
when	it	grows	violent	 that	I	don’t	 like	it.”

      “I’ve	 always	rather	enjoyed	thunderstorms,”	 he	murmured.

      She	shot	him	a	startled	look	but	didn’t	 say	anything,	then	returned	her	gaze
to	the	pebbles	at	her	feet.	She	was	kicking	one	along	the	path	as	they	walked,
occasionally	breaking	her	stride	or	stepping	to	the	side	just	so	she	could	give	it	a
kick	and	keep	it	flying	 ahead	of	her.	There	was	something	charming	about	it,
something	rather	sweet	about	the	way	her	booted	foot	peeked	out	from	under	the
hem	of	her	dress	at	such	regular	intervals	and	connected	with	the	pebble.

      Anthony	 watched	her	curiously,	forgetting	 to	pull	his	 eyes	off	her	face	when
she	looked	back	up.

      “Do	 you	think—Why	 are	you	looking	at	me	like	 that?”	she	asked.

      “Do	 I	think	 what?”	he	returned,	deliberately	ignoring	 the	second	part	of	her
question.

      Her	lips	 settled	into	a	peevish	line.	Anthony	felt	 his	own	quivering,	 wanting
to	smile	with	 amusement.

180
      “Are	 you	laughing	at	me?”	 she	asked	suspiciously.

      He	shook	his	head.

      Her	feet	ground	to	a	halt.	“I	 think	 you	are.”

      “I	 assure	you,”	he	said,	sounding	even	to	himself	as	if	he	wanted	to	laugh,
“that	I	am	not	laughing	 at	you.”

      “You’re	 lying.”

      “I’m	  not—”	 He	had	to	stop.	If	he	spoke	any	further	he	knew	he’d	explode
with	laughter.	And	 the	strangest	thing	was—he	hadn’t	a	clue	why.

      “Oh,	 for	heaven’s	sake,”	she	muttered.	“What	is	the	problem?”

      Anthony	 sank	against	the	trunk	of	a	nearby	elm,	his	entire	body	shaking	with
barely	contained	mirth.

      Kate	planted	her	hands	on	her	hips,	the	expression	in	her	eyes	a	little	bit
curious,	a	little	bit	 furious.	“What’s	 so	funny?”

      He	finally	 gave	in	to	the	laughter	and	barely	managed	to	lift	 his	shoulders
into	a	shrug.	“I	don’t	 know,”	 he	gasped.	“The	expression	on	your	face…it’s…”

      He	noticed	that	she	smiled.	He	loved	that	she	smiled.

      “The	 expression	on	your	face	is	not	exactly	unamusing	yourself,	my	lord,”
she	remarked.

      “Oh,	 I’m	 sure.”	He	took	a	few	deep	breaths	and	then,	when	he	was	satisfied
that	he	had	regained	control,	straightened.	He	caught	sight	of	her	face,	still
vaguely	suspicious,	and	suddenly	he	realized	that	he	had	to	know	what	she
thought	of	him.

      It	couldn’t	 wait	 until	the	next	day.	It	 couldn’t	 wait	until	 that	evening.

      He	wasn’t	sure	how	it	 had	come	about,	but	her	good	opinion	meant	a	great
deal	to	him.	Of	course	he	needed	her	approval	in	his	much-neglected	suit	of
Edwina,	but	there	was	more	to	it	than	that.	She’d	insulted	him,	she’d	 nearly
dunked	him	in	The	Serpentine,	she’d	humiliated	him	 at	Pall	Mall,	 and	yet	he

181
dunked	him	in	The	Serpentine,	she’d	humiliated	him	 at	Pall	Mall,	 and	yet	he
craved	her	good	opinion.

      Anthony	 couldn’t	 remember	the	last	time	someone’s	regard	had	meant	so
much,	and	frankly,	it	 was	humbling.

      “I	 think	you	 owe	me	a	boon,”	he	said,	pushing	off	the	tree	and	standing
straight.	His	mind	was	whirring.	 He	needed	to	be	clever	about	this.	He	had	to
know	what	she	thought.	And	yet,	he	didn’t	 want	her	knowing	 how	much	it	meant
to	him.	Not	until	 he	understood	why	it	meant	so	much	to	him.

      “I	 beg	your	pardon?”

      “A	 boon.	For	the	Pall	Mall	 game.”

      She	let	out	a	ladylike	snort	as	she	leaned	against	the	tree	and	crossed	her
arms.	“If	anyone	owes	anyone	else	a	boon,	then	you	owe	one	to	me.	I	did	win,
after	all.”

      “Ah,	 but	I	was	the	one	humiliated.”

      “True,”	 she	acceded.

      “You	 would	 not	be	yourself,”	he	said	in	an	extremely	dry	 voice,	“if	 you
resisted	the	urge	to	agree.”

      Kate	gave	him	a	demure	glance.	“A	 lady	should	be	honest	in	all	things.”

      When	she	raised	her	eyes	to	his	face,	one	corner	of	his	mouth	was	curved
into	a	rather	knowing	smile.	 “I	was	hoping	you’d	 say	that,”	he	murmured.

      Kate	felt	 immediately	uneasy.	“And	 why	is	that?”

      “Because	my	boon,	Miss	Sheffield,	 is	to	ask	you	a	question—any	question
of	my	choosing—and	you	must	answer	with	 the	utmost	honesty.”	He	planted
one	hand	against	the	tree	trunk,	rather	close	to	her	face,	and	leaned	forward.
Kate	suddenly	felt	trapped,	even	though	it	would	 be	easy	enough	to	dart	away.

      With	 a	touch	of	dismay—and	a	shiver	of	excitement—she	realized	that	she
felt	trapped	by	his	eyes,	which	were	burning	rather	dark	and	hot	into	hers.

      “Do	 you	think	 you	can	do	that,	Miss	Sheffield?”	 he	murmured.

182
      “Do	 you	think	 you	can	do	that,	Miss	Sheffield?”	 he	murmured.

      “Wh-what	 is	your	 question?”	she	asked,	not	realizing	that	she	was
whispering	until	 she	heard	her	voice,	breathy	and	crackling	like	the	wind.

      He	cocked	his	head	slightly	to	 the	side.	“Now,	remember,	you	have	to
answer	honestly.”

      She	nodded.	Or	at	least	she	thought	she	nodded.	She	meant	to	nod.	In	all
truth,	she	wasn’t	entirely	convinced	of	 her	ability	 to	move.

      He	leaned	forward,	not	so	much	that	she	could	feel	his	breath,	but	close
enough	to	make	her	shiver.	“Here,	Miss	Sheffield,	 is	my	question.”

      Her	lips	 parted.

      “Do	 you”—he	 moved	closer—“still”—and	  another	inch—“hate	 me?”

      Kate	swallowed	 convulsively.	Whatever	 she’d	been	expecting	him	to	ask,	it
hadn’t	been	this.	She	licked	her	lips,	preparing	to	speak,	even	though	she	had	no
idea	what	she’d	say,	but	not	a	sound	emerged.

      His	lips	 curved	into	a	slow,	masculine	smile.	“I’ll	  take	that	as	a	no.”

      And	then,	with	 an	abruptness	that	left	her	head	spinning,	he	pushed	off	the
tree	and	said	briskly,	“Well,	 then,	I	do	believe	it’s	 time	we	went	inside	 and
prepared	for	the	evening,	don’t	you?”

      Kate	sagged	against	the	tree,	completely	devoid	of	energy.

      “You	 wish	to	remain	outside	for	 a	few	moments?”	He	planted	his	hands	on
his	hips	and	looked	up	at	the	sky,	his	demeanor	pragmatic	and	efficient—one
hundred	and	eighty	degrees	changed	from	the	slow,	lazy	seducer	he’d	been	just
ten	seconds	earlier.	“You	might	as	well.	It	 doesn’t	look	like	 it’s	 going	to	rain,
after	all.	At	 least	not	in	the	next	few	hours.”

      She	just	stared	at	him.	Either	he’d	lost	his	mind	 or	she’d	forgotten	how	to
talk.	Or	maybe	both.

      “Very	 well.	 I’ve	 always	admired	a	woman	who	appreciates	fresh	air.	I	shall
see	you	at	supper,	then?”

183
       She	nodded.	 She	was	surprised	 she	even	 managed	that.

       “Excellent.”	   He	reached	 out	and	 took	 her	hand,	 dropping	 a	searing	 kiss	 on
the	inside	 of	 her	wrist,	 upon	 the	single	 band	 of	bare	 flesh	 that	peeked	 out
between	her	 glove	 and	the	hem	 of	 her	sleeve.	 “Until	  tonight,	  Miss	 Sheffield.”

       And	 then	he	strode	 off,	 leaving	 her	 with	 the	 oddest	feeling	  that	something
rather	important	  had	just	 taken	 place.

       But	for	 the	 life	 of	 her,	she	had	no	 idea	what.
                                                                     	

At	half	seven	that	night,	Kate	considered	falling	dreadfully	ill.	At	quarter	to	eight,	she’d	refined	her	goal	to
an	apoplectic	fit.	But	at	five	minutes	to	the	hour,	as	the	dinner	bell	sounded,	alerting	guests	that	it	was	time
to	assemble	in	the	drawing	room,	she	squared	her	shoulders	and	walked	into	the	hall	outside	her	bedroom
door	to	meet	Mary.

       She	refused	to	 be	a	coward.

       She	wasn’t	 a	coward.

       And	 she	could	 make	it	 through	 the	 evening.	 Besides,	 she	told	 herself,	 she
wasn’t	 likely	  to	be	seated	anywhere	  near	Lord	 Bridgerton.	   He	was	a	viscount
and	the	man	 of	the	 house,	and	would	  therefore	 be	at	 the	head	of	 the	table.	 As	 the
daughter	of	 a	baron’s	 second	 son,	she	held	 little	  rank	compared	 to	 the	other
guests,	and	would	  most	certainly	  be	seated	so	far	 down	 the	 table	that	 she
wouldn’t	  even	be	 able	to	see	him	 without	  developing	  a	crick	 in	 her	neck.

       Edwina,	 who	 was	sharing	 a	room	 with	  Kate,	 had	already	 gone	to	 Mary’s
chamber	to	 help	 her	choose	a	necklace,	 and	 so	Kate	 found	 herself	 alone	 in	the
hall.	 She	supposed	she	could	 enter	 Mary’s	  room	 and	wait	 for	 the	two	 of	 them
there,	but	 she	didn’t	 feel	 terribly	  conversational,	  and	 Edwina	 had	already	 noticed
her	odd,	 reflective	 mood.	 The	 last	 thing	 Kate	 needed	was	a	round	 of	 “Whatever
can	be	wrong’s”	  from	  Mary.

       And	 the	truth	 was—Kate	  didn’t	  even	know	 what	 was	wrong.	  All	 she	knew
was	that	that	 afternoon,	 something	  had	changed	 between	 her	and	the	 viscount.
Something	 was	different,	  and	 she	freely	 admitted	  (to	herself,	 at	 least)	that	 it
frightened	 her.

       Which	 was	 normal,	 right?	 People	 always	 feared	what	 they	 didn’t	  understand.

184
      And	Kate	 definitely	didn’t	 understand	the	viscount.

      But	just	as	she	was	beginning	to	truly	enjoy	 her	solitude,	the	door	across	the
hall	opened,	and	out	walked	another	young	lady.	Kate	recognized	her	instantly
as	Penelope	Featherington,	the	youngest	of	the	three	famed	Featherington	sisters
—well,	 the	three	who	were	out	in	society.	Kate	had	heard	that	there	was	a	fourth
still	in	 the	schoolroom.

      Unfortunately	 for	the	Featherington	sisters,	they	were	famed	for	their	lack	 of
success	on	the	marriage	mart.	Prudence	and	Philippa	had	been	out	for	three	years
now,	without	 a	single	proposal	between	the	two	of	them.	Penelope	was	in	the
midst	of	her	second	season	and	could	usually	be	found	at	social	functions	trying
to	avoid	her	mother	and	sisters,	who	were	universally	regarded	as	ninnies.

      Kate	had	always	liked	Penelope.	The	two	had	formed	a	bond	ever	since
they’d	both	been	skewered	by	Lady	Whistledown	 for	wearing	gowns	of	 an
unflattering	color.

      Kate	noted	with	 a	sad	sigh	that	Penelope’s	current	gown	of	lemon	yellow
silk	made	the	poor	girl	look	 hopelessly	sallow.	And	 if	that	weren’t	 bad	enough,	it
had	been	cut	with	far	too	many	frills	 and	flounces.	Penelope	wasn’t	a	tall	girl,
and	the	gown	positively	overwhelmed	 her.

      It	was	a	pity,	 because	she	might	be	quite	attractive	if	someone	could
convince	her	mother	to	stay	away	from	the	modiste	and	let	Penelope	choose	her
own	clothing.	She	had	a	rather	pleasing	face,	with	the	pale,	pale	skin	of	a
redhead,	except	that	her	hair	was	truly	more	auburn	than	red,	and	if	one	really
wanted	to	put	a	fine	point	on	it,	 more	brownish	red	than	auburn.

      Whatever	you	called	it,	 Kate	thought	with	 dismay,	it	didn’t	 go	with	 lemon
yellow.

      “Kate!”	  Penelope	called	out,	after	closing	her	door	behind	her.	“What	a
surprise.	I	didn’t	 realize	you	were	attending.”

      Kate	nodded.	“I	 think	we	might	 have	been	issued	a	late	invitation.	We	met
Lady	Bridgerton	 only	just	last	week.”

      “Well,	 I	 know	I	just	 said	I	was	surprised,	but	I’m	actually	 not	surprised.
Lord	Bridgerton	 has	been	paying	much	attention	to	your	sister.”

185
      Kate	flushed.	“Er,	 yes,”	she	stammered.	“He	has.”

      “That	 is	what	the	gossips	say,	at	least,”	Penelope	continued.	“But	then	again,
one	can’t	always	trust	the	gossips.”

      “I	 have	rarely	known	Lady	 Whistledown	 to	be	incorrect,”	Kate	said.

      Penelope	just	shrugged	and	then	looked	down	at	her	gown	with	disgust.
“She	certainly	is	never	incorrect	about	me.”

      “Oh,	 don’t	be	silly,”	 Kate	 said	quickly,	but	they	both	knew	 she	was	just
being	polite.

      Penelope	gave	her	head	a	weary	shake.	“My	mother	is	convinced	that	yellow
is	a	happy	color	and	that	a	happy	girl	will	 snare	a	husband.”

      “Oh,	 dear,”	Kate	said,	snorting	a	giggle.

      “What	 she	doesn’t	grasp,”	Penelope	continued	wryly,	“is	 that	such	a	happy
shade	of	yellow	makes	me	look	rather	un	happy	and	positively	repels	the
gentlemen.”

      “Have	 you	suggested	green?”	Kate	inquired.	“I	think	 you’d	 be	smashing	in
green.”

      Penelope	shook	her	head.	“She	doesn’t	like	green.	Says	it’s	melancholy.”

      “Green?”	 Kate	asked	with	disbelief.

      “I	 don’t	even	try	 to	understand	her.”

      Kate,	who	was	wearing	green,	held	up	her	sleeve	near	Penelope’s	face,
blocking	the	yellow	 as	best	as	she	could.

      “Your	 whole	face	lights	 up,”	she	said.

      “Don’t	 tell	 me	that.	It	will	 only	 make	the	yellow	more	painful.”

      Kate	offered	her	a	sympathetic	smile.	“I	 would	 loan	you	one	of	mine,	but
I’m	afraid	 it	would	 drag	on	the	floor.”

      Penelope	waved	away	her	offer.	“That’s	 very	kind	of	 you,	but	I’m	 resigned

186
      Penelope	waved	away	her	offer.	“That’s	 very	kind	of	 you,	but	I’m	 resigned
to	my	fate.	At	least	it’s	 better	than	last	year.”

      Kate	raised	a	brow.

      “Oh,	 that’s	right.	You	 weren’t	out	last	year.”	 Penelope	winced.	“I	weighed
nearly	two	stone	more	than	I	do	now.”

      “Two	 stone?”	Kate	echoed.	She	couldn’t	believe	it.

      Penelope	nodded	and	made	a	face.	“Baby	fat.	I	begged	Mama	not	to	force
me	to	come	out	until	I	turned	eighteen,	but	she	thought	a	head	start	might	be
good	for	me.”

      Kate	only	 had	to	take	one	look	at	Penelope’s	face	to	know	that	it	hadn’t	been
good	for	her.	She	felt	a	certain	kinship	with	 this	girl,	 even	though	Penelope	was
nearly	three	years	younger.	Both	of	them	knew	the	singular	feeling	of	 not	being
the	most	popular	girl	in	the	room,	 knew	the	exact	expression	you	put	on	your
face	when	you	weren’t	asked	to	dance	but	you	wanted	to	look	as	if	you	didn’t
care.

      “I	 say,”	Penelope	said,	“why	don’t	 the	two	of	 us	go	down	to	supper
together?	It	seems	your	family	and	mine	are	both	delayed.”

      Kate	wasn’t	 in	much	of	a	rush	to	reach	the	drawing	room	and	the	inevitable
company	of	Lord	Bridgerton,	 but	waiting	 for	Mary	 and	Edwina	would	 delay	the
torture	by	only	a	few	 minutes,	so	she	decided	she	might	as	well	head	down	with
Penelope.

      They	both	poked	their	heads	into	their	respective	mother’s	 room,	informed
them	of	the	change	in	plans,	and	linked	arms,	heading	down	the	hall.

      When	they	reached	the	drawing	room,	much	of	the	company	was	already	in
attendance,	milling	about	and	chatting	as	they	waited	for	the	rest	of	the	guests	to
come	down.	Kate,	who	had	never	attended	a	country	house	party	before,	noted
with	surprise	that	nearly	everyone	seemed	more	relaxed	and	a	bit	more	animated
than	they	did	in	London.	It	 must	be	the	fresh	air,	she	thought	with	a	smile.	Or
perhaps	distance	relaxed	the	strict	rules	of	the	capital.	Whatever	the	case,	she
decided	she	preferred	this	atmosphere	to	that	of	a	London	dinner	party.

      She	could	see	Lord	Bridgerton	across	the	room.	Or	rather	she	supposed	she

187
      She	could	see	Lord	Bridgerton	across	the	room.	Or	rather	she	supposed	she
could	sense	him.	As	soon	as	she	spotted	him	standing	over	by	the	fireplace,
she’d	kept	her	gaze	scrupulously	averted.

      But	she	could	feel	him	 nonetheless.	She	knew	she	had	to	be	crazy,	but	she’d
swear	she	knew	when	he	tilted	his	head,	and	heard	him	when	he	spoke	and	when
he	laughed.

      And	she	definitely	 knew	when	his	eyes	were	on	her	back.	Her	neck	felt	as	if
it	were	about	to	go	up	in	flames.

      “I	 didn’t	 realize	Lady	Bridgerton	 had	invited	so	many	people,”	Penelope
said.

      Careful	to	keep	her	eyes	away	from	the	fireplace,	Kate	did	 a	sweep	of	the
room	to	see	who	was	there.

      “Oh,	 no,”	Penelope	half	whispered,	half	moaned.	“Cressida	Cowper	is	here.”

      Kate	discreetly	followed	 Penelope’s	gaze.	If	Edwina	 had	any	competition	for
the	role	of	1814’s	reigning	 beauty,	it	was	Cressida	Cowper.	Tall,	slender,	with
honey-blond	hair	and	sparkling	green	eyes,	Cressida	was	almost	never	without	a
small	bevy	of	admirers.	But	where	Edwina	 was	kind	and	generous,	Cressida
was,	in	Kate’s	estimation,	a	self-centered,	ill-mannered	witch	 who	took	her	joy
in	the	torment	of	others.

      “She	hates	me,”	Penelope	whispered.

      “She	hates	everyone,”	Kate	replied.

      “No,	 she	really	hates	me.”

      “Whyever?”	 Kate	turned	to	her	friend	 with	 curious	eyes.	“What	could	you
possibly	have	done	to	her?”

      “I	 bumped	into	her	last	year	and	caused	her	to	spill	punch	all	over	herself
and	the	Duke	of	Ashbourne.”

      “That’s	 all?”

      Penelope	rolled	her	eyes.	“It	was	enough	for	Cressida.	She’s	convinced	he
would	have	proposed	if	she	hadn’t	appeared	clumsy.”

188
would	have	proposed	if	she	hadn’t	appeared	clumsy.”

      Kate	let	out	a	snort	that	didn’t	 even	pretend	to	be	ladylike.	“Ashbourne	 isn’t
about	to	get	hitched	anytime	soon.	Everyone	knows	that.	He’s	nearly	as	bad	a
rake	as	Bridgerton.”

      “Who	 is	most	probably	going	 to	get	married	this	year,”	Penelope	reminded
her.	“If	 the	gossips	are	correct.”

      “Bah,”	 Kate	scoffed.	“Lady	 Whistledown	 herself	wrote	that	she	doesn’t
think	he’ll	 marry	this	year.”

      “That	 was	weeks	ago,”	Penelope	replied	with	a	dismissive	wave	of	her	hand.
“Lady	Whistledown	 changes	her	mind	all	the	time.	Besides,	it’s	 obvious	to
everyone	that	the	viscount	is	courting	your	sister.”

      Kate	bit	her	tongue	before	she	muttered,	“Don’t	 remind	me.”

      But	her	wince	 of	pain	was	drowned	out	by	Penelope’s	hoarse	whisper	of,
“Oh,	no.	She’s	coming	this	way.”

      Kate	gave	her	arm	a	reassuring	squeeze.	“Don’t	worry	about	her.	She’s	no
better	than	you.”

      Penelope	shot	her	a	sarcastic	look.	“I	know	that.	But	that	doesn’t	make	her
any	less	unpleasant.	And	she	always	goes	out	of	her	way	to	make	sure	that	I
have	to	deal	with	her.”

      “Kate.	 Penelope,”	Cressida	trilled,	drawing	up	alongside	them,	giving	 her
shiny	hair	an	affected	shake.	“What	a	surprise	to	see	you	here.”

      “And	 why	is	 that?”	Kate	asked.

      Cressida	blinked,	obviously	 surprised	that	Kate	had	even	questioned	her
pronouncement.	“Well,”	 she	said	slowly,	“I	 suppose	it	is	not	such	a	surprise	to
see	you	here,	as	your	sister	is	very	much	in	demand,	and	we	all	know	that	you
must	go	where	she	goes,	but	Penelope’s	presence…”	She	shrugged	daintily.
“Well,	 who	am	I	to	judge?	Lady	 Bridgerton	is	a	most	kindhearted	woman.”

      The	comment	was	so	rude	that	Kate	could	not	help	but	gape.	And	while	 she
was	staring	at	Cressida,	openmouthed	with	shock,	Cressida	went	in	for	the	kill.

189
      “That’s	 a	lovely	gown,	 Penelope,”	she	said,	her	smile	so	sweet	that	Kate
would	swear	she	could	taste	sugar	in	the	air.	“I	do	love	yellow,”	  she	added,
smoothing	down	the	pale	yellow	 fabric	of	her	own	gown.	 “It	 takes	a	very	special
complexion	to	wear	it,	 don’t	you	think?”

      Kate	ground	her	teeth	together.	Naturally	Cressida	looked	brilliant	 in	 her
gown.	Cressida	would	look	brilliant	  in	a	sackcloth.

      Cressida	smiled	again,	this	time	reminding	 Kate	of	a	serpent,	then	turned
slightly	to	 motion	to	someone	across	the	room.	“Oh,	Grimston,	Grimston!	 Come
over	here	for	a	moment.”

      Kate	looked	over	her	shoulder	to	see	Basil	Grimston	approaching	and	just
barely	managed	to	stifle	a	groan.	Grimston	was	the	perfect	male	counterpart	to
Cressida—rude,	supercilious,	and	self-important.	Why	 a	lovely	lady	like
Viscountess	Bridgerton	had	invited	him,	 she’d	never	know.	Probably	to	even	up
the	numbers	with	so	many	young	ladies	invited.

      Grimston	slithered	 over	and	lifted	one	corner	of	his	mouth	in	 a	mockery	of	a
smile.	“Your	 servant,”	he	said	to	Cressida	after	sparing	Kate	and	Penelope	a
fleeting,	disdainful	 glance.

      “Don’t	 you	 think	dear	Penelope	looks	fetching	in	that	gown?”	 Cressida	said.
“Yellow	 truly	 must	be	the	color	of	the	season.”

      Grimston	did	 a	slow,	insulting	 perusal	of	Penelope,	from	the	top	of	her	head
to	the	tips	of	her	feet	and	back.	He	barely	moved	his	head,	letting	his	eyes	travel
up	and	down	her	frame.	Kate	fought	a	spasm	of	revulsion	so	strong	it	nearly
brought	on	a	wave	of	nausea.	More	than	anything,	she	wanted	to	throw	her	arms
around	Penelope	and	give	the	poor	girl	a	hug.	But	such	attention	would	only
single	her	out	further	as	someone	who	was	weak	and	easily	bullied.

      When	Grimston	 was	finally	 done	with	his	rude	inspection,	he	turned	to
Cressida	and	shrugged,	as	if	he	couldn’t	think	of	anything	complimentary	 to	say.

      “Don’t	 you	 have	somewhere	else	to	be?”	Kate	blurted	out.

      Cressida	looked	shocked.	“Why,	 Miss	Sheffield,	I	 can	hardly	countenance
your	impertinence.	Mr.	 Grimston	and	I	were	merely	admiring	 Penelope’s
appearance.	That	shade	of	yellow	does	so	much	for	her	complexion.	And	it	is	so
nice	to	see	her	looking	so	well	after	last	year.”

190
nice	to	see	her	looking	so	well	after	last	year.”

      “Indeed,”	 Grimston	drawled,	 his	oily	tone	making	 Kate	feel	positively
unclean.

      Kate	could	feel	 Penelope	shaking	next	to	her.	She	hoped	it	was	with	anger,
not	with	pain.

      “I	 can’t	imagine	what	 you	mean,”	Kate	said	in	icy	 tones.

      “Why,	 surely	you	know,”	 Grimston	 said,	his	eyes	glittering	with	 delight.	He
leaned	forward	and	then	said	in	a	whisper	that	was	louder	than	his	usual	voice,
loud	enough	so	that	a	great	many	people	could	hear,	“She	was	fat.”

      Kate	opened	her	mouth	to	give	a	scathing	retort,	but	before	she	could	make	a
sound,	Cressida	added,	“It	was	such	a	pity,	because	there	were	so	many	more
men	in	town	last	year.	Of	course	most	of	us	still	 never	lack	for	a	dance	partner,
but	I	do	feel	for	poor	 Penelope	when	I	see	her	sitting	with	the	dowagers.”

      “The	 dowagers,”	Penelope	ground	out,	“are	often	the	only	people	in	the
room	with	a	modicum	 of	intelligence.”

      Kate	wanted	to	jump	up	and	cheer.

      Cressida	made	a	breathy	little	“Oh”	 sound,	as	if	she	had	any	right	to	be
offended.	“Still,	 one	cannot	help	but…Oh!	 Lord	Bridgerton!”

      Kate	moved	to	the	side	to	allow	 the	viscount	into	their	small	 circle,	noticing
with	disgust	that	Cressida’s	entire	demeanor	changed.	Her	eyelids	began	to
flutter	and	her	mouth	made	a	pretty	little	 cupid’s	bow.

      It	was	so	appalling	Kate	forgot	 to	be	self-conscious	around	the	viscount.

      Bridgerton	 shot	Cressida	a	hard	look	but	did	not	say	anything.	Instead,	he
turned	quite	deliberately	to	Kate	and	Penelope	and	murmured	their	names	in
greeting.

      Kate	nearly	gasped	with	glee.	He’d	 given	Cressida	Cowper	the	cut	direct!

      “Miss	 Sheffield,”	 he	said	smoothly,	“I	 hope	you	will	 excuse	us	as	I	escort
Miss	Featherington	in	to	dinner.”

191
      “But	 you	can’t	escort	her	in!”	 Cressida	blurted	out.

      Bridgerton	 gave	her	an	icy	stare.	“I’m	sorry,”	 he	said	in	a	voice	that	said	he
was	anything	but.	“Had	I	 included	you	in	the	conversation?”

      Cressida	shrank	back,	obviously	mortified	 by	her	outburst.	Still,	 it	was
beyond	irregular	for	him	 to	escort	Penelope.	As	the	man	of	the	house,	it	was	his
duty	to	escort	the	highest-ranking	woman.	Kate	wasn’t	 sure	who	that	happened
to	be	this	evening,	but	it	certainly	 wasn’t	Penelope,	whose	father	had	been	a
mere	mister.

      Bridgerton	 offered	Penelope	his	arm,	turning	his	back	on	Cressida	in	the
process.	“I	do	hate	a	bully,	don’t	 you?”	he	murmured.

      Kate	clapped	her	hand	over	her	mouth,	but	she	couldn’t	stifle	 her	giggle.
Bridgerton	offered	her	a	small,	secret	smile	over	Penelope’s	head,	and	in	that
moment	Kate	had	the	oddest	feeling	that	she	understood	this	man	completely.

      But	even	stranger—suddenly	she	wasn’t	so	certain	that	he	was	the	soulless,
reprehensible	rake	she’d	taken	such	comfort	in	believing	him.

      “Did	 you	see	that?”

      Kate,	who,	along	with	 the	rest	of	the	assembled	company,	had	been	staring
openmouthed	as	Bridgerton	led	Penelope	from	the	room,	his	head	bent	to	hers	as
if	she	were	the	most	fascinating	woman	ever	to	walk	the	earth,	turned	to	see
Edwina	standing	next	to	her.

      “I	 saw	the	whole	thing,”	 Kate	said	in	a	dazed	voice.	“I	heard	the	whole
thing.”

      “What	 happened?”

      “He	 was…he	was…”	Kate	stumbled	over	her	words,	 unsure	of	how	to
describe	what	exactly	he’d	done.	And	then	she	said	something	she’d	never
thought	possible:	“He	was	a	hero.”

192
Chapter	     12


A	man	with	charm	is	an	entertaining	 thing,	and	a	man	with	looks	is,	of	 course,	a
sight	to	behold,	but	a	man	with	honor—ah,	he	is	the	one,	dear	reader,	to	which
the	young	ladies	should	flock.

                                                        LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	2	MAY	1814



Later	 that	night,	 after	supper	was	done	and	the	men	went	off	to	drink	their	port
before	rejoining	the	ladies	with	 superior	expressions	on	their	faces,	as	if	they	had
just	talked	about	something	weightier	than	which	 horse	was	likely	to	win	 the
Royal	Ascot;	after	the	assembled	company	had	played	a	sometime	tedious	and
sometime	hilarious	round	of	charades;	after	Lady	Bridgerton	 had	cleared	her
throat	and	discreetly	suggested	that	it	might	be	time	to	turn	in;	after	the	ladies
had	taken	their	candles	and	headed	off	to	bed;	after	the	gentlemen	had
presumably	followed…

      Kate	couldn’t	 sleep.

      Clearly,	it	 was	to	be	one	of	those	stare-at-the-cracks-in	the-ceiling	sort	of
nights.	Except	that	there	were	no	cracks	in	the	ceiling	at	Aubrey	Hall.	 And	the
moon	wasn’t	even	out,	so	there	wasn’t	any	light	filtering	  through	the	curtains,
which	meant	that	even	if	there	were	cracks,	she	wouldn’t	be	able	to	see	them,
and…

      Kate	groaned	as	she	pushed	back	her	covers	and	rose	to	her	feet.	One	of
these	days	she	was	going	to	have	to	learn	how	to	force	her	brain	to	stop	racing	in
eight	different	directions	 at	once.	She’d	already	lain	in	bed	for	nearly	an	hour,
staring	up	into	the	dark,	inky	 night,	shutting	her	eyes	every	now	and	then	and
trying	to	will	  herself	to	sleep.

      It	wasn’t	 working.

      She	couldn’t	stop	thinking	 about	the	expression	on	Penelope	Featherington’s
face	when	the	viscount	had	swooped	in	to	her	rescue.	Her	own	expression,	Kate
was	sure,	must	have	been	somewhat	similar—a	bit	stunned,	a	little	delighted,
and	a	lot	as	if	she	were	about	to	melt	onto	the	floor	at	that	very	minute.

193
and	a	lot	as	if	she	were	about	to	melt	onto	the	floor	at	that	very	minute.

      Bridgerton	 had	been	that	magnificent.

      Kate	had	spent	the	entire	day	either	watching	or	interacting	with	 the
Bridgertons.	And	one	thing	had	become	clear:	Everything	 that	had	been	said
about	Anthony	and	his	devotion	to	his	family—it	  was	all	true.

      And	while	 she	wasn’t	quite	ready	to	relinquish	 her	opinion	that	he	was	a
rake	and	a	rogue,	she	was	starting	to	realize	that	he	might	be	all	that	and
something	else	as	well.

      Something	good.

      Something	that,	if	 she	were	trying	to	be	utterly	objective	 about	the	matter,
which	she	admitted	was	difficult	 to	do,	really	 ought	not	disqualify	 him	as	a
potential	husband	for	Edwina.

      Oh,	why	 why	why	did	 he	have	to	go	and	be	nice?	Why	couldn’t	he	have	just
stayed	the	suave	but	shallow	libertine	it	had	been	so	easy	to	believe	him?	Now
he	was	something	else	altogether,	someone	she	feared	she	might	actually	come
to	care	for.

      Kate	felt	 her	face	flush,	even	in	the	dark.	She	had	to	stop	thinking	about
Anthony	Bridgerton.	 At	this	 rate	she	wasn’t	going	to	get	any	sleep	for	a	week.

      Maybe	if	 she	had	something	to	read.	She’d	seen	a	rather	large	and	extensive
library	earlier	that	evening;	 surely	the	Bridgertons	had	some	tome	in	there	that
would	be	guaranteed	to	put	her	to	sleep.

      She	pulled	on	her	robe	and	tiptoed	to	the	door,	careful	not	to	wake	Edwina.
Not	that	that	would	have	been	an	easy	task.	Edwina	had	always	slept	like	the
dead.	According	to	Mary,	 she’d	even	slept	through	the	night	as	a	baby—from
the	very	first	day	of	 her	birth.

      Kate	slid	her	feet	into	 a	pair	of	slippers,	then	moved	quietly	into	 the	hall,
careful	to	look	this	way	 and	that	before	shutting	the	door	behind	her.	This	was
her	first	country	house	visit,	 but	she’d	heard	a	thing	or	two	about	these	sorts	of
gatherings,	and	the	last	thing	she	wanted	to	do	was	run	into	someone	on	his	way
to	a	bedroom	not	his	own.

194
      If	 someone	was	carrying	on	with	someone	not	his	spouse,	Kate	decided,	she
didn’t	want	 to	know	about	it.

      A	single	 lantern	lit	the	hall,	 giving	the	dark	air	a	dim,	 flickering	 glow.	Kate
had	grabbed	a	candle	on	her	way	out,	so	she	walked	over	and	flipped	the	lid	of
the	lantern	to	light	her	wick.	 Once	the	flame	was	steady,	she	started	toward	the
stairs,	making	sure	to	pause	at	every	corner	and	check	carefully	for	passersby.

      A	few	 minutes	later	she	found	herself	in	the	library.	 It	wasn’t	 large	by	ton
standards,	but	the	walls	were	covered	floor	to	ceiling	with	 bookcases.	Kate
pushed	the	door	until	it	was	almost	closed—if	 someone	was	up	and	about,	she
didn’t	want	 to	alert	them	to	her	presence	by	letting	the	door	click	shut—and
made	her	way	to	the	nearest	bookcase,	peering	at	the	titles.

      “Hmmm,”	  she	murmured	to	herself,	pulling	out	a	book	and	looking	 at	the
front	cover,	“botany.”	 She	did	love	gardening,	but	somehow	a	textbook	on	the
subject	didn’t	sound	terribly	 exciting.	 Should	she	seek	out	a	novel,	which	would
capture	her	imagination,	or	should	she	go	for	a	dry	text,	which	 would	be	more
likely	 to	put	her	to	sleep?

      Kate	replaced	the	book	and	moved	over	to	the	next	bookcase,	setting	her
candle	down	on	a	nearby	table.	It	appeared	to	be	the	philosophy	section.
“Definitely	 not,”	 she	muttered,	sliding	her	candle	along	the	table	as	she	moved
one	bookcase	to	the	right.	Botany	might	put	her	to	sleep,	but	philosophy	was
likely	 to	leave	her	in	a	stupor	for	days.

      She	moved	the	candle	a	bit	to	the	right,	leaning	forward	 to	peer	at	the	next
set	of	books,	when	a	bright	and	completely	unexpected	flash	of	lightning	 lit	 up
the	room.

      A	short,	staccato	scream	burst	forth	from	her	lungs,	and	she	jumped
backward,	bumping	her	behind	against	the	table.	Not	now,	she	silently	pleaded,
not	here.

      But	as	her	mind	formed	the	word,	 “here,”	the	entire	room	 exploded	with	a
dull	boom	of	thunder.

      And	then	it	 was	dark	again,	leaving	Kate	shaking,	her	fingers	gripping	 the
table	so	hard	that	her	joints	locked.	She	hated	this.	Oh,	how	she	hated	this.	She
hated	the	noise	and	the	streaks	of	light,	and	the	crackling	tension	in	the	air,	but
most	of	all	she	hated	what	it	made	her	feel.

195
most	of	all	she	hated	what	it	made	her	feel.

      So	terrified	 that	eventually	she	couldn’t	feel	 anything	at	all.

      It	had	been	this	way	all	her	life,	 or	at	least	as	long	as	she	could	remember.
When	she’d	been	small,	her	father	or	Mary	had	comforted	her	whenever	it	had
stormed.	Kate	had	many	memories	of	one	of	them	sitting	on	the	edge	of	her	bed,
holding	her	hand	and	whispering	soothing	words	as	thunder	and	lightning
crashed	around	her.	But	as	she	grew	older,	she	managed	to	convince	people	that
she	was	over	her	affliction.	Oh,	everyone	knew	that	she	still	hated	storms.	But
she’d	managed	to	keep	the	extent	of	her	terror	to	herself.

      It	seemed	the	worst	sort	of	weakness—one	with	no	apparent	cause,	and
unfortunately,	one	with	 no	clear	cure.

      She	didn’t	hear	any	rain	against	the	windows;	maybe	the	storm	wouldn’t	 be
so	bad.	Maybe	it	had	started	far	away	and	was	moving	even	farther.	Maybe	it
was—

      Another	flash	 illuminated	 the	room,	squeezing	out	a	second	scream	from
Kate’s	lungs.	And	this	 time	the	thunder	had	arrived	even	closer	to	the	lightning,
indicating	that	the	storm	was	pulling	 closer.

      Kate	felt	 herself	sink	to	the	floor.

      It	was	too	loud.	 Too	loud,	and	too	bright,	and	too—

      BOOM!

      Kate	huddled	under	the	table,	her	legs	folded	up,	her	arms	about	her	knees,
waiting	in	 terror	for	the	next	round.

      And	then	the	rain	began.
                                                                	

It	was	a	bit	past	midnight,	and	all	the	guests	(who	were	keeping	somewhat	to	country	hours)	had	gone	to
bed,	but	Anthony	was	still	in	his	study,	tapping	his	fingers	against	the	edge	of	his	desk	in	time	with	the	rain
beating	against	his	window.	Every	now	and	then	a	bolt	of	lightning	lit	up	the	room	in	a	flash	of	brilliance,
and	each	clap	of	thunder	was	so	loud	and	unexpected,	he	jumped	in	his	chair.

      God,	he	loved	thunderstorms.

196
      Hard	to	tell	 why.	Maybe	it	 was	just	the	proof	of	nature’s	power	 over	man.
Maybe	it	was	the	sheer	energy	of	the	light	and	sound	that	pounded	around	him.
Whatever	the	case,	it	made	him	feel	alive.

      He	hadn’t	been	particularly	 tired	when	his	mother	had	suggested	they	all
turn	in,	and	so	it	had	seemed	silly	not	to	use	these	few	moments	of	solitude	to	go
over	the	Aubrey	Hall	 books	his	steward	had	left	out	for	him.	 The	Lord	knew	his
mother	would	have	his	every	minute	crammed	with	 activities	involving	  eligible
young	women	on	the	morrow.

      But	after	an	hour	or	so	of	painstaking	 checking,	the	dry	tip	of	 a	quill	tapping
against	each	number	in	the	ledger	as	he	added	and	subtracted,	multiplied	and
occasionally	divided,	his	eyelids	began	to	droop.

      It	had	been	a	long	day,	he	allowed,	closing	the	ledger	but	leaving	a	piece	of
paper	sticking	out	to	mark	his	place.	He’d	 spent	much	of	the	morning	visiting
tenants	and	inspecting	buildings.	One	family	needed	a	door	repaired.	Another
was	having	trouble	harvesting	their	crops	and	paying	their	rent,	due	to	the
father’s	broken	leg.	Anthony	 had	heard	and	settled	disputes,	admired	new
babies,	and	even	helped	to	fix	a	leaky	roof.	It	was	all	part	of	 being	a	landowner,
and	he	enjoyed	it,	but	it	was	tiring.

      The	Pall	Mall	 game	had	been	an	enjoyable	interlude,	but	once	back	at	the
house,	he’d	been	thrust	into	the	role	of	host	for	his	mother’s	party.	Which	 had
been	almost	as	exhausting	as	the	tenant	visits.	Eloise	was	barely	seventeen	and
clearly	had	needed	someone	to	watch	over	her,	that	bitchy	Cowper	girl	had	been
tormenting	poor	Penelope	Featherington,	and	someone	had	had	to	do	something
about	that,	and…

      And	then	there	was	Kate	Sheffield.

      The	bane	of	his	existence.

      And	the	object	of	 his	desires.

      All	 at	once.

      What	a	muddle.	He	was	supposed	to	be	courting	her	sister,	for	God’s	sake.
Edwina.	The	belle	of	the	season.	Lovely	beyond	compare.	Sweet	and	generous
and	even-tempered.

197
      And	instead	he	couldn’t	 stop	thinking	about	Kate.	Kate,	 who,	much	as	she
infuriated	him,	 couldn’t	help	but	 command	his	respect.	How	could	he	not	admire
one	who	clung	so	steadfastly	to	her	convictions?	And	Anthony	 had	to	admit	that
the	crux	of	her	convictions—devotion	 to	family—was	 the	one	principle	 he	held
above	all	else.

      With	 a	yawn,	Anthony	got	 up	from	behind	his	desk	and	stretched	his	arms.	It
was	definitely	time	 for	bed.	With	 any	luck,	he’d	fall	 asleep	the	moment	his	head
hit	the	pillow.	 The	last	thing	he	wanted	was	to	find	himself	 staring	at	the	ceiling,
thinking	of	 Kate.

      And	of	 all	the	things	he	wanted	to	do	to	Kate.

      Anthony	 picked	up	a	candle	and	headed	out	into	the	empty	hall.	There	was
something	peaceful	and	intriguing	about	a	quiet	house.	Even	with	the	rain
beating	against	the	walls,	he	could	hear	every	click	of	his	boots	against	the	floor
—heel,	toe,	heel,	toe.	And	except	for	when	the	lightning	 streaked	through	the
sky,	his	candle	provided	the	only	illumination	  in	the	hall.	He	rather	enjoyed
waving	the	flame	this	way	 and	that,	watching	the	play	of	shadows	against	the
walls	and	furniture.	It	 was	a	rather	odd	feeling	of	control,	but—

      One	of	his	brows	rose	up	in	question.	The	library	 door	was	a	few	inches	ajar,
and	he	could	see	a	pale	strip	of	candlelight	shining	from	within.

      He	was	fairly	 certain	no	one	else	was	up.	And	there	certainly	wasn’t	a	sound
coming	from	the	library.	 Someone	must	have	gone	in	for	a	book	and	left	a
candle	burning.	Anthony	frowned.	 It	was	a	damned	irresponsible	thing	to	do.
Fire	could	devastate	a	house	faster	than	anything	else,	even	in	the	middle	of	a
rainstorm,	and	the	library—filled	  to	the	brim	with	 books—was	the	ideal	place	to
spark	a	flame.

      He	pushed	the	door	open	and	entered	the	room.	One	entire	wall	of	the	library
was	taken	up	by	tall	windows,	so	the	sound	of	the	rain	was	much	louder	here
than	it	had	been	in	the	hall.	A	crack	of	thunder	shook	the	floor,	 then,	practically
on	top	of	that,	a	flash	of	lightning	 split	 the	night.

      The	electricity	 of	the	moment	made	him	grin,	 and	he	crossed	over	to	where
the	offending	candle	had	been	left	burning.	He	leaned	over,	blew	it	out,	 and
then…

      He	heard	something.

198
      He	heard	something.

      It	was	the	sound	of	breath.	Panicked,	labored,	with	the	slightest	touch	of	 a
whimper.

      Anthony	 looked	purposefully	 around	the	room.	“Is	someone	here?”	he	called
out.	But	he	could	see	no	one.

      Then	he	heard	it	again.	From	below.

      Holding	 his	own	candle	steady,	he	crouched	down	to	peer	under	the	table.

      And	his	breath	was	sucked	right	out	of	 his	body.

      “My	 God,”	 he	gasped.	“Kate.”

      She	was	curled	up	into	a	ball,	her	arms	wrapped	around	her	bent	legs	so
tightly	it	 looked	as	if	she	were	about	to	shatter.	Her	head	was	bent	down,	her	eye
sockets	resting	on	her	knees,	and	her	entire	body	was	shaking	with	fast,	intense
tremors.

      Anthony’s	 blood	ran	to	ice.	He’d	 never	seen	someone	shake	like	that.

      “Kate?”	 he	said	again,	setting	his	candle	down	on	the	floor	as	he	moved
closer.	He	couldn’t	tell	 if	she	could	hear	him.	She	seemed	to	have	retreated	into
herself,	desperate	to	escape	something.	Was	it	the	storm?	She’d	said	she	hated
the	rain,	but	this	went	far	deeper.	Anthony	knew	 that	most	people	didn’t	thrive
on	electrical	storms	as	he	did,	but	he’d	never	heard	of	someone	being	reduced	to
this.

      She	looked	as	if	she’d	break	into	a	million	 brittle	 pieces	if	he	so	much	as
touched	her.

      Thunder	shook	the	room,	and	her	body	flinched	 with	such	torment	that
Anthony	felt	 it	in	his	gut.	 “Oh,	Kate,”	 he	whispered.	It	broke	his	heart	to	see	her
thus.	With	a	careful	and	steady	hand,	he	reached	out	to	her.	He	still	wasn’t	sure
if	she’d	even	registered	his	presence;	startling	her	might	be	like	waking	 a
sleepwalker.

      Gently	he	set	his	hand	on	her	upper	arm	and	gave	it	the	tiniest	of	squeezes.
“I’m	 here,	Kate,”	he	murmured.	“Everything	  will	 be	all	right.”

199
“I’m	 here,	Kate,”	he	murmured.	“Everything	  will	 be	all	right.”

      Lightning	 tore	through	the	night,	 flashing	the	room	with	 a	sharp	burst	of
light,	and	she	squeezed	herself	into	an	even	tighter	ball,	if	that	was	possible.	It
occurred	to	him	that	she	was	trying	to	shield	her	eyes	by	keeping	her	face	to	her
knees.

      He	moved	closer	and	took	one	of	her	hands	in	his.	Her	skin	was	like	 ice,	her
fingers	stiff	 from	terror.	It	 was	difficult	 to	pry	 her	arm	from	around	her	legs,	but
eventually	he	was	able	to	bring	her	hand	to	his	mouth,	and	he	pressed	his	lips
against	her	skin,	trying	to	warm	her.

      “I’m	  here,	Kate,”	he	repeated,	not	really	sure	what	else	to	say.	“I’m	here.	It
will	 be	all	right.”

      Eventually	 he	managed	to	scoot	himself	under	the	table	so	that	he	was	sitting
beside	her	on	the	floor,	with	his	arm	around	her	trembling	 shoulders.	She
seemed	to	relax	slightly	at	his	touch,	which	left	 him	with	 the	oddest	feeling—
almost	a	sense	of	pride	that	he	had	been	the	one	to	be	able	to	help	her.	That,	and
a	bone-deep	feeling	of	relief,	because	it	was	killing	 him	to	see	her	in	such
torment.

      He	whispered	soothing	words	in	 her	ear	and	softly	caressed	her	shoulder,
trying	to	comfort	 her	with	his	 mere	presence.	And	slowly—very,	slowly;	 he	had
no	idea	how	many	minutes	he	sat	under	that	table	with	her—he	could	feel	her
muscles	begin	to	unwind.	Her	skin	lost	that	awful	 clammy	feeling,	 and	her
breathing,	while	still	 rushed,	no	longer	sounded	quite	so	panicked.

      Finally,	 when	he	felt	she	might	be	ready,	he	touched	two	fingers	to	the
underside	of	her	chin,	using	the	softest	pressure	imaginable	to	lift	her	face	so
that	he	could	see	her	eyes.	“Look	at	me,	Kate,”	he	whispered,	his	voice	gentle
but	suffused	with	authority.	 “If	 you	just	look	 at	me,	you	will	 know	that	you	are
safe.”

      The	tiny	 muscles	around	her	eyes	quivered	for	a	good	fifteen	seconds	before
her	lids	finally	 fluttered.	She	was	trying	to	 open	her	eyes,	but	they	were
resisting.	Anthony	had	little	 experience	with	this	sort	of	 terror,	but	it	seemed	to
make	sense	to	him	that	her	eyes	just	wouldn’t	want	to	open,	that	they	simply
wouldn’t	 want	to	see	whatever	it	was	that	so	frightened	her.

      After	 several	more	seconds	of	fluttering,	she	finally	 managed	to	open	her
eyes	all	the	way	and	met	his	gaze.

200
eyes	all	the	way	and	met	his	gaze.

      Anthony	 felt	as	if	he’d	 been	punched	in	the	gut.

      If	 eyes	were	truly	the	windows	to	the	soul,	something	had	shattered	within
Kate	Sheffield	that	night.	 She	looked	haunted,	hunted,	and	utterly	lost	and
bewildered.

      “I	 don’t	remember,”	 she	whispered,	her	voice	barely	audible.

      He	took	her	hand,	which	he’d	 never	relinquished	his	hold	on,	and	brought	it
to	his	lips	again.	He	pressed	a	gentle,	almost	paternal	kiss	on	her	palm.	“You
don’t	remember	what?”

      She	shook	her	head.	“I	don’t	know.”

      “Do	 you	remember	coming	to	the	library?”

      She	nodded.

      “Do	 you	remember	the	storm?”

      She	closed	her	eyes	for	a	moment,	as	if	the	act	of	keeping	them	open	had
required	more	energy	than	she	possessed.	“It’s	still	storming.”

      Anthony	 nodded.	That	was	true.	The	rain	was	still	beating	against	the
windows	with	 just	as	much	ferocity	as	before,	but	it	had	been	several	minutes
since	the	last	bout	of	thunder	and	lightning.

      She	looked	at	him	with	 desperate	eyes.	“I	can’t…I	don’t…”

      Anthony	 squeezed	her	hand.	“You	don’t	have	to	say	anything.”

      He	felt	 her	body	shudder	and	relax,	then	heard	her	whisper,	“Thank	you.”

      “Do	 you	want	me	to	talk	to	 you?”	he	asked.

      She	shut	her	eyes—not	as	tightly	as	before—and	nodded.

      He	smiled,	even	though	he	knew	she	could	not	see	it.	But	maybe	she	could
sense	it.	Maybe	she’d	be	able	to	hear	his	smile	in	his	voice.	“Let’s	 see,”	he
mused,	“what	can	I	tell	you	 about?”

201
mused,	“what	can	I	tell	you	 about?”

      “Tell	 me	about	the	house,”	she	whispered.

      “This	 house?”	he	asked	in	surprise.

      She	nodded.

      “Very	 well,”	 he	replied,	feeling	 rather	absurdly	pleased	that	she	was
interested	in	the	one	pile	of	stone	and	mortar	that	meant	so	much	to	him.	“I	grew
up	here,	you	know.”

      “Your	 mother	told	 me.”

      Anthony	 felt	a	spark	of	something	warm	and	powerful	 in	his	chest	as	she
spoke.	He’d	told	her	she	didn’t	have	to	say	anything,	and	she’d	been	quite
obviously	thankful	 for	that,	but	now	 she	was	actually	taking	part	in	the
conversation.	Surely	that	had	to	mean	she	was	beginning	to	feel	better.	If	she’d
open	her	eyes—if	they	weren’t	sitting	 under	a	table—it	might	 seem	almost
normal.

      And	it	 was	stunning	how	much	he	wanted	to	be	the	one	to	make	her	feel
better.

      “Shall	 I	tell	 you	about	the	time	my	brother	drowned	my	 sister’s	favorite
doll?”	he	asked.

      She	shook	her	head,	then	flinched	when	the	wind	picked	up,	causing	the	rain
to	beat	against	the	windows	with	new	ferocity.	 But	she	steeled	her	chin	and	said,
“Tell	 me	something	about	you.”

      “All	  right,”	 Anthony	said	slowly,	 trying	 to	ignore	the	vague,	uncomfortable
feeling	that	spread	in	his	chest.	It	was	so	much	easier	to	tell	a	tale	of	his	many
siblings	than	to	talk	about	himself.

      “Tell	 me	about	your	father.”

      He	froze.	“My	  father?”

      She	smiled,	but	he	was	too	shocked	by	her	request	to	notice.	“You	must	have
had	one,”	she	said.

202
      Anthony’s	 throat	began	to	feel	very	tight.	 He	didn’t	 often	talk	about	his
father,	not	even	with	his	family.	 He’d	 told	himself	 that	it	was	because	it	was	so
much	water	under	the	bridge;	Edmund	had	been	dead	for	over	ten	years.	But	the
truth	was	that	some	things	simply	hurt	too	much.

      And	there	were	some	wounds	that	didn’t	 heal,	not	even	in	ten	years.

      “He—he	 was	a	great	man,”	he	said	softly.	“A	 great	father.	I	loved	him	 very
much.”

      Kate	turned	to	look	 at	him,	the	first	time	 she’d	met	his	gaze	since	he’d	lifted
her	chin	with	his	fingers	 many	minutes	earlier.	“Your	 mother	speaks	of	him	with
great	affection.	That	was	why	I	asked.”

      “We	 all	loved	him,”	 he	said	simply,	turning	 his	head	and	staring	out	across
the	room.	His	eyes	focused	on	the	leg	of	a	chair,	but	he	didn’t	really	 see	it.	He
didn’t	see	anything	but	the	memories	in	his	mind.	 “He	was	the	finest	father	a	boy
could	ever	want.”

      “When	 did	he	die?”

      “Eleven	 years	ago.	In	the	summer.	When	I	was	eighteen.	Right	before	I	left
for	Oxford.”

      “That’s	 a	difficult	 time	 for	a	man	to	lose	his	father,”	she	murmured.

      He	turned	sharply	to	look	 at	her.	“Any	 time	is	a	difficult	 time	 for	a	man	to
lose	his	father.”

      “Of	 course,”	she	quickly	 agreed,	“but	some	times	are	worse	than	others,	I
think.	And	 surely	it	must	be	different	for	 boys	and	girls.	My	 father	passed	on
five	years	ago,	and	I	miss	him	terribly,	 but	I	don’t	 think	it’s	 the	same.”

      He	didn’t	 have	to	voice	his	question.	It	was	there	in	his	eyes.

      “My	 father	was	wonderful,”	  Kate	explained,	her	eyes	warming	as	she
reminisced.	“Kind	 and	gentle,	but	stern	when	he	needed	to	be.	But	a	boy’s	father
—well,	 he	has	to	teach	his	son	how	to	be	a	man.	And	to	lose	a	father	at	eighteen,
when	you’re	just	learning	 what	all	that	means…”	She	let	out	a	long	exhale.	“It’s
probably	presumptuous	for	me	even	to	discuss	it,	as	I’m	not	a	man	and	therefore
couldn’t	possibly	 put	myself	in	your	 shoes,	but	I	think…”	 She	paused,	pursing

203
couldn’t	possibly	 put	myself	in	your	 shoes,	but	I	think…”	 She	paused,	pursing
her	lips	as	she	considered	her	words.	“Well,	I	just	think	 it	would	 be	very
difficult.”

      “My	 brothers	were	sixteen,	twelve,	and	two,”	 Anthony	 said	softly.

      “I	 would	imagine	 it	was	difficult	 for	 them	as	well,”	 she	replied,	“although
your	youngest	brother	probably	doesn’t	remember	him.”

      Anthony	 shook	his	head.

      Kate	smiled	wistfully.	  “I	 don’t	remember	my	mother,	either.	 It’s	an	odd
thing.”

      “How	 old	were	you	when	 she	died?”

      “It	 was	on	my	third	 birthday.	My	 father	married	Mary	 only	a	few	months
later.	He	didn’t	 observe	the	proper	mourning	period,	and	it	shocked	some	of	the
neighbors,	but	he	thought	I	needed	a	mother	more	than	he	needed	to	follow
etiquette.”

      For	the	first	 time,	Anthony	 wondered	what	would	have	happened	if	it	had
been	his	mother	who	had	died	young,	leaving	his	father	with	a	house	full	 of
children,	several	of	them	infants	and	toddlers.	Edmund	wouldn’t	 have	had	an
easy	time	of	it.	None	of	them	would	 have.

      Not	that	it	 had	been	easy	for	Violet.	But	at	least	she’d	had	Anthony,	who’d
been	able	to	step	in	and	try	to	act	the	role	of	surrogate	father	to	his	younger
siblings.	If	 Violet	had	died,	the	Bridgertons	 would	have	been	left	completely
without	a	maternal	figure.	After	 all,	 Daphne—the	eldest	of	the	Bridgerton
daughters—had	been	only	ten	at	Edmund’s	death.	And	Anthony	was	certain	that
his	father	would	not	have	remarried.

      No	matter	how	his	 father	would	have	wanted	a	mother	for	his	children,	 he
would	not	have	been	able	to	take	another	wife.

      “How	 did	your	 mother	die?”	Anthony	 asked,	surprised	by	the	depth	of	his
curiosity.

      “Influenza.	 Or	at	least	that’s	what	they	thought.	It	 could	have	been	any	sort
of	lung	fever.”	 She	rested	her	chin	on	her	hand.	“It	was	very	quick,	I’m	 told.	 My
father	said	I	fell	ill	 as	well,	 although	mine	was	a	mild	case.”

204
father	said	I	fell	ill	 as	well,	 although	mine	was	a	mild	case.”

      Anthony	 thought	about	the	son	he	hoped	to	sire,	the	very	reason	he	had
finally	 decided	to	marry.	“Do	 you	miss	a	parent	you	never	knew?”	he	whispered.

      Kate	considered	his	question	for	some	time.	His	voice	 had	held	a	hoarse
urgency	that	told	her	there	was	something	critical	about	her	reply.	Why,	 she
couldn’t	imagine,	 but	something	about	her	childhood	clearly	rang	a	chord	within
his	heart.

      “Yes,”	 she	finally	 answered,	“but	not	in	the	way	you	 would	think.	 You	can’t
really	miss	her,	because	you	didn’t	know	her,	but	there’s	still	 a	hole	in	your	life
—a	big	empty	spot,	and	you	know	who	 was	supposed	to	fit	there,	but	you	can’t
remember	her,	and	you	don’t	know	what	she	was	like,	and	so	you	don’t	know
how	she	would	have	filled	that	hole.”	 Her	lips	curved	into	 a	sad	sort	of	smile.
“Does	this	make	any	sense?”

      Anthony	 nodded.	“It	makes	a	great	deal	of	sense.”

      “I	 think	losing	 a	parent	once	you	know	and	love	them	is	harder,”	Kate
added.	“And	I	know,	 because	I’ve	lost	both.”

      “I’m	  sorry,”	he	said	quietly.

      “It’s	 all	 right,”	 she	assured	him.	“That	old	adage—time	heals	all	wounds—
it’s	really	 true.”

      He	stared	at	her	intently,	and	she	could	tell	from	 his	expression	that	he	didn’t
agree.

      “It	 really	is	more	difficult	  when	you’re	 older.	You’re	 blessed	because	you
had	the	chance	to	know	them,	but	the	pain	of	the	loss	is	more	intense.”

      “It	 was	as	if	I’d	 lost	an	arm,”	Anthony	 whispered.

      She	nodded	soberly,	somehow	knowing	that	he	hadn’t	spoken	of	his	sorrow
to	many	people.	She	licked	nervously	at	her	lips,	which	 had	gone	quite	dry.
Funny	how	that	happened.	All	the	rain	in	 the	world	pounding	outside,	and	here
she	was,	parched	as	a	bone.

      “Perhaps	it	was	better	for	me,	then,”	 Kate	said	softly,	“losing	 my	mother	so

205
      “Perhaps	it	was	better	for	me,	then,”	 Kate	said	softly,	“losing	 my	mother	so
young.	And	Mary	 has	been	wonderful.	She	loves	me	as	a	daughter.	In	fact—”
She	broke	off,	startled	by	the	sudden	wetness	in	her	eyes.	When	she	finally
found	her	voice	again,	it	was	an	emotional	whisper.	“In	 fact,	she	has	never	once
treated	me	differently	than	she	has	Edwina.	I—I	don’t	 think	 I	could	have	loved
my	own	mother	any	better.”

      Anthony’s	 eyes	burned	into	hers.	“I’m	 so	glad,”	he	said,	his	voice	low	 and
intense.

      Kate	swallowed.	 “She’s	so	funny	about	it	sometimes.	She	visits	my	mother’s
grave,	just	to	tell	her	how	I’m	 doing.	It’s	 very	sweet,	actually.	When	 I	was	small,
I	would	go	with	 her,	to	tell	my	 mother	how	Mary	 was	doing.”

      Anthony	 smiled.	“And	 was	your	report	favorable?”

      “Always.”

      They	sat	in	companionable	silence	for	a	moment,	both	staring	at	the	candle
flame,	watching	the	wax	drip	 down	the	taper	to	the	candlestick.	When	the	fourth
drop	of	wax	rolled	 down	the	candle,	sliding	along	the	column	until	 it	 hardened	in
place,	Kate	turned	to	Anthony	and	said,	“I’m	 sure	I	sound	insufferably
optimistic,	but	 I	think	there	must	be	some	master	plan	in	life.”

      He	turned	to	her	and	quirked	a	brow.

      “Everything	 really	 does	work	out	in	the	end,”	she	explained.	“I	 lost	my
mother,	but	I	gained	Mary.	And	 a	sister	I	love	dearly.	And—”

      A	flash	 of	lightning	 lit	 the	room.	Kate	bit	her	lip,	 trying	to	force	 slow	and
even	breaths	through	her	nose.	The	thunder	would	come,	but	she’d	be	ready	for
it,	and—

      The	room	shook	with	 noise,	and	she	was	able	to	keep	her	eyes	open.

      She	let	out	a	long	exhale	and	allowed	herself	a	proud	smile.	That	hadn’t
been	so	difficult.	It	 certainly	hadn’t	 been	fun,	but	it	hadn’t	been	impossible.	It
might	have	been	Anthony’s	comforting	 presence	next	to	her,	or	simply	that	the
storm	was	moving	away,	but	she’d	made	it	through	without	 her	heart	jumping
through	her	skin.

      “Are	 you	all	right?”	 Anthony	 asked.

206
      “Are	 you	all	right?”	 Anthony	 asked.

      She	looked	over	at	him,	and	something	inside	of	her	melted	at	the	concerned
look	on	his	face.	Whatever	he’d	done	in	the	past,	however	they’d	argued	and
fought,	in	this	moment	he	truly	 cared	about	her.

      “Yes,”	 she	said,	hearing	surprise	in	her	voice	even	though	she	hadn’t
intended	it.	“Yes,	I	 think	I	 am.”

      He	gave	her	hand	a	squeeze.	“How	long	have	you	been	like	this?”

      “Tonight?	 Or	in	my	 life?”

      “Both.”

      “Tonight	 since	the	first	clap	of	 thunder.	I	get	quite	nervous	when	it	begins	to
rain,	but	as	long	as	there	is	no	thunder	and	lightning,	I’m	 all	right.	It’s	 not	the
rain,	actually,	which	 upsets	me,	but	just	the	fear	that	it	might	grow	into
something	more.”	She	swallowed,	licking	 her	dry	lips	 before	she	continued.	“To
answer	your	other	query,	I	can’t	remember	a	time	I	wasn’t	 terrified	 by	storms.
It’s	simply	 a	part	of	me.	It’s	quite	 foolish,	I	 know—”

      “It’s	 not	foolish,”	  he	interjected.

      “You’re	 very	 sweet	to	think	so,”	she	said	with	a	sheepish	half-smile,	“but
you’re	wrong.	Nothing	 could	be	more	foolish	 than	to	fear	something	with	no
reason.”

      “Sometimes…”	 Anthony	 said	in	a	halting	voice,	 “sometimes	there	are
reasons	for	our	fears	that	we	can’t	quite	explain.	Sometimes	it’s	just	something
we	feel	in	our	bones,	something	we	know	to	be	true,	but	would	 sound	foolish	to
anyone	else.”

      Kate	stared	at	him	intently,	 watching	his	dark	eyes	in	the	flickering
candlelight,	and	catching	her	breath	at	the	flash	of	pain	she	saw	in	the	brief
second	before	he	looked	away.	And	she	knew—with	every	fiber	 of	her	being—
that	he	wasn’t	speaking	of	intangibles.	He	was	talking	about	his	own	 fears,
something	very	specific	that	haunted	him	every	minute	of	 every	day.

      Something	she	knew	she	did	not	have	the	right	to	ask	him	about.	But	she
wished—oh,	how	she	wished—that	when	he	was	ready	to	face	his	fears,	she

207
wished—oh,	how	she	wished—that	when	he	was	ready	to	face	his	fears,	she
could	be	the	one	to	help	him.

      But	that	wasn’t	 to	be.	He	would	marry	someone	else,	maybe	even	Edwina,
and	only	his	wife	would	 have	the	right	to	talk	 to	him	about	such	personal
matters.

      “I	 think	I	 might	be	ready	to	go	upstairs,”	she	said.	Suddenly	it	was	too	hard
to	be	in	his	presence,	too	painful	to	know	that	he	would	belong	to	 someone	else.

      His	lips	 quirked	into	a	boyish	smile.	 “Are	 you	saying	I	might	 finally	 crawl
out	from	under	this	table?”

      “Oh,	 goodness!”	She	clapped	one	of	her	hands	to	her	cheek	in	a	sheepish
expression.	“I’m	 so	sorry.	I	stopped	noticing	where	we	were	sitting	 ages	ago,
I’m	afraid.	 What	a	ninny	you	must	think	 me.”

      He	shook	his	head,	still	smiling.	 “Never	 a	ninny,	Kate.	Even	when	I	thought
you	the	most	insufferable	female	creature	on	the	planet,	I	had	no	doubts	about
your	intelligence.”

      Kate,	who	had	been	in	the	process	of	scooting	out	from	under	the	table,
paused.	“I	just	don’t	know	 if	I	 should	feel	complimented	or	 insulted	by	that
statement.”

      “Probably	 both,”	he	admitted,	“but	 for	friendship’s	 sake,	let’s	decide	upon
complimented.”

      She	turned	to	look	at	him,	aware	that	she	presented	an	awkward	picture	on
her	hands	and	knees,	but	the	moment	seemed	too	important	to	delay.	“Then	we
are	friends?”	she	whispered.

      He	nodded	as	he	stood.	“Hard	to	believe,	but	I	think	 we	are.”

      Kate	smiled	as	she	took	his	helping	hand	and	rose	to	her	feet.	“I’m	 glad.
You’re—you’re	 really	 not	the	devil	I’d	 originally	 thought	 you.”

      One	of	his	brows	lifted,	 and	his	face	suddenly	took	on	a	very	wicked
expression.

      “Well,	 maybe	you	are,”	 she	amended,	thinking	he	probably	was	every	bit	the
rake	and	rogue	that	society	had	painted	him.	“But	maybe	you’re	also	a	rather

208
rake	and	rogue	that	society	had	painted	him.	“But	maybe	you’re	also	a	rather
nice	person	as	well.”

      “Nice	 seems	so	bland,”	he	mused.

      “Nice,”	 she	said	emphatically,	“is	 nice.	And	given	what	 I	used	to	think	of
you,	you	ought	to	be	delighted	by	the	compliment.”

      He	laughed.	“One	thing	 about	you,	Kate	Sheffield,	is	that	you	 are	never
boring.”

      “Boring	 is	so	bland,”	 she	quipped.

      He	smiled—a	true	grin,	 not	that	ironic	 curve	he	used	at	society	functions,	but
the	real	thing.	Kate’s	throat	suddenly	felt	 very	tight.

      “I’m	  afraid	I	cannot	walk	you	 back	to	your	room,”	 he	said.	“If	 someone
should	come	across	us	at	this	hour…”

      Kate	nodded.	They’d	 forged	an	unlikely	 friendship,	but	she	didn’t	 want	to
get	trapped	into	marriage	with	him,	 right?	And	it	 went	without	 saying	that	he
didn’t	want	 to	marry	her.

      He	motioned	to	her.	“And	 especially	with	 you	dressed	like	that….”

      Kate	looked	down	 and	gasped,	yanking	her	robe	more	tightly	around	her.
She’d	completely	forgotten	that	she	wasn’t	properly	 dressed.	Her	nightclothes
certainly	weren’t	 risqué	or	revealing,	especially	with	 her	thick	robe,	but	they
were	nightclothes.

      “Will	  you	be	all	right?”	 he	asked	softly.	“It’s	 still	 raining.”

      Kate	stopped	and	listened	to	the	rain,	which	had	softened	to	a	gentle	patter
against	the	windows.	“I	 think	the	storm	is	over.”

      He	nodded	and	peered	out	into	the	hall.	“It’s	 empty,”	 he	said.

      “I	 should	go.”

      He	stepped	aside	to	let	her	pass.

      She	moved	forward,	but	when	she	reached	the	doorway	she	stopped	and

209
      She	moved	forward,	but	when	she	reached	the	doorway	she	stopped	and
turned	around.	“Lord	Bridgerton?”

      “Anthony,”	  he	said.	“You	should	call	 me	Anthony.	I	 believe	I’ve	 already
called	you	Kate.”

      “You	 did?”

      “When	 I	found	you.”	 He	waved	a	hand.	“I	don’t	 think	 you	heard	anything	I
said.”

      “You’re	 probably	 right.”	 She	smiled	hesitantly.	“Anthony.”	  His	name
sounded	strange	on	her	tongue.

      He	leaned	forward	slightly,	 an	odd,	almost	devilish	 light	in	 his	eyes.	“Kate,”
he	said	in	return.

      “I	 just	wanted	to	say	thank	you,”	 she	said.	“For	helping	me	tonight.	I—”	  She
cleared	her	throat.	“It	would	 have	been	a	great	deal	more	difficult	without	 you.”

      “I	 didn’t	 do	anything,”	 he	said	gruffly.

      “No,	 you	did	everything.”	 And	 then,	before	she’d	be	tempted	to	stay,	she
hurried	down	the	hall	and	up	the	stairs.

210
Chapter	     13


There	is	little	to	report	 in	London	with	 so	many	people	away	in	Kent	at	the
Bridgerton	house	party.	This	Author	 can	only	imagine	all	 the	gossip	that	will
soon	reach	town.	There	will	be	a	scandal,	yes?	There	is	always	a	scandal	at	a
house	party.

                                                        LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	4	MAY	1814



The	 following	  morning	was	the	sort	that	usually	follows	 a	violent	storm—
bright	and	clear,	but	with	a	fine,	 damp	mist	that	settled	cold	and	refreshing	on
the	skin.

      Anthony	 was	oblivious	to	the	weather,	having	spent	most	of	the	night	staring
into	the	darkness	and	seeing	nothing	but	Kate’s	face.	He’d	finally	 fallen	asleep
as	the	first	streaks	of	dawn	fingered	across	the	sky.	By	the	time	he	woke,	it	was
well	past	noon,	but	he	did	not	feel	rested.	His	body	was	suffused	with	a	strange
combination	of	exhaustion	and	nervous	energy.	His	eyes	felt	heavy	and	dull	in
their	sockets,	and	yet	his	fingers	kept	drumming	the	bed,	inching	toward	 the
edge	as	if	they	alone	could	pull	him	out	and	to	his	feet.

      Finally,	 when	his	stomach	growled	so	loudly	 that	he	could	swear	he	saw	the
plaster	on	the	ceiling	shake,	he	staggered	upright	and	pulled	on	his	robe.	With	a
wide,	loud	yawn,	he	moved	to	the	window,	 not	because	he	was	looking	for
anyone	or	anything	in	particular,	but	simply	 because	the	view	was	better	than
anything	else	in	his	room.

      And	yet	in	 the	quarter	second	before	he	looked	down	and	gazed	upon	the
grounds,	he	somehow	knew	what	he	would	see.

      Kate.	Walking	 slowly	 across	the	lawn,	far	more	slowly	than	he’d	 ever	seen
her	walk	before.	Usually,	she	walked	as	if	in	 a	race.

      She	was	much	too	far	away	for	him	 to	see	her	face—just	a	sliver	of	her
profile,	the	curve	of	 her	cheek.	And	yet	he	could	not	take	his	eyes	off	of	her.
There	was	so	much	magic	in	her	form—a	strange	grace	in	the	way	her	arm
swung	as	she	walked,	an	artistry	in	the	posture	of	her	shoulders.

211
swung	as	she	walked,	  an	artistry	 in	 the	posture	 of	 her	shoulders.

       She	was	walking	  toward	 the	 garden,	he	 realized.

       And	 he	knew	 he	had	to	 join	 her.
                                                                     	

The	weather	remained	in	its	contradictory	state	for	most	of	the	day,	dividing	the	house	party	neatly	in	half,
between	those	who	insisted	the	bright	sunshine	beckoned	outdoor	play,	and	those	who	eschewed	the	wet
grass	and	damp	air	for	the	warmer,	drier	clime	of	the	drawing	room.

       Kate	was	 firmly	  in	 the	former	 group,	 although	  she	was	not	 in	the	 mood	 for
company.	 Her	 mind	 was	in	 far	too	 reflective	  a	mood	 to	make	 polite	 conversation
with	 people	 she	barely	 knew,	 and	so	she	stole	 away	 once	again	 to	Lady
Bridgerton’s	  spectacular	 gardens	 and	found	 herself	 a	quiet	 spot	 on	a	bench	 near
the	rose	arbor.	 The	 stone	was	cold	 and	 just	a	little	  bit	 damp	beneath	 her	bottom,
but	she	hadn’t	 slept	 particularly	   well	 the	night	 before,	 and	 she	was	tired,	 and	 it
was	better	 than	standing.

       And	 it	was,	 she	realized	 with	 a	sigh,	 just	 about	the	 only	 place	 where	she
might	 be	left	 to	her	 own	 company.	 If	 she	remained	 in	 the	house,	 she’d	 surely	 be
roped	into	 joining	  the	group	 of	 ladies	 chatting	 in	 the	drawing	  room	 while	 they
wrote	 correspondence	 to	friends	  and	family,	  or	worse,	 she’d	 be	stuck	 with	 the
coterie	 who’d	 retired	 to	 the	orangery	 to	 pursue	their	 embroidery.

       As	for	 the	outdoor	  enthusiasts,	 they’d	 also	 broken	 into	 two	 groups.	 One	had
hied	off	 to	 the	village	  to	shop	 and	see	whatever	 sights	 there	were	 to	be	 found,
and	the	other	 was	taking	  a	constitutional	  walk	 to	 the	lake.	 As	 Kate	had	 no
interest	in	 shopping	 (and	 she	was	already	 quite	 familiar	  with	  the	lake)	 she’d
eschewed	their	 company	 as	well.

       Hence,	her	 solitude	 in	 the	garden.

       She	sat	for	 several	minutes,	  just	staring	 off	 into	 space,	 her	eyes	focusing
somewhat	 blindly	  on	the	 tightly	 furled	  bud	of	 a	nearby	 rose.	It	 was	nice	 to	be
alone,	where	 she	didn’t	  have	to	 cover	 her	mouth	 or	 stifle	 the	loud	 sleepy	 noises
she	made	when	 she	yawned.	 Nice	 to	be	 alone,	where	 no	 one	was	going	 to
comment	 on	the	 dark	circles	 beneath	 her	eyes	 or	her	uncommon	  quietude	 and
lack	of	 conversation.

       Nice	 to	be	alone,	 where	 she	could	 sit	and	 attempt	 to	sort	 through	 her	muddle
of	thoughts	 about	 the	viscount.	  It	 was	a	daunting	 task,	 and	one	 she’d	rather	 put

212
of	thoughts	about	the	viscount.	It	was	a	daunting	task,	and	one	she’d	rather	put
off,	but	it	 had	to	be	done.

      But	there	really	 wasn’t	all	that	much	to	sort	out.	 Because	everything	she	had
learned	in	the	past	few	days	pointed	her	conscience	in	one,	singular	direction.
And	she	knew	that	she	could	no	longer	oppose	Bridgerton’s	courtship	of
Edwina.

      In	the	past	few	days	he’d	proven	himself	 sensitive,	caring,	and	principled.
Even,	she	thought	with	a	glimmer	of	 a	smile	as	she	recalled	the	light	in	Penelope
Featherington’s	eyes	when	he’d	saved	her	from	the	verbal	talons	of	Cressida
Cowper,	heroic.

      He	was	devoted	to	family.

      He	had	used	his	social	position	and	power	not	to	lord	over	others	but	simply
to	spare	another	person	insult.

      He	had	helped	her	through	one	of	her	phobic	attacks	with	a	grace	and
sensitivity	that,	now	that	she	could	view	 it	with	 a	clear	head,	stunned	her.

      He	might	 have	been	a	rake	and	a	rogue—he	might	still	be	a	rake	and	a	rogue
—but	clearly	his	behavior	 to	those	ends	did	not	define	the	man.	And	the	only
objection	Kate	had	to	his	marrying	 Edwina	was…

      She	swallowed	painfully.	 There	was	a	lump	the	size	of	a	cannonball	in	her
throat.

      Because	deep	in	her	heart,	she	wanted	him	for	herself.

      But	that	was	selfish,	and	Kate	had	spent	her	life	trying	 to	be	unselfish,	and
she	knew	she	could	never	ask	Edwina	not	to	marry	Anthony	for	 such	a	reason.	If
Edwina	knew	that	Kate	was	even	the	tiniest	bit	infatuated	with	 the	viscount,	she
would	put	an	end	to	his	courtship	at	once.	And	what	purpose	would	that	serve?
Anthony	would	 just	find	 some	other	beautiful,	eligible	woman	 to	pursue.	There
were	plenty	to	choose	from	in	London.

      It	wasn’t	 as	if	he	were	going	to	ask	her	instead,	so	what	would	she	have	to
gain	by	preventing	a	match	between	him	and	Edwina?

      Nothing	 except	the	agony	of	having	to	see	him	married	to	her	sister.	And

213
      Nothing	 except	the	agony	of	having	to	see	him	married	to	her	sister.	And
that	would	fade	in	time,	wouldn’t	  it?	It	had	to;	she	herself	had	just	said	the	night
before	that	time	truly	did	 heal	all	wounds.	Besides,	it	would	probably	 hurt	just	as
much	to	see	him	married	to	some	other	lady;	the	only	difference	would	 be	that
she	would	not	have	to	see	him	at	holidays	and	christenings	and	the	like.

      Kate	let	out	a	sigh.	A	 long,	sad,	weary	sigh	that	stole	every	breath	from	her
lungs	and	left	her	shoulders	sagging,	her	posture	drooping.

      Her	heart	aching.

      And	then	a	voice	filled	 her	ears.	His	voice,	low	 and	smooth,	like	a	warm
swirl	around	her.	“My	 goodness,	you	sound	serious.”

      Kate	stood	so	suddenly	that	the	backs	of	her	legs	knocked	into	the	edge	of
the	stone	bench,	setting	her	off	balance	and	causing	her	to	stumble.	“My	lord,”
she	blurted	out.

      His	lips	 curved	with	the	barest	hint	of	a	smile.	“I	 thought	 I	might	find	 you
here.”

      Her	eyes	widened	at	the	realization	that	he’d	deliberately	sought	her	out.	Her
heart	started	beating	faster	as	well,	but	at	least	that	was	something	she	could
keep	hidden	from	him.

      He	glanced	briefly	 down	to	the	stone	bench,	signaling	that	she	should	feel
free	to	resume	her	seat.	“Actually,	I	saw	you	from	 my	window.	 I	wanted	to	make
certain	that	you	were	feeling	better,”	he	said	quietly.

      Kate	sat	down,	disappointment	rising	 in	her	throat.	He	was	merely	being
polite.	Of	course	he	was	merely	being	polite.	 Silly	of	 her	to	dream—even	for	a
moment—that	there	might	be	something	more.	He	was,	she’d	finally	 realized,	a
nice	person,	and	any	nice	person	would	want	to	make	sure	that	she	was	feeling
better	after	what	had	transpired	the	night	before.

      “I	 am,”	she	replied.	“Very	 much.	Thank	you.”

      If	 he	thought	anything	of	her	broken,	staccato	sentences,	he	did	not	make
any	discernible	reaction	of	it.	“I’m	  glad,”	 he	said	as	he	sat	beside	her.	“I	worried
about	you	for	much	of	the	night.”

      Her	heart,	which	had	already	been	pounding	much	too	quickly,	 skipped	a

214
      Her	heart,	which	had	already	been	pounding	much	too	quickly,	 skipped	a
beat.	“You	did?”

      “Of	 course.	How	could	I	 not?”

      Kate	swallowed.	 There	it	was,	that	infernal	politeness	again.	Oh,	she	didn’t
doubt	that	his	interest	and	concern	were	real	and	true.	It	just	hurt	that	they	were
prompted	by	his	natural	kindness	of	spirit,	not	 any	special	feeling	for	her.

      Not	that	she	had	expected	anything	different.	But	 she’d	found	it	impossible
not	to	hope,	anyway.

      “I’m	  sorry	to	have	bothered	you	so	late	at	night,”	she	said	quietly,	mostly
because	she	thought	she	should.	In	truth,	she	was	desperately	glad	that	he’d	been
there.

      “Don’t	 be	silly,”	  he	said,	straightening	slightly	and	fixing	 upon	her	a	rather
stern	sort	of	look.	“I	 hate	to	think	of	 you	all	alone	during	a	storm.	I’m	 glad	I	was
there	to	comfort	you.”

      “I’m	  usually	alone	during	storms,”	she	admitted.

      Anthony	 frowned.	“Your	 family	 does	not	offer	you	 comfort	during	 storms?”

      She	looked	a	little	sheepish	as	she	said,	“They	do	not	know	that	I	still	 fear
them.”

      He	nodded	slowly.	 “I	see.	There	are	times—”	Anthony	 paused	to	clear	his
throat,	a	diversionary	tactic	he	frequently	employed	 when	he	wasn’t	quite	certain
what	it	was	he	wanted	to	say.	“I	think	 you	would	 gain	comfort	by	seeking	the	aid
of	your	mother	and	sister,	but	I	know—”	  He	cleared	his	throat	again.	He	knew
well	the	singularly	 strange	sensation	of	loving	one’s	family	 to	distraction,	and
yet	not	feeling	quite	able	to	share	one’s	deepest	and	most	intractable	fears.	It
brought	on	an	uncanny	sense	of	isolation,	of	being	remarkably	alone	in	a	loud
and	loving	crowd.

      “I	 know,”	 he	said	again,	his	voice	purposely	even	and	subdued,	“that	it	can
often	be	most	difficult	 to	share	one’s	fears	with	those	one	most	deeply	loves.”

      Her	brown	 eyes,	wise	and	warm	and	undeniably	perceptive,	focused	on	his.

215
For	one	split	moment	he	had	the	bizarre	thought	that	she	somehow	knew
everything	about	him,	every	last	detail	from	 the	moment	of	his	birth	 to	his
certainty	of	his	own	death.	It	seemed,	in	that	second,	with	her	face	tipped	up
toward	his	and	her	lips	slightly	 parted,	that	she,	more	than	anyone	else	who
would	ever	walk	this	 earth,	truly	knew	him.

      It	was	thrilling.

      But	more	than	that,	it	 was	terrifying.

      “You’re	 a	very	wise	 man,”	she	whispered.

      It	took	 him	a	moment	to	remember	what	they’d	been	talking	 about.	Ah	yes,
fears.	He	knew	fears.	He	tried	to	laugh	off	her	compliment.	 “Most	 of	the	time
I’m	a	very	foolish	 man.”

      She	shook	her	head.	“No.	I	think	 you’ve	hit	 the	nail	squarely	on	its
proverbial	head.	Of	course	I	would	not	 tell	Mary	 and	Edwina.	I	do	not	want	to
trouble	them.”	She	chewed	on	her	lip	for	 a	moment—a	funny	little	 movement
with	her	teeth	that	he	found	oddly	seductive.

      “Of	 course,”	she	added,	“if	I	 am	to	be	true	to	myself,	I	must	confess	that	my
motives	are	not	entirely	unselfish.	Surely,	an	equal	part	of	my	 reluctance	lies	in
my	desire	not	to	be	seen	as	weak.”

      “That’s	 not	such	a	terrible	sin,”	 he	murmured.

      “Not	 as	far	as	sins	go,	I	suppose,”	Kate	said	with	a	smile.	“But	 I	would
hazard	a	guess	that	it	is	one	from	which	you,	too,	suffer.”

      He	didn’t	 say	anything,	just	nodded	his	assent.

      “We	 all	have	our	roles	to	play	in	life,”	  she	continued,	“and	mine	has	always
been	to	be	strong	and	sensible.	Cringing	under	a	table	during	an	electrical	storm
is	neither.”

      “Your	 sister,”	 he	said	quietly,	“is	probably	 a	great	deal	stronger	than	you
think.”

      Her	eyes	flew	to	his	face.	Was	he	trying	 to	tell	her	that	he’d	fallen	 in	love
with	Edwina?	He’d	 complimented	her	sister’s	grace	and	beauty	before,	but	never

216
with	Edwina?	He’d	 complimented	her	sister’s	grace	and	beauty	before,	but	never
had	he	referred	to	her	inner	person.

      Kate’s	eyes	searched	his	for	as	long	as	she	dared,	but	she	found	nothing	that
revealed	his	true	feelings.	“I	did	 not	mean	to	imply	that	she	wasn’t,”	 she	finally
replied.	“But	 I	am	her	older	sister.	I	have	always	had	to	be	strong	for	her.
Whereas	she	has	only	had	to	be	strong	for	herself.”	She	brought	her	eyes	back	up
to	his,	only	to	find	 that	he	was	staring	at	her	with	an	odd	intensity,	almost	as	if
he	could	see	past	her	skin	and	into	her	very	soul.	“You	are	the	oldest	as	well,”
she	said.	“I’m	sure	you	know	 what	I	mean.”

      He	nodded,	and	his	eyes	looked	amused	and	resigned	at	the	same	time.
“Exactly.”

      She	gave	him	an	answering	smile,	the	kind	that	passed	between	people	who
know	similar	 experiences	and	trials.	And	as	she	felt	herself	growing	more	at	ease
next	to	him,	almost	as	if	she	could	sink	into	 his	side	and	bury	herself	against	the
warmth	of	his	body,	she	knew	that	she	could	put	off	 her	task	no	longer.

      She	had	to	tell	him	that	she’d	withdrawn	 her	opposition	to	his	 match	with
Edwina.	It	wasn’t	 fair	to	anyone	to	keep	it	to	herself,	just	 because	she	wanted	to
keep	him	to	herself,	if	only	 for	a	few	perfect	moments	right	 here	in	the	gardens.

      She	took	a	deep	breath,	straightened	her	shoulders,	and	turned	to	him.

      He	looked	at	her	expectantly.	It	 was	obvious,	after	all,	that	she	had
something	to	say.

      Kate’s	lips	 parted.	But	nothing	came	out.

      “Yes?”	 he	asked,	looking	rather	amused.

      “My	 lord,”	 she	blurted	out.

      “Anthony,”	  he	corrected	gently.

      “Anthony,”	  she	repeated,	wondering	why	the	use	of	his	given	name	made
this	all	the	more	difficult.	 “I	 did	 need	to	speak	with	you	about	something.”

      He	smiled.	“I’d	  gathered.”

      Her	eyes	became	inexplicably	fastened	on	her	right	foot,	which	 was	tracing

217
      Her	eyes	became	inexplicably	fastened	on	her	right	foot,	which	 was	tracing
half-moons	on	the	packed	dirt	of	the	path.	“It’s…um…it’s	   about	Edwina.”

      Anthony’s	 brows	rose	and	he	followed	her	gaze	to	her	foot,	which	 had	left
half-moons	behind	and	was	now	drawing	squiggly	 lines.	“Is	something	amiss
with	your	sister?”	 he	inquired	gently.

      She	shook	her	head,	looking	back	up.	“Not	at	all.	 I	believe	she’s	in	the
drawing	room,	writing	 a	letter	to	our	cousin	in	 Somerset.	Ladies	like	to	do	that,
you	know.”

      He	blinked.	 “Do	what?”

      “Write	 letters.	I’m	 not	a	very	good	correspondent	myself,”	 she	said,	her
words	coming	forth	 in	an	oddly	rushed	fashion,	“as	I	rarely	have	the	patience	to
sit	still	at	a	desk	long	enough	to	write	an	entire	letter.	Not	 to	mention	that	my
penmanship	is	abysmal.	But	most	ladies	spend	a	goodly	portion	of	every	day
drafting	letters.”

      He	tried	not	to	smile.	 “You	 wanted	to	warn	me	that	your	sister	likes	to	write
letters?”

      “No,	 of	course	not,”	she	mumbled.	“It’s	 just	 that	you	asked	if	she	was	all
right,	and	I	said	of	course,	and	I	told	you	where	she	was,	and	then	we	were
entirely	off	 the	topic,	and—”

      He	laid	his	hand	across	hers,	effectively	cutting	 her	off.	“What	 is	it	you
needed	to	tell	me,	Kate?”

      He	watched	with	 interest	as	she	steeled	her	shoulders	and	clenched	her	jaw.
She	looked	as	if	she	were	preparing	for	a	hideous	task.	Then,	in	one	big	rush	of	a
sentence,	she	said,	“I	just	wanted	you	to	know	that	I	have	withdrawn	my
objections	to	your	suit	of	 Edwina.”

      His	chest	suddenly	felt	a	bit	 hollow.	“I…see,”	  he	said,	not	because	he	did
see,	just	because	he	had	to	say	something.

      “I	 admit	to	a	strong	prejudice	against	you,”	 she	continued	quickly,	“but	 I
have	come	to	know	you	since	my	arrival	at	Aubrey	 Hall,	 and	in	all	conscience,	I
could	not	allow	you	 to	go	on	thinking	 that	I	would	stand	in	your	 way.	It	would—
it	would	not	 be	right	of	me.”

218
it	would	not	 be	right	of	me.”

      Anthony	 just	stared	at	her,	completely	at	a	loss.	There	was,	he	realized
dimly,	something	a	bit	 deflating	about	her	willingness	 to	marry	him	off	 to	her
sister,	since	he’d	spent	the	better	part	of	the	last	two	days	fighting	the	urge	to
kiss	her	rather	senseless.

      On	the	other	hand,	wasn’t	this	what	he	wanted?	Edwina	would	 make	the
perfect	wife.

      Kate	would	 not.

      Edwina	fit	 all	the	criteria	 he’d	laid	out	 when	he’d	finally	 decided	it	was	time
to	wed.

      Kate	did	not.

      And	he	certainly	 couldn’t	 dally	with	 Kate	if	 he	meant	to	marry	Edwina.

      She	was	giving	him	 what	he	wanted—exactly,	he	reminded	himself,	what	he
wanted;	with	her	sister’s	blessing,	Edwina	would	 marry	him	 next	week	if	he	so
desired.

      Then	why	the	devil	 did	he	want	to	grab	her	by	the	shoulders	and	shake	and
shake	and	shake	until	she	took	back	every	bloody	little	annoying	word?

      It	was	that	spark.	That	damnable	spark	that	never	seemed	to	dim	between
them.	That	awful	prickle	 of	awareness	that	burned	every	time	she	entered	a
room,	or	took	a	breath,	or	pointed	a	toe.	That	sinking	feeling	 that	he	could,	if	he
let	himself,	love	her.

      Which	 was	the	one	thing	he	feared	most.

      Perhaps	the	only	thing	he	feared	at	all.

      It	was	ironic,	 but	death	was	the	one	thing	he	wasn’t	afraid	of.	Death	wasn’t
frightening	to	a	man	alone.	The	great	beyond	held	no	terror	when	one	had
managed	to	avoid	attachments	here	on	earth.

      Love	was	truly	 a	spectacular,	sacred	thing.	Anthony	knew	that.	He’d	seen	it
every	day	of	his	childhood,	every	time	 his	parents	had	shared	a	glance	or
touched	hands.

219
touched	hands.

      But	love	 was	the	enemy	of	the	dying	man.	It	was	the	only	thing	 that	could
make	the	rest	of	his	years	intolerable—to	taste	bliss	and	know	that	it	would	 all
be	snatched	away.	And	that	was	probably	why,	when	Anthony	finally	  reacted	to
her	words,	he	didn’t	yank	her	to	him	 and	kiss	her	until	she	was	gasping,	and	he
didn’t	press	his	lips	to	her	ear	and	burn	his	breath	against	her	skin,	making	sure
she	understood	that	he	was	on	fire	for	her,	and	not	her	sister.

      Never	her	sister.

      Instead,	he	just	looked	at	her	impassively,	his	eyes	far,	far	steadier	than	his
heart,	and	said,	“I	am	much	relieved,”	all	 the	while	having	 the	strangest	feeling
that	he	wasn’t	really	there,	but	rather	watching	the	entire	scene—nothing	more
than	a	farce,	really—from	outside	of	 his	body,	all	the	while	 wondering	what	the
hell	was	going	on.

      She	smiled	weakly	and	said,	“I	 thought	you	might	 feel	that	way.”

      “Kate,	 I—”

      She’d	never	know	what	 he	meant	to	say.	In	all	truth,	he	wasn’t	even	sure
what	he	intended	to	say.	He	hadn’t	even	realized	that	he	was	going	to	speak	until
her	name	passed	over	his	lips.

      But	his	words	 would	remain	forever	unspoken,	because	at	that	moment,	he
heard	it.

      A	low	 buzz.	A	whine,	 really.	It	 was	the	sort	of	sound	most	people	found
mildly	 annoying.

      Nothing,	 to	Anthony,	could	 have	been	more	terrifying.

      “Don’t	 move,”	 he	whispered,	his	voice	harsh	with	fear.

      Kate’s	eyes	narrowed,	and	of	course	she	moved,	trying	to	twist	about.	“What
are	you	talking	about?	What	is	wrong?”

      “Just	don’t	 move,”	he	repeated.

      Her	eyes	slid	to	the	left,	then	her	chin	followed	 by	 a	quarter	of	an	inch	or	so.
“Oh,	it’s	 just	a	bee!”	Her	face	broke	out	in	 a	relieved	grin,	and	she	lifted	her

220
“Oh,	it’s	 just	a	bee!”	Her	face	broke	out	in	 a	relieved	grin,	and	she	lifted	her
hand	to	swat	it	away.	“For	goodness’	sake,	Anthony,	don’t	 do	that	again.	You
had	me	scared	for	a	moment.”

      Anthony’s	 hand	shot	out	and	grasped	her	wrist	with	painful	 force.	“I	 said
don’t	move,”	 he	hissed.

      “Anthony,”	  she	said,	laughing,	“it’s	 a	bee.”

      He	held	her	immobile,	 his	grasp	hard	and	painful,	his	eyes	never	leaving	the
loathsome	creature,	watching	as	it	buzzed	purposefully	around	her	head.	He	was
paralyzed	by	fear,	and	fury,	and	something	else	he	couldn’t	quite	put	his	finger
on.

      It	wasn’t	 as	if	he	hadn’t	come	into	contact	with	 bees	in	the	eleven	years
since	his	father’s	death.	One	couldn’t	reside	in	England,	after	all,	 and	expect	to
avoid	them	altogether.

      Until	 now,	in	 fact,	he’d	forced	himself	 to	flirt	 with	 them	in	an	odd,	fatalistic
manner.	He’d	always	suspected	that	he	might	be	doomed	to	follow	in	his	father’s
footsteps	in	all	respects.	If	he	was	going	to	be	brought	down	by	a	humble	insect,
by	God	he’d	do	it	standing	firm	 and	holding	his	 ground.	He	was	going	to	die
sooner	or…well,	sooner,	and	he	wasn’t	going	to	run	from	 some	bloody	bug.	And
so	when	one	flew	by,	he	laughed,	he	mocked,	he	cursed,	and	he	swatted	it	away
with	his	hand,	daring	it	 to	retaliate.

      And	he’d	 never	been	stung.

      But	seeing	one	fly	so	dangerously	close	to	Kate,	brushing	by	her	hair,
landing	on	the	lacy	sleeve	of	her	dress—it	was	terrifying,	 almost	hypnotizing.
His	mind	raced	ahead,	and	he	saw	the	tiny	monster	sink	its	stinger	into	her	soft
flesh,	he	saw	her	gasping	for	air,	sinking	to	the	ground.

      He	saw	her	here	at	Aubrey	Hall,	laid	 out	on	the	same	bed	that	had	served	as
his	father’s	first	 coffin.

      “Just	be	quiet,”	 he	whispered.	“We’re	going	 to	stand—slowly.	Then	we’re
going	to	walk	away.”

      “Anthony,”	  she	said,	her	eyes	crinkling	in	an	impatiently	 confused	manner,
“what	is	wrong	 with	you?”

221
      He	tugged	on	her	hand,	trying	to	force	her	to	rise,	but	she	resisted.	“It’s	 a
bee,”	she	said	in	an	exasperated	voice.	“Stop	acting	so	strangely.	For	heaven’s
sake,	it’s	not	going	to	kill	 me.”

      Her	words	hung	heavy	in	the	air,	 almost	like	solid	objects,	ready	to	crash	to
the	ground	and	shatter	them	both.	Then,	finally,	when	Anthony	 felt	his	throat
relax	enough	to	speak,	he	said	in	a	low,	intense	voice,	“It	might.”

      Kate	froze,	not	because	she	meant	to	follow	his	orders,	but	because
something	in	his	aspect,	something	in	his	eyes,	frightened	her	to	the	bone.	He
looked	changed,	possessed	by	some	unknown	demon.	“Anthony,”	she	said	in
what	she	hoped	was	an	even,	authoritative	voice,	“let	go	of	my	wrist	 this
instant.”

      She	pulled,	but	he	did	not	relent,	and	the	bee	kept	buzzing	relentlessly	about
her.

      “Anthony!”	  she	exclaimed.	“Stop	this	right—”

      The	rest	of	her	sentence	was	lost	as	she	somehow	managed	to	yank	her	hand
from	his	crushing	grasp.	The	sudden	freedom	left	her	off	balance,	and	her	arm
flailed	up	and	about,	the	inside	of	her	elbow	knocking	 into	the	bee,	which	let	out
a	loud,	angry	buzz	as	the	force	of	the	blow	sent	it	hurtling	 through	space,
smashing	right	into	the	strip	of	 bare	skin	above	the	lace-edged	bodice	of	her
afternoon	dress.

      “Oh,	 for	the	love	of—Ow!”	  Kate	let	out	 a	howl	as	the	bee,	no	doubt
infuriated	by	its	 abuse,	sank	its	stinger	into	her	flesh.	“Oh,	damn,”	she	swore,
completely	past	any	pretensions	toward	proper	language.	It	was	just	a	bee	sting,
of	course,	and	nothing	she	hadn’t	suffered	several	times	before,	but	bloody	hell,
it	hurt.

      “Oh,	 bother,”	she	grumbled,	pulling	 her	chin	against	her	chest	so	she	could
look	down	and	get	the	best	view	of	the	red	welt	rising	 right	along	the	edge	of	her
bodice.	“Now	 I’ll	 have	to	go	inside	for	a	poultice,	 and	it’ll	 get	all	over	my
dress.”	With	a	disdainful	 sniff,	she	brushed	the	dead	carcass	of	the	bee	from	her
skirt,	muttering,	“Well,	  at	least	he’s	dead,	the	vexing	thing.	It’s	probably	 the
only	justice	in	the—”

      That	was	when	she	looked	up	and	spied	Anthony’s	face.	He’d	 gone	white.
Not	pale,	not	even	bloodless,	but	white.	“Oh,	 my	God,”	he	whispered,	and	the

222
Not	pale,	not	even	bloodless,	but	white.	“Oh,	 my	God,”	he	whispered,	and	the
oddest	thing	was	that	his	lips	didn’t	 even	move.	“Oh,	my	God.”

      “Anthony?”	  she	asked,	leaning	forward	and	momentarily	forgetting	 about
the	painful	sting	on	her	chest.	“Anthony,	 what	is	wrong?”

      Whatever	trance	he	was	in	suddenly	snapped,	and	he	leaped	forward,
roughly	grabbing	one	of	her	shoulders	with	 one	hand	while	his	other	grappled
with	the	bodice	of	her	gown,	 pulling	it	 down	to	better	expose	her	wound.

      “My	 lord!”	  Kate	shrieked.	“Stop!”

      He	said	nothing,	but	his	breath	was	ragged	and	fast	as	he	pinned	her	against
the	back	of	the	bench,	still	holding	 her	dress	down,	not	low	enough	to	expose
her,	but	certainly	lower	than	decency	allowed.

      “Anthony!”	  she	tried,	hoping	that	the	use	of	his	given	name	might	get	his
attention.	She	didn’t	know	 this	man;	he	wasn’t	the	one	who	had	sat	at	her	side
just	two	minutes	earlier.	He	was	crazed,	frantic,	and	completely	heedless	of	her
protestations.

      “Will	  you	shut	up?”	he	hissed,	never	once	looking	up	at	her.	His	eyes	were
focused	on	the	red,	swollen	circle	of	flesh	on	her	chest,	and	with	trembling	 hands
he	plucked	the	stinger	from	her	skin.

      “Anthony,	 I’m	 fine!”	  she	insisted.	“You	must—”

      She	gasped.	He’d	moved	one	of	his	hands	slightly	as	he	used	the	other	to
yank	a	handkerchief	from	his	pocket,	and	it	now	 rather	indelicately	cupped	her
entire	breast.

      “Anthony,	 what	are	you	doing?”	 She	grabbed	at	his	hand,	trying	to	remove	it
from	her	person,	but	his	strength	was	beyond	her.

      He	pinned	her	even	more	firmly	 against	the	back	of	the	bench,	his	hand
nearly	pressing	her	breast	flat.	“Be	still!”	 he	barked,	and	then	he	took	the
handkerchief	and	began	to	press	against	the	swollen	sting.

      “What	 are	you	doing?”	she	asked,	still	trying	 to	scoot	away.

      He	didn’t	 look	up.	“Expressing	 the	venom.”

223
      He	didn’t	 look	up.	“Expressing	 the	venom.”

      “Is	 there	venom?”

      “There	must	be,”	 he	muttered.	“There	has	to	be.	Something	is	killing	 you.”

      Her	mouth	fell	 open.	“Something	is	killing	  me?	Are	you	mad?	Nothing	is
killing	 me.	It’s	a	bee	sting.”

      But	he	ignored	her,	too	focused	on	his	self-appointed	task	of	treating	 her
wound.

      “Anthony,”	  she	said	in	a	placating	voice,	trying	to	reason	with	 him.	“I
appreciate	your	concern,	but	I’ve	been	stung	by	bees	at	least	a	half	dozen	times,
and	I—”

      “He’d	 been	stung	before,	too,”	he	interrupted.

      Something	about	his	voice	sent	a	shiver	down	her	spine.	“Who?”	 she
whispered.

      He	pressed	more	firmly	 against	the	raised	hive,	dabbing	the	handkerchief
against	the	clear	liquid	that	oozed	out.	“My	 father,”	 he	said	flatly,	“and	it	 killed
him.”

      She	couldn’t	quite	 believe	it.	“A	 bee?”

      “Yes,	 a	bee,”	he	snapped.	“Haven’t	you	been	listening?”

      “Anthony,	 a	little	 bee	cannot	kill	a	man.”

      He	actually	paused	in	his	ministrations	 for	a	brief	second	to	glance	up	at	her.
His	eyes	were	hard,	haunted.	“I	assure	you	that	it	can,”	he	bit	off.

      Kate	couldn’t	 quite	believe	that	his	words	were	true,	but	she	also	didn’t	 think
he	was	lying,	and	so	she	held	still	for	a	moment,	recognizing	that	he	needed	to
treat	her	bee	sting	far	more	than	she	needed	to	scoot	away	from	his	attentions.

      “It’s	 still	 swollen,”	 he	muttered,	pressing	harder	with	the	handkerchief.	“I
don’t	think	 I	got	it	 all	out.”

      “I’m	  sure	I’ll	 be	fine,”	she	said	gently,	her	ire	with	 him	turning	 into	an

224
      “I’m	  sure	I’ll	 be	fine,”	she	said	gently,	her	ire	with	 him	turning	 into	an
almost	maternal	concern.	His	brow	was	wrinkled	 with	concentration,	and	his
movements	still	carried	an	air	of	frantic	 energy.	He	was	petrified,	she	realized,
scared	that	she	would	drop	dead	right	there	on	the	garden	bench,	felled	by	a	tiny
little	bee.

      It	seemed	unfathomable,	and	yet	it	was	true.

      He	shook	his	head.	“It’s	 not	good	enough,”	he	said	hoarsely.	“I	have	to	get	it
all	out.”

      “Anthony,	 I—What	 are	you	doing?”

      He’d	 tipped	her	chin	back	and	his	head	was	closing	the	distance	between
them,	almost	as	if	he	meant	to	kiss	her.

      “I’m	  going	to	have	to	suck	the	venom	out,”	he	said	grimly.	 “Just	hold	still.”

      “Anthony!”	  she	shrieked.	“You	 can’t—”	 She	gasped,	completely	unable	to
finish	her	sentence	once	she	felt	his	lips	settling	on	her	skin,	applying	a	gentle,
yet	inexorable	pressure,	pulling	her	into	his	mouth.	Kate	 didn’t	know	 how	to
respond,	didn’t	know	whether	to	 push	him	away	or	pull	him	 toward	her.

      But	in	 the	end	she	just	froze.	Because	when	she	lifted	her	head	and	looked
over	his	shoulder,	she	saw	a	group	of	three	women	staring	at	them	with	equal
expressions	of	shock.

      Mary.

      Lady	Bridgerton.

      And	Mrs.	 Featherington,	arguably	the	ton’s	biggest	gossip.

      And	Kate	 knew,	beyond	a	shadow	of	a	doubt,	that	her	life	would	never	be
the	same.

225
Chapter	    14


And	indeed,	if	a	scandal	does	erupt	at	Lady	Bridgerton’s	party,	those	of	us	who
remain	in	London	may	be	assured	that	any	and	all	titillating	news	shall	reach
our	tender	ears	with	all	possible	haste.	With	so	many	notorious	gossips	in
attendance,	we	are	all	but	guaranteed	a	full	and	detailed	report.

                                                    LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	4	MAY	1814



For	 a	split	second,	everyone	remained	frozen	as	if	in	a	tableau.	Kate	stared	at
the	three	matrons	in	shock.	They	stared	back	at	her	in	utter	horror.

      And	Anthony	kept	trying	to	suck	the	venom	from	Kate’s	bee	sting,
completely	oblivious	to	the	fact	that	they	had	an	audience.

      Of	the	quintet,	Kate	found	her	voice—and	her	strength—first,	shoving	with
all	her	might	against	Anthony’s	shoulder	as	she	let	out	an	impassioned	cry	of,
“Stop!”

      Caught	off	guard,	he	proved	surprisingly	easy	to	dislodge,	and	he	landed	on
his	bum	on	the	ground,	his	eyes	still	burning	with	determination	to	save	her	from
what	he	perceived	as	her	deathly	fate.

      “Anthony?”	Lady	Bridgerton	gasped,	her	voice	quavering	on	her	son’s
name,	as	if	she	couldn’t	quite	believe	what	she	was	seeing.

      He	twisted	around.	“Mother?”

      “Anthony,	what	were	you	doing?”

      “She	was	stung	by	a	bee,”	he	said	grimly.

      “I’m	fine,”	 Kate	insisted,	then	yanked	up	her	dress.	“I	told	him	I	was	fine,
but	he	wouldn’t	listen	to	me.”

      Lady	Bridgerton’s	eyes	misted	over	with	understanding.	“I	see,”	she	said	in

226
a	small,	sad	voice,	and	Anthony	knew	that	she	did	see.	She	was,	perhaps,	the
only	person	who	could	see.

      “Kate,”	 Mary	 finally	 said,	choking	on	her	words,	“he	 had	his	lips	on	your…
on	your—”

      “On	 her	breast,”	Mrs.	Featherington	said	helpfully,	 folding	 her	arms	over	her
ample	bosom.	A	disapproving	frown	 crossed	her	face,	but	it	was	clear	that	she
was	enjoying	herself	immensely.

      “He	 did	not!”	 Kate	exclaimed,	struggling	 to	her	feet,	which	wasn’t	 the
easiest	task,	since	Anthony	had	landed	on	one	of	them	when	she’d	shoved	him
off	the	bench.	“I	 was	stung	right	here!”	With	 a	frantic	finger,	 she	pointed	at	the
round	red	welt	that	was	still	rising	 on	the	thin	skin	covering	 her	collarbone.

      The	three	older	ladies	stared	at	her	bee	sting,	their	skin	assuming	identical
blushes	of	faint	crimson.

      “It’s	 not	anywhere	near	my	breast!”	 Kate	protested,	too	horrified	by	the
direction	of	the	conversation	to	remember	to	feel	embarrassed	at	her	rather
anatomical	language.

      “It	 isn’t	 far,”	 Mrs.	Featherington	pointed	out.

      “Will	  someone	shut	her	up?”	Anthony	snapped.

      “Well!”	  Mrs.	 Featherington	huffed.	“I	 never!”

      “No,”	 Anthony	 replied.	“You	 always.”

      “What	 does	he	mean	by	that?”	Mrs.	Featherington	demanded,	poking	Lady
Bridgerton	in	the	arm.	When	the	viscountess	did	not	respond,	she	turned	to	Mary
and	repeated	the	question.

      But	Mary	 had	eyes	only	for	her	daughter.	“Kate,”	 she	ordered,	“come	here
this	instant.”

      Dutifully,	  Kate	moved	to	Mary’s	 side.

      “Well?”	  Mrs.	Featherington	asked.	“What	are	we	going	to	do?”

227
      Four	sets	of	eyes	turned	on	her	in	disbelief.

      “	 ‘We’?”	 Kate	questioned	faintly.

      “I	 fail	 to	see	how	you	have	any	say	in	the	matter,”	Anthony	bit	off.

      Mrs.	Featherington	just	let	 out	a	loud,	disdainful,	and	rather	nasal	sniff.
“You	 have	to	marry	the	chit,”	she	announced.

      “What?”	 The	word	was	ripped	from	 Kate’s	throat.	“You	  must	be	mad.”

      “I	 must	be	the	only	sensible	one	in	the	garden	is	what	I	must	be,”	Mrs.
Featherington	said	officiously.	 “Lud,	 girl,	he	had	his	mouth	on	your	bubbies,	and
we	all	saw	it.”

      “He	 did	not!”	 Kate	moaned.	“I	was	stung	by	a	bee.	A	bee!”

      “Portia,”	 Lady	 Bridgerton	interjected,	“I	 hardly	 think	there	is	need	for	such
graphic	language.”

      “There’s	 little	 use	for	delicacy	now,”	 Mrs.	Featherington	replied.	“It’s	  going
to	make	a	tidy	piece	of	gossip	no	matter	how	you	describe	it.	The	ton’s	most
fervent	bachelor,	brought	down	by	a	bee.	I	must	say,	my	lord,	it’s	 not	how	I
imagined	it.”

      “There	is	not	 going	to	be	any	gossip,”	Anthony	 growled,	advancing	on	her
with	a	menacing	air,	“because	no	one	is	going	to	say	a	word.	I	will	 not	see	Miss
Sheffield’s	reputation	 besmirched	in	any	way.”

      Mrs.	Featherington’s	 eyes	bugged	out	with	disbelief.	“You	 think	 you	can
keep	something	like	this	quiet?”

      “I’m	 not	going	 to	say	anything,	and	I	rather	doubt	that	Miss	Sheffield	 will,
either,”	he	said,	planting	his	hands	on	his	hips	as	he	glared	down	at	her.	It	was
the	sort	of	stare	that	brought	grown	men	to	their	knees,	but	Mrs.	Featherington
was	either	impervious	or	simply	 stupid,	so	he	continued	with,	“Which	 leaves	our
respective	mothers,	who	would	seem	to	have	a	vested	interest	in	protecting	our
reputations.	Which	then	leaves	you,	Mrs.	Featherington,	as	the	only	member	of
our	cozy	little	 group	who	might	prove	 herself	a	gossipy,	loudmouthed	fishwife
over	this.”

228
      Mrs.	Featherington	turned	a	dull	 red.	“Anyone	 could	have	seen	from	the
house,”	she	said	bitterly,	clearly	loath	to	lose	such	a	prime	piece	of	gossip.	She’d
be	fêted	for	a	month	as	the	only	eyewitness	to	such	a	scandal.	The	only
eyewitness	who’d	talk,	that	is.

      Lady	Bridgerton	 glanced	up	at	the	house,	her	face	going	pale.	“She’s	right,
Anthony,”	 she	said.	“You	were	in	full	 view	 of	the	guest	wing.”

      “It	 was	a	bee,”	Kate	practically	 wailed.	“Just	a	bee!	Surely	we	can’t	be
forced	to	marry	because	of	a	bee!”

      Her	outburst	was	met	with	 silence.	She	looked	from	Mary	to	 Lady
Bridgerton,	both	of	 whom	were	gazing	at	her	with	expressions	hovering	between
concern,	kindness,	and	pity.	Then	she	looked	at	Anthony,	whose	expression	was
hard,	closed,	and	utterly	unreadable.

      Kate	closed	her	eyes	in	misery.	This	wasn’t	how	 it	was	supposed	to	happen.
Even	as	she	had	told	him	he	might	marry	her	sister,	she’d	secretly	wished	he
could	be	hers,	but	not	like	this.

      Oh,	dear	Lord,	not	like	 this.	Not	so	he’d	feel	 trapped.	Not	so	he’d	spend	the
rest	of	his	life	looking	 at	her	and	wishing	she	were	someone	else.

      “Anthony?”	  she	whispered.	Maybe	if	he	spoke	to	her,	maybe	if	he	just
looked	at	her	she	might	glean	some	clue	as	to	what	he	was	thinking.

      “We	 will	 marry	next	week,”	 he	stated.	His	voice	was	firm	and	clear,	but
otherwise	devoid	of	emotion.

      “Oh,	 good!”	Lady	 Bridgerton	 said	with	great	relief,	clapping	 her	hands
together.	“Mrs.	Sheffield	 and	I	will	 begin	preparations	immediately.”

      “Anthony,”	  Kate	whispered	again,	this	time	with	 more	urgency,	“are	you
certain?”	She	grabbed	his	arm	and	tried	to	pull	him	away	from	 the	matrons.	She
gained	only	a	few	inches,	but	at	least	now	they	weren’t	facing	 them.

      He	gazed	at	her	with	implacable	eyes.	“We	will	  marry,”	he	said	simply,	 his
voice	that	of	the	consummate	aristocrat,	brooking	no	protest	and	expecting	to	be
obeyed.	“There	is	nothing	else	to	do.”

      “But	 you	don’t	 want	to	marry	me,”	 she	said.

229
      “But	 you	don’t	 want	to	marry	me,”	 she	said.

      This	caused	him	to	raise	a	brow.	“And	 do	you	want	to	marry	 me?”

      She	said	nothing.	There	was	nothing	she	could	say,	not	if	she	wanted	to
maintain	even	a	shred	of	pride.

      “I	 suspect	we	shall	suit	well	enough,”	he	continued,	his	expression	softening
slightly.	“We’ve	  become	friends	of	a	sort,	after	all.	That’s	more	than	most	men
and	women	have	at	the	beginning	of	a	union.”

      “You	 can’t	want	 this,”	she	persisted.	“You	wanted	to	marry	 Edwina.	What
are	you	going	to	say	to	Edwina?”

      He	crossed	his	arms.	“I	never	made	any	promises	to	Edwina.	And	I	imagine
we’ll	 simply	tell	 her	we	fell	in	 love.”

      Kate	felt	 her	eyes	rolling	of	their	 own	volition.	 “She’ll	 never	believe	that.”

      He	shrugged.	“Then	tell	 her	the	truth.	Tell	her	you	were	stung	by	a	bee,	and	I
was	trying	to	aid	you,	and	we	were	caught	in	a	compromising	 position.	Tell	 her
whatever	you	want.	She’s	your	sister.”

      Kate	sank	back	down	onto	the	stone	bench,	sighing.	“No	one	is	going	to
believe	you	wanted	to	marry	me,”	 she	said.	“Everyone	will	 think	you	were
trapped.”

      Anthony	 shot	a	pointed	glare	at	the	three	women,	who	were	still	staring	at
them	with	interest.	At	 his,	“Would	 you	mind?”	 both	his	and	Kate’s	mothers
stepped	back	several	feet	and	turned	around	to	afford	them	more	privacy.	When
Mrs.	Featherington	did	not	follow	 immediately,	 Violet	 reached	forward	and
nearly	pulled	her	arm	out	of	the	socket.

      Sitting	 down	next	to	Kate,	he	said,	“There	is	little	 we	can	do	to	prevent
people	from	talking,	 especially	with	Portia	Featherington	as	a	witness.	I	don’t
trust	that	woman	to	keep	her	mouth	shut	any	longer	than	it	takes	her	to	return	to
the	house.”	He	leaned	back	and	propped	his	left	ankle	on	his	right	knee.	“So	we
might	as	well	make	the	best	of	it.	I	 have	to	get	married	this	year—”

      “Why?”

      “Why	 what?”

230
      “Why	 what?”

      “Why	 do	you	have	to	get	married	this	year?”

      He	paused	for	a	moment.	There	wasn’t	really	an	answer	to	that	question.	So
he	said,	“Because	I	decided	I	would,	and	that’s	a	good	enough	reason	for	me.	As
for	you,	you	have	to	get	married	eventually—”

      She	interrupted	him	again	with,	 “To	 be	honest,	I	rather	assumed	I	wouldn’t.”

      Anthony	 felt	his	muscles	tense,	and	it	took	him	several	seconds	to	realize
that	what	he	was	feeling	was	rage.	“You	planned	to	live	 your	life	 as	a	spinster?”

      She	nodded,	her	eyes	innocent	and	frank	at	the	same	time.	“It	seemed	a
definite	possibility,	 yes.”

      Anthony	 held	himself	still	 for	 several	seconds,	thinking	he	might	like	to
murder	all	those	men	and	women	who	had	compared	her	to	Edwina	and	found
her	lacking.	Kate	truly	 had	no	idea	that	she	might	be	attractive	and	desirable	in
her	own	right.

      When	Mrs.	 Featherington	had	announced	that	they	must	marry,	his	initial
reaction	had	been	the	same	as	Kate’s—utter	horror.	Not	to	mention	a	rather
pricked	sense	of	pride.	No	man	liked	to	be	forced	into	marriage,	and	it	 was
particularly	galling	 to	be	forced	by	a	bee.

      But	as	he	stood	there,	watching	Kate	howl	in	 protest	(not,	he	thought,	the
most	flattering	of	 reactions,	but	he	supposed	she	was	allowed	her	pride	as	well),
a	strange	sense	of	satisfaction	washed	over	him.

      He	wanted	her.

      He	wanted	her	desperately.

      He	wouldn’t,	 in	a	million	  years,	have	allowed	himself	to	choose	her	as	a
wife.	She	was	far,	far	too	dangerous	to	his	peace	of	mind.

      But	fate	had	intervened,	and	now	that	it	looked	 like	he	had	to	marry	her…
well,	there	didn’t	 seem	much	use	in	putting	up	a	big	fuss.	There	were	worse	fates
than	finding	oneself	married	to	an	intelligent,	 entertaining	woman	whom	 one

231
happened	to	lust	after	around	the	clock.

      All	 he	had	to	do	was	make	certain	he	didn’t	actually	fall	 in	love	 with	her.
Which	shouldn’t	 prove	impossible,	right?	The	Lord	 knew	she	drove	him	crazy
half	the	time	with	 her	incessant	arguing.	He	could	have	a	pleasant	marriage	with
Kate.	He’d	enjoy	her	friendship	 and	enjoy	her	body	and	keep	it	at	that.	It	didn’t
have	to	go	any	deeper.

      And	he	couldn’t	 have	asked	for	a	better	woman	to	serve	as	mother	to	his
sons	after	he	was	gone.	That	was	certainly	worth	a	great	deal.

      “This	 will	 work,”	 he	said	with	great	authority.	 “You’ll	  see.”

      She	looked	doubtful,	but	 she	nodded.	Of	course,	there	was	little	else	she
could	do.	She’d	just	been	caught	by	the	biggest	gossip	in	London	with	a	man’s
mouth	on	her	chest.	If	he	hadn’t	offered	to	marry	 her,	she’d	have	been	ruined
forever.

      And	if	 she’d	refused	to	marry	him…well,	  then	she’d	be	branded	a	fallen
woman	and	an	idiot.

      Anthony	 suddenly	stood.	“Mother!”	  he	barked,	leaving	Kate	on	the	bench	as
he	strode	over	to	her.	“My	fiancée	and	I	desire	a	bit	of	 privacy	here	in	the
garden.”

      “Of	 course,”	Lady	Bridgerton	 murmured.

      “Do	 you	think	 that’s	wise?”	Mrs.	 Featherington	asked.

      Anthony	 leaned	forward,	placed	his	mouth	very	close	to	his	mother’s	ear,
and	whispered,	“If	you	 do	not	remove	her	from	my	presence	within	the	next	ten
seconds,	I	shall	murder	her	on	the	spot.”

      Lady	Bridgerton	 choked	on	a	laugh,	nodded,	and	managed	to	say,	“Of
course.”

      In	under	a	minute,	Anthony	 and	Kate	were	alone	in	the	garden.

      He	turned	to	face	her;	she’d	stood	and	taken	a	few	steps	toward	him.	“I
think,”	 he	murmured,	slipping	his	arm	through	hers,	“that	 we	ought	to	consider
moving	out	of	sight	 of	the	house.”

232
moving	out	of	sight	 of	the	house.”

      His	steps	were	long	and	purposeful,	and	she	stumbled	to	keep	up	with	him
until	she	found	her	stride.	“My	 lord,”	 she	asked,	hurrying	along,	“do	you	 think
this	is	wise?”

      “You	 sound	like	Mrs.	 Featherington,”	he	pointed	out,	not	breaking	his	pace,
even	for	a	second.

      “Heaven	forbid,”	  Kate	muttered,	“but	the	question	still	 stands.”

      “Yes,	 I	do	think	it’s	 very	wise,”	 he	replied,	pulling	 her	into	a	gazebo.	Its
walls	were	partially	 open	to	the	air,	but	it	was	surrounded	by	lilac	bushes	and
afforded	them	considerable	privacy.

      “But—”

      He	smiled.	Slowly.	 “Did	 you	know	 you	argue	too	much?”

      “You	 brought	me	here	to	tell	me	that?”

      “No,”	 he	drawled,	“I	 brought	you	 here	to	do	this.”

      And	then,	before	she	had	a	chance	to	utter	a	word,	before	she	even	had	a
chance	to	draw	breath,	his	mouth	swooped	down	and	captured	hers	in	a	hungry,
searing	kiss.	His	lips	were	voracious,	taking	everything	 she	had	to	give	and	then
demanding	even	more.	The	fire	that	glowed	within	 her	burned	and	crackled	even
hotter	than	what	he’d	stoked	that	night	in	his	study,	hotter	by	 a	tenfold.

      She	was	melting.	Dear	God,	she	was	melting,	and	she	wanted	so	much	more.

      “You	 shouldn’t	 do	this	to	me,”	he	whispered	against	her	mouth.	“You
shouldn’t.	Everything	 about	you	is	absolutely	wrong.	And	 yet…”

      Kate	gasped	as	his	hands	stole	around	to	her	backside	and	pressed	her
harshly	against	his	arousal.

      “Do	 you	see?”	he	said	raggedly,	his	lips	moving	along	her	cheek.	“Do	 you
feel?”	He	chuckled	hoarsely,	an	odd	mocking	sound.	“Do	 you	even	understand?”
He	squeezed	mercilessly,	then	nibbled	the	tender	skin	of	her	ear.	“Of	course	you
don’t.”

233
      Kate	felt	 herself	sliding	into	 him.	Her	skin	was	starting	to	 burn,	and	her
traitorous	arms	stole	up	and	around	his	neck.	He	was	stoking	a	fire	in	her,
something	she	could	not	even	begin	to	control.	She’d	been	possessed	by	some
primitive	 urge,	something	hot	and	molten	which	needed	nothing	so	much	as	the
touch	of	his	skin	against	hers.

      She	wanted	him.	Oh,	how	she	wanted	him.	She	shouldn’t	want	him,
shouldn’t	desire	this	man	who	was	marrying	 her	for	all	the	wrong	reasons.

      And	yet	she	wanted	him	with	 a	desperation	that	left	her	breathless.

      It	was	wrong,	 so	very	wrong.	She	had	grave	doubts	about	this	marriage,	and
she	knew	she	ought	to	maintain	a	clear	head.	She	kept	trying	to	remind	herself	of
that,	but	it	didn’t	 stop	her	lips	from	parting	 to	allow	 his	entry,	nor	her	own
tongue	from	shyly	flicking	  out	to	taste	the	corner	of	his	mouth.

      And	the	desire	pooling	 in	her	belly—and	surely	 that	was	what	this	strange,
prickly,	 swirling	 feeling	had	to	be—it	just	 kept	getting	stronger	and	stronger.

      “Am	 I	a	terrible	 person?”	she	whispered,	more	for	her	ears	than	for	his.
“Does	this	mean	I	am	fallen?”

      But	he	heard	her,	and	his	voice	was	hot	and	moist	on	the	skin	of	her	cheek.

      “No.”

      He	moved	to	her	ear	and	made	her	listen	more	closely.

      “No.”

      He	traveled	to	her	lips	and	forced	her	to	swallow	 the	word.

      “No.”

      Kate	felt	 her	head	fall	back.	His	voice	was	low	 and	seductive,	and	it	almost
made	her	feel	like	she’d	been	born	for	this	moment.

      “You’re	 perfect,”	 he	whispered,	his	large	hands	moving	urgently	over	her
body,	one	settling	on	her	waist	and	the	other	moving	up	toward	the	gentle	swell
of	her	breast.	“Right	here,	right	now,	 in	this	moment,	in	this	 garden,	you’re
perfect.”

234
perfect.”

      Kate	found	something	unsettling	 about	his	words,	as	if	he	were	trying	to	tell
her—and	perhaps	himself	as	well—that	she	might	not	be	perfect	tomorrow,	 and
perhaps	even	less	so	the	next	day.	But	his	lips	and	hands	were	persuasive,	and
she	forced	the	unpleasant	thoughts	from	her	head,	instead	reveling	in	the	heady
bliss	of	the	moment.

      She	felt	beautiful.	 She	felt…perfect.	And	 right	there,	right	then,	she	couldn’t
help	but	adore	the	man	who	made	her	feel	that	way.

      Anthony	 slid	the	hand	at	her	waist	to	the	small	of	her	back,	supporting	her	as
his	other	hand	found	her	breast	and	squeezed	her	flesh	through	the	thin	muslin	of
her	dress.	His	fingers	seemed	beyond	his	control,	tight	and	spasmodic,	gripping
her	as	if	he	were	falling	off	 a	cliff	 and	had	finally	 found	purchase.	Her	nipple
was	hard	and	tight	against	his	palm,	even	through	the	fabric	of	her	dress,	and	it
took	everything	in	 him,	every	last	ounce	of	restraint,	not	to	reach	around	to	the
back	of	her	frock	and	slowly	 pull	each	button	from	 its	prison.

      He	could	see	it	all	in	 his	mind,	even	as	his	lips	met	hers	in	another	searing
kiss.	Her	dress	would	slip	from	 her	shoulders,	the	muslin	doing	a	tantalizing
slide	along	her	skin	until	her	breasts	were	bared.	He	could	picture	those	in	his
mind,	too,	and	he	somehow	knew	they,	too,	would	be	perfect.	He’d	 cup	one,
lifting	 the	nipple	to	the	sun,	and	slowly,	ever	so	slowly,	 he’d	bend	his	head
toward	her	until	he	could	just	barely	 touch	her	with	his	tongue.

      She’d	moan,	and	he’d	tease	her	some	more,	holding	her	tightly	so	that	she
couldn’t	wriggle	 away.	And	 then,	just	when	her	head	dropped	back	and	she	was
gasping,	he’d	replace	his	tongue	with	his	lips	and	suckle	her	until	 she	screamed.

      Dear	God,	he	wanted	that	so	badly	he	thought	he	might	explode.

      But	this	wasn’t	 the	time	or	the	place.	It	wasn’t	 that	he	felt	a	need	to	wait	for
his	marriage	vows.	As	far	as	he	was	concerned,	he’d	declared	himself	in	public,
and	she	was	his.	But	he	wasn’t	going	to	tumble	her	in	his	mother’s	garden
gazebo.	He	had	more	pride—and	more	respect	for	her—than	that.

      With	 great	reluctance,	he	slowly	tore	himself	away	from	 her,	letting	his
hands	rest	on	her	slim	shoulders	and	straightening	his	arms	to	keep	himself	far
enough	away	so	that	he	wouldn’t	be	tempted	to	continue	where	he’d	left	off.

      And	the	temptation	 was	there.	He	made	the	mistake	of	looking	at	her	face,

235
      And	the	temptation	 was	there.	He	made	the	mistake	of	looking	at	her	face,
and	in	that	moment	he	would	have	sworn	that	Kate	Sheffield	was	every	bit	 as
beautiful	as	her	sister.

      Hers	was	a	different	sort	of	attraction.	 Her	lips	were	fuller,	 less	in	fashion
but	infinitely	 more	kissable.	Her	lashes—how	had	he	not	noticed	before	how
long	they	were?	When	she	blinked	they	seemed	to	rest	on	her	cheeks	like	a
carpet.	And	when	her	skin	was	tinged	with	the	pinks	 of	desire,	she	glowed.
Anthony	knew	he	was	being	fanciful,	 but	when	he	gazed	upon	her	face,	he	could
not	help	thinking	 of	the	new	dawn,	of	that	exact	moment	when	the	sun	was
creeping	over	the	horizon,	painting	the	sky	with	 its	subtle	palette	of	peaches	and
pinks.

      They	stood	that	way	for	 a	full	minute,	 both	catching	their	breath,	until
Anthony	finally	 let	 his	arms	drop,	and	they	each	took	a	step	back.	Kate	lifted	a
hand	to	her	mouth,	her	fore,	middle,	and	ring	fingers	just	 barely	touching	her
lips.	“We	 shouldn’t	have	done	that,”	she	whispered.

      He	leaned	back	against	one	of	the	gazebo	posts,	looked	extremely	satisfied
with	his	lot.	 “Why	 not?	We’re	betrothed.”

      “We’re	 not,”	 she	admitted.	“Not	really.”

      He	quirked	a	brow.

      “No	 agreements	have	been	made,”	Kate	explained	hastily.	“Or	papers
signed.	And	I	have	no	dowry.	You	 should	know	that	I	 have	no	dowry.”

      This	caused	him	to	smile.	“Are	 you	trying	 to	get	rid	of	 me?”

      “Of	 course	not!”	 She	fidgeted	slightly,	shifting	 her	weight	from	 foot	to	foot.

      He	took	a	step	toward	her.	“Surely	 you’re	not	trying	 to	provide	me	with	 a
reason	to	be	rid	of	you?”

      Kate	flushed.	“N-no,”	  she	lied,	even	though	that	was	exactly	what	she	had
been	doing.	It	was,	of	course,	the	utmost	stupidity	on	her	part.	If	 he	backed	out
of	this	marriage,	she’d	be	ruined	forever,	not	just	in	 London,	but	also	in	her	little
village	in	Somerset.	News	of	a	fallen	woman	 always	traveled	fast.

      But	it	 was	never	easy	to	be	the	second	choice,	and	a	part	of	her	almost

236
      But	it	 was	never	easy	to	be	the	second	choice,	and	a	part	of	her	almost
wanted	him	to	confirm	 all	of	her	suspicions—that	he	didn’t	 want	her	as	his
bride,	that	he’d	much	prefer	Edwina,	that	he	was	only	marrying	 her	because	he
had	to.	It	would	hurt	 dreadfully,	but	if	 he	would	just	say	it,	 she	would	know,	and
knowing—even	if	 the	knowledge	was	bitter—was	 always	better	than	not
knowing.

      At	 least	then	she	would	know	exactly	where	she	stood.	As	it	was,	she	felt	as
if	her	feet	were	planted	firmly	 in	quicksand.

      “Let	 us	make	one	thing	clear,”	Anthony	 said,	capturing	her	attention	with	 his
decisive	tone.	His	eyes	caught	hers,	burning	with	such	intensity	that	she	could
not	look	away.	“I	 said	I	was	going	to	marry	 you.	I	am	a	man	of	my	word.	 Any
further	speculation	on	the	subject	would	be	highly	 insulting.”

      Kate	nodded.	But	she	couldn’t	 help	thinking:	 Be	careful	what	you	wish	for…
be	careful	what	you	wish	for.

      She’d	just	agreed	to	marry	the	very	man	with	 whom	she	feared	she	was
falling	in	 love.	And	all	 she	could	wonder	was:	Does	he	think	of	Edwina	when	he
kisses	me?

      Be	careful	what	you	wish	for,	 her	mind	thundered.

      You	just	might	get	it.

237
Chapter	     15


Once	again,	This	Author	has	been	proven	correct.	Country	house	parties	do
result	in	the	most	surprising	of	 betrothals.

      Yes	indeed,	dear	reader,	you	are	surely	reading	it	here	first:	 Viscount
Bridgerton	is	to	 marry	Miss	Katharine	 Sheffield.	Not	Miss	Edwina,	 as	gossips
had	speculated,	but	Miss	Katharine.

      As	to	how	the	betrothal	came	about,	details	have	been	surprisingly	 difficult
to	obtain.	This	Author	has	it	 on	the	best	authority	that	the	new	couple	was
caught	in	a	compromising	position,	 and	that	Mrs.	Featherington	 was	a	witness,
but	Mrs.	F	has	been	uncharacteristically	 closelipped	about	the	entire	affair.
Given	that	lady’s	propensity	 for	gossip,	This	Author	can	only	 assume	that	the
viscount	(never	known	for	lacking	 a	spine)	threatened	bodily	injury	 upon	Mrs.	F
should	she	even	breathe	a	syllable.

                                                       LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	11	MAY	1814



Kate	 soon	realized	that	notoriety	did	 not	agree	with	her.

      The	remaining	two	 days	in	Kent	had	been	bad	enough;	once	Anthony	had
announced	their	engagement	at	supper	following	their	somewhat	precipitous
betrothal,	she	had	scarcely	a	chance	to	breathe	between	all	the	congratulations,
questions,	and	innuendos	that	were	being	tossed	her	way	by	Lady	Bridgerton’s
guests.

      The	only	time	 she	felt	truly	at	ease	was	when,	a	few	hours	after	Anthony’s
announcement,	she	finally	had	a	chance	to	talk	privately	with	Edwina,	 who’d
thrown	her	arms	around	her	sister	and	declared	herself	“thrilled,”	 “overjoyed,”
and	“not	even	one	tiny	bit	surprised.”

      Kate	had	expressed	her	surprise	that	Edwina	was	not	surprised,	but	Edwina
had	just	shrugged	and	said,	“It	was	obvious	to	me	that	he	was	smitten.	I	do	not
know	why	no	one	else	saw	it.”

      Which	 had	left	Kate	rather	puzzled,	since	she’d	been	fairly	certain	that

238
      Which	 had	left	Kate	rather	puzzled,	since	she’d	been	fairly	certain	that
Anthony	had	had	his	matrimonial	 sights	set	on	Edwina.

      Once	Kate	returned	to	London,	the	speculation	was	even	worse.	Every	single
member	of	the	ton,	it	seemed,	found	it	imperative	to	stop	by	the	Sheffields’
small	rented	home	on	Milner	Street	to	call	on	the	future	 viscountess.	Most
managed	to	infuse	their	congratulations	with	a	healthy	dose	of	unflattering
implication.	 No	one	believed	it	possible	that	the	viscount	might	 actually	want	to
marry	Kate,	and	no	one	seemed	to	realize	how	rude	it	was	to	say	as	much	to	her
face.

      “My	 goodness,	you	were	lucky,”	 said	Lady	Cowper,	the	mother	of	 the
infamous	Cressida	Cowper,	who,	for	her	part,	did	not	say	two	words	 to	Kate,	just
sulked	in	the	corner	and	glared	daggers	in	her	direction.

      “I	 had	no	idea	he	was	interested	in	you,”	gushed	Miss	Gertrude	Knight,	 with
a	facial	expression	that	clearly	said	she	still	didn’t	 believe	it,	and	perhaps	even
hoped	that	the	betrothal	might	still	prove	 to	be	a	sham,	announcement	in	the
London	Times	notwithstanding.

      And	from	 Lady	Danbury,	 who’d	never	been	known	to	mince	 words:	“Don’t
know	how	you	trapped	him,	 but	it	must	have	been	a	neat	trick.	There	are	a	few
gels	out	there	who	wouldn’t	 mind	taking	lessons	from	you,	mark	 my	words.”

      Kate	just	smiled	(or	 tried	to,	at	least;	she	suspected	that	her	attempts	at
gracious	and	friendly	response	were	not	always	convincing)	and	nodded,	and
murmured,	“I	 am	a	fortunate	girl,”	 whenever	Mary	poked	her	in	the	side.

      As	for	 Anthony,	the	lucky	 man	had	been	able	to	avoid	the	harsh	scrutiny
she’d	been	forced	to	endure.	He	had	told	her	he	needed	to	remain	at	Aubrey	Hall
to	take	care	of	a	few	estate	details	before	the	wedding,	which	had	been	set	for
the	following	 Saturday,	only	nine	days	after	the	incident	in	 the	garden.	Mary	had
worried	that	such	hastiness	would	lead	to	“talk,”	 but	Lady	Bridgerton	 had	rather
pragmatically	explained	that	there	would	 be	“talk”	 no	matter	what,	and	that	Kate
would	be	less	subject	to	unflattering	innuendo	once	she	had	the	protection	of
Anthony’s	 name.

      Kate	suspected	that	the	viscountess—who	had	gained	a	certain	reputation	for
her	single-minded	desire	to	see	her	adult	children	married	off—simply	 wanted	to
get	Anthony	in	front	 of	the	bishop	before	he	had	the	chance	to	change	his	mind.

239
      Kate	found	herself	in	 agreement	with	Lady	Bridgerton.	 As	nervous	as	she
was	about	the	wedding	and	the	marriage	to	follow,	she’d	never	been	the	sort	to
put	things	off.	Once	she	made	a	decision—or,	in	this	case,	had	one	made	for	her
—she	saw	no	reason	for	delay.	And	as	for	the	“talk,”	 a	hasty	wedding	might
increase	its	volume,	but	Kate	suspected	that	the	sooner	she	and	Anthony	were
married,	the	sooner	it	would	die	down,	and	the	sooner	she	might	hope	to	return
to	the	normal	obscurity	of	her	own	 life.

      Of	course,	her	life	 would	not	be	her	own	for	 much	longer.	She	was	going	to
have	to	get	used	to	that.

      Not	that	it	 felt	like	 her	own	even	now.	Her	days	were	a	whirlwind	 of
activity,	with	 Lady	 Bridgerton	dragging	her	from	 shop	to	shop,	spending	an
enormous	amount	of	Anthony’s	money	 for	her	trousseau.	Kate	had	quickly
learned	that	resistance	was	useless;	when	Lady	Bridgerton—or	Violet,	as	she
had	now	been	instructed	to	call	her—made	up	her	mind,	heaven	help	the	fool
who	got	in	her	way.	Mary	 and	Edwina	had	accompanied	them	on	a	few	of	the
outings,	but	they	had	quickly	declared	themselves	exhausted	by	Violet’s
indefatigable	energy	and	gone	off	to	Gunter’s	for	 a	flavored	ice.

      Finally,	 a	mere	two	days	before	the	wedding,	Kate	received	a	note	from
Anthony,	asking	her	to	be	at	home	at	four	that	afternoon	so	that	he	might	pay	her
a	call.	Kate	was	a	little	nervous	at	seeing	him	again;	somehow	everything
seemed	different—more	formal—in	 town.	Nonetheless,	she	seized	upon	the
opportunity	to	avoid	 another	afternoon	on	Oxford	Street,	at	the	dressmaker,	and
the	milliner,	 and	the	glovemaker,	and	to	whomever	else	Violet	had	it	in	mind	 to
drag	her.

      And	so,	while	 Mary	and	Edwina	 were	out	running	errands—Kate	had
conveniently	forgotten	to	 mention	that	the	viscount	was	expected—she	sat	down
in	the	drawing	room,	Newton	 sleeping	contentedly	at	her	feet,	and	waited.
                                                                	

Anthony	had	spent	most	of	the	week	thinking.	Not	surprisingly,	all	of	his	thoughts	were	of	Kate	and	their
upcoming	union.

      He’d	 been	worried	that	he	could,	if	he	let	himself,	 love	her.	The	key,	it
seemed,	was	simply	not	to	let	himself.	And	the	more	he	thought	about	it,	the
more	convinced	he	was	that	this	would	not	pose	a	problem.	He	was	a	man,	after
all,	and	well	in	 control	of	his	actions	and	emotions.	He	was	no	fool;	 he	knew	that
love	existed.	But	he	also	believed	in	the	power	of	the	mind,	 and	perhaps	even

240
love	existed.	But	he	also	believed	in	the	power	of	the	mind,	 and	perhaps	even
more	importantly,	the	power	of	 the	will.	 Frankly,	he	saw	no	reason	why	love
should	be	an	involuntary	thing.

      If	 he	didn’t	want	to	 fall	in	 love,	then	by	damn,	he	wasn’t	going	to.	It	 was	as
simple	as	that.	It	had	to	be	as	simple	as	that.	If	it	weren’t,	then	he	wasn’t	much
of	a	man,	was	he?

      He	would,	 however,	have	to	have	a	talk	with	Kate	on	this	measure	prior	to
the	wedding.	There	were	certain	things	about	their	marriage	that	needed	to	be
made	clear.	Not	rules,	exactly,	but…understandings.	Yes,	that	was	a	good	word
for	it.

      Kate	needed	to	understand	exactly	what	she	could	expect	from	him,	and
what	he	expected	in	return.	Theirs	was	not	a	love	match.	And	it	wasn’t	 going	to
grow	into	one.	That	simply	 was	not	an	option.	He	didn’t	 think	she	had	any
delusions	on	that	measure,	but	just	in	case,	he	wanted	to	make	it	clear	now,
before	any	misunderstandings	had	the	chance	to	grow	into	full-fledged	disasters.

      It	was	best	to	lay	everything	 out	on	the	proverbial	table	so	that	neither	party
would	be	unpleasantly	surprised	later	on.	Surely	Kate	would	agree.	She	was	a
practical	girl.	 She’d	want	to	know	where	she	stood.	She	wasn’t	the	sort	who
liked	to	be	kept	guessing.

      At	 precisely	two	minutes	before	four,	 Anthony	rapped	twice	on	the
Sheffields’	front	 door,	trying	 to	ignore	the	half	dozen	members	of	the	ton	who
just	happened	to	be	strolling	along	Milner	 Street	that	afternoon.	They	were,	he
thought	with	a	grimace,	a	bit	far	 from	their	usual	haunts.

      But	he	wasn’t	 surprised.	He	might	be	recently	returned	to	London,	but	he
was	well	aware	that	his	betrothal	was	the	current	scandal	du	jour.	Whistledown
was	delivered	all	the	way	in	Kent,	 after	all.

      The	butler	opened	the	door	quickly	 and	ushered	him	in,	showing	him	to	the
nearby	drawing	room.	Kate	was	waiting	 on	the	sofa,	her	hair	swept	up	into	a
neat	something-or-other	(Anthony	never	could	remember	the	names	of	all	those
coiffures	the	ladies	seemed	to	favor)	and	topped	with	a	ridiculous	little	 cap	of
some	sort	that	he	supposed	was	meant	to	match	the	white	trim	on	her	pale	blue
afternoon	dress.

241
      The	cap,	he	decided,	would	be	the	first	thing	to	go	once	they	were	married.
She	had	lovely	hair,	long	and	lustrous	and	thick.	He	knew	that	good	manners
dictated	that	she	wear	bonnets	when	she	was	out	and	about,	but	really,	it	seemed
a	crime	to	cover	it	up	in	the	comfort	 of	her	own	home.

      Before	he	could	open	his	mouth,	however,	even	in	greeting,	she	motioned	to
a	silver	tea	service	on	the	table	in	front	of	her	and	said,	“I	took	 the	liberty	of
ordering	tea.	There’s	a	slight	chill	 in	the	air	and	I	thought	you	might	 like	 some.
If	you	don’t,	 I’d	 be	happy	to	ring	for	something	else.”

      There	hadn’t	been	a	chill	in	 the	air,	at	least	not	one	that	Anthony	had
detected,	but	he	nonetheless	said,	“That	would	be	lovely,	thank	you.”

      Kate	nodded	and	picked	up	the	pot	to	pour.	She	tipped	it	about	an	inch,	then
righted	it,	frowning	 as	she	said,	“I	don’t	 even	know	how	you	take	your	tea.”

      Anthony	 felt	one	corner	of	his	mouth	tipping	 up	slightly.	 “Milk.	  No	sugar.”

      She	nodded,	setting	the	pot	down	in	favor	of	the	milk.	 “It	 seems	a	thing	a
wife	should	know.”

      He	sat	down	in	a	chair	that	sat	at	a	right	angle	to	the	sofa.	“And	now	 you
do.”

      She	took	a	deep	breath	and	then	let	it	go.	“Now	I	do,”	 she	murmured.

      Anthony	 cleared	his	throat	as	he	watched	her	pour.	She	wasn’t	wearing
gloves,	and	he	found	he	liked	to	watch	her	hands	as	she	worked.	Her	fingers
were	long	and	slender,	and	they	were	incredibly	graceful,	which	 surprised	him,
considering	how	many	times	she’d	trod	on	his	toes	while	 dancing.

      Of	course	some	of	those	missteps	had	been	done	on	purpose,	but	not,	he
suspected,	as	many	as	she	would	have	liked	to	have	him	believe.

      “Here	you	 are,”	she	murmured,	holding	out	his	tea.	“Be	 careful,	it’s	hot.	 I’ve
never	been	one	for	lukewarm	tea.”

      No,	he	thought	with	 a	smile,	she	wouldn’t	 be.	Kate	wasn’t	the	sort	to	do
anything	in	half	 measures.	It	was	one	of	the	things	he	liked	best	about	her.

      “My	 lord?”	 she	said	politely,	moving	 the	tea	a	few	inches	farther	in	his

242
      “My	 lord?”	 she	said	politely,	moving	 the	tea	a	few	inches	farther	in	his
direction.

      Anthony	 grasped	the	saucer,	allowing	his	gloved	fingers	to	brush	against	her
bare	ones.	He	kept	his	eyes	on	her	face,	noticing	the	faint	pink	stain	of	blush	that
touched	her	cheeks.

      For	some	reason	that	pleased	him.

      “Did	 you	have	something	specific	you	 wanted	to	ask	me,	my	lord?”	she
asked,	once	her	hand	was	safely	away	from	his	and	her	fingers	wrapped	around
the	handle	of	her	own	teacup.

      “It’s	 Anthony,	 as	I’m	sure	you	recall,	 and	I	can’t	call	upon	my	 fiancée
merely	for	the	pleasure	of	her	company?”

      She	gave	him	a	shrewd	look	over	the	rim	of	 her	cup.	“Of	course	you	can,”
she	replied,	“but	I	don’t	 think	you	 are.”

      He	raised	a	brow	at	her	impertinence.	“As	 it	happens,	you’re	right.”

      She	murmured	something.	He	didn’t	 quite	catch	it,	but	he	had	a	sneaking
suspicion	it	had	been,	“I	usually	am.”

      “I	 thought	we	ought	to	discuss	our	marriage,”	he	said.

      “I	 beg	your	pardon?”

      He	leaned	back	in	his	chair.	“We’re	 both	practical	 people.	I	think	we’ll	 find
ourselves	more	at	ease	once	we	understand	what	we	can	expect	from	one
another.”

      “Of—of	  course.”

      “Good.”	 He	set	his	teacup	down	in	the	saucer,	then	set	both	down	on	the
table	in	front	of	 him.	“I’m	  glad	you	feel	that	way.”

      Kate	nodded	slowly	 but	didn’t	 say	anything,	instead	choosing	to	keep	her
eyes	trained	on	his	face	as	he	cleared	his	throat.	He	looked	as	if	he	were
preparing	for	a	parliamentary	speech.

243
      “We	 did	not	get	off	 to	the	most	favorable	of	starts,”	he	said,	scowling
slightly	when	she	nodded	her	agreement,	“but	I	feel—and	I	 hope	that	you	do	as
well—that	 we	have	since	reached	a	friendship	of	sorts.”

      She	nodded	again,	thinking	that	she	might	make	it	all	 the	way	through	the
conversation	doing	nothing	but	nodding.

      “Friendship	 between	the	husband	and	the	wife	is	of	the	utmost	importance,”
he	continued,	“even	more	important,	in	my	 opinion,	than	love.”

      This	time	 she	didn’t	nod.

      “Our	 marriage	will	 be	one	based	on	mutual	friendship	and	respect,”	he
pontificated,	“and	I	 for	one	could	not	be	more	pleased.”

      “Respect,”	 Kate	echoed,	mostly	because	he	was	looking	at	her	expectantly.

      “I	 will	 do	my	best	to	be	a	good	husband	to	you,”	he	said.	“And,	provided
that	you	do	not	bar	me	from	your	bed,	I	shall	be	faithful	 to	both	 you	and	our
vows.”

      “That’s	 rather	enlightened	of	you,”	 she	murmured.	He	was	saying	nothing
she	did	not	expect,	and	yet	she	found	it	somewhat	needling	all	the	same.

      His	eyes	narrowed.	“I	 hope	you’re	taking	me	seriously,	Kate.”

      “Oh,	 very	much	so.”

      “Good.”	 But	 he	gave	her	a	funny	look,	and	she	wasn’t	sure	if	he	believed
her.	“In	return,”	 he	added,	“I	expect	that	you	will	 not	behave	in	any	manner	that
will	 sully	my	 family’s	 name.”

      Kate	felt	 her	spine	stiffen.	“I	 would	not	dream	of	it.”

      “I	 didn’t	 think	you	 would.	That	is	one	of	the	reasons	I	am	so	pleased	with
this	marriage.	You	will	 make	an	excellent	viscountess.”

      It	was	meant	as	a	compliment,	Kate	knew,	but	still	 it	felt	 a	bit	hollow,	 and
maybe	a	touch	condescending.	She’d	much	rather	have	been	told	that	she’d
make	an	excellent	wife.

244
      “We	 shall	have	friendship,”	 he	announced,	“and	we	shall	have	mutual
respect,	and	children—intelligent	 children,	thank	God,	since	you	are	quite	the
most	intelligent	woman	 of	my	acquaintance.”

      That	made	up	for	his	condescension,	but	Kate	had	barely	time	to	smile	at	his
compliment	before	he	added,	“But	you	should	not	 expect	love.	This	marriage
will	 not	be	about	love.”

      An	awful	 lump	rose	in	Kate’s	 throat,	and	she	found	herself	nodding	yet
again,	except	this	time	every	movement	of	her	neck	somehow	brought	pain	to
her	heart.

      “There	are	certain	things	I	 cannot	give	you,”	Anthony	 said,	“and	love,	 I’m
afraid,	is	one	of	them.”

      “I	 see.”

      “Do	 you?”

      “Of	 course,”	she	practically	snapped.	“You	 could	not	make	it	any	plainer	if
you	wrote	it	on	my	 arm.”

      “I	 had	never	planned	to	marry	for	love,”	 he	said.

      “That	 is	not	what	you	told	me	when	you	 were	courting	Edwina.”

      “When	 I	was	courting	Edwina,”	 he	returned,	“I	 was	trying	to	impress	you.”

      Her	eyes	narrowed.	“You	 are	not	impressing	me	now.”

      He	let	out	a	long	breath.	“Kate,	 I	did	not	come	here	to	argue.	I	merely
thought	it	best	if	we	were	honest	with	 one	another	before	the	wedding	on
Saturday	morning.”

      “Of	 course,”	she	sighed,	forcing	herself	to	nod.	His	 intention	hadn’t	been	to
insult	her,	and	she	shouldn’t	have	overreacted.	She	knew	him	well	enough	now
to	know	that	he	was	merely	acting	out	of	concern.	He	knew	he	would	 never	love
her;	better	to	make	that	clear	in	the	beginning.

      But	still	 it	 hurt.	She	didn’t	know	 if	she	loved	him,	but	 she	was	fairly	certain

245
she	could	love	him,	and	deathly	afraid	that	after	a	few	weeks	of	marriage,	she
would	love	him.

      And	it	 would	be	so	nice	if	 he	could	just	love	her	back.

      “It	 is	best	that	we	understand	each	other	now,”	he	said	softly.

      Kate	just	kept	nodding.	 A	body	in	motion	 tended	to	remain	in	motion,	 and
she	was	afraid	that	if	she	stopped,	she	might	do	something	really	stupid,	like	cry.

      He	reached	across	the	table	and	took	her	hand,	which	made	her	flinch.	“I
didn’t	want	 you	to	enter	this	marriage	with	any	delusions,”	 he	said.	“I	didn’t
think	you’d	 want	that.”

      “Of	 course	not,	my	lord,”	 she	said.

      He	frowned.	“I	 thought	 I	told	you	to	 call	me	Anthony.”

      “You	 did,”	 she	said,	“my	lord.”

      He	withdrew	 his	hand.	Kate	watched	as	he	returned	it	to	his	own	lap,	feeling
strangely	bereft.

      “Before	 I	go,”	 he	said,	“I	have	something	for	you.”	 Without	 taking	his	eyes
off	of	her	face,	he	reached	into	his	pocket	and	pulled	out	a	small	jeweler’s	 box.
“I	must	apologize	for	 being	so	delayed	in	presenting	you	with	a	betrothal	ring,”
he	murmured,	handing	it	to	her.

      Kate	smoothed	her	fingers	over	the	blue	velvet	covering	 before	flipping	 the
box	open.	Inside	lay	a	rather	simple	gold	ring,	adorned	by	a	single	round-cut
diamond.

      “It’s	 a	Bridgerton	 heirloom,”	 he	said.	“There	are	several	betrothal	rings	in
the	collection,	but	I	thought	 you’d	like	 this	one	best.	The	others	were	rather
heavy	and	fussy.”

      “It’s	 beautiful,”	 Kate	said,	quite	unable	to	take	her	eyes	off	of	 it.

      He	reached	out	and	took	the	box	from	her.	“May	 I?”	 he	murmured,	plucking
the	ring	from	its	velvet	 nest.

246
      She	held	out	her	hand,	cursing	at	herself	when	she	realized	she	was
trembling—not	 a	great	deal,	but	surely	enough	for	him	to	notice.	He	didn’t	 say	a
word,	though,	just	steadied	her	hand	with	his	as	he	used	the	other	to	slip	the	ring
on	her	finger.

      “Looks	 rather	nice,	don’t	you	 think?”	 he	asked,	still	holding	the	tips	of	her
fingers	with	his.

      Kate	nodded,	unable	to	take	her	eyes	off	of	it.	She’d	never	been	one	for
rings;	this	would	be	the	first	 she	wore	with	any	regularity.	 It	felt	 strange	on	her
finger,	heavy	and	cold	and	very,	very	solid.	 It	somehow	made	everything	that
had	happened	in	the	past	week	seem	more	real.	More	final.	It	occurred	to	her	as
she	was	staring	at	the	ring	that	she’d	been	half	expecting	a	bolt	of	lightning	to
come	down	from	heaven	and	stop	the	proceedings	before	they	actually	said	their
vows.

      Anthony	 moved	closer,	then	brought	her	newly	adorned	fingers	to	his	lips.
“Perhaps	we	should	seal	the	bargain	with	a	kiss?”	he	murmured.

      “I’m	  not	sure….”

      He	pulled	her	onto	his	lap	and	grinned	devilishly.	 “I	 am.”

      But	as	Kate	tumbled	onto	him,	 she	accidentally	kicked	Newton,	who	 let	out
a	loud,	whiny	bark,	obviously	 distressed	at	having	his	nap	so	rudely	interrupted.

      Anthony	 raised	a	brow	and	peered	over	Kate	at	Newton.	“I	didn’t	 even	see
him	here.”

      “He	 was	taking	a	nap,”	Kate	explained.	“He’s	 a	very	sound	sleeper.”

      But	once	awake,	Newton	refused	to	be	left	out	of	 the	action,	and	with	a
slightly	more	awake	bark,	he	leaped	up	onto	the	chair,	landing	on	Kate’s	lap.

      “Newton!”	  she	squealed.

      “Oh,	 for	the	love	of—”	 But	 Anthony’s	 mutterings	were	cut	short	by	a	big,
sloppy	kiss	from	Newton.

      “I	 think	he	likes	 you,”	Kate	said,	so	amused	by	Anthony’s	 disgusted
expression	that	she	forgot	to	be	self-conscious	about	her	position	on	his	lap.

247
expression	that	she	forgot	to	be	self-conscious	about	her	position	on	his	lap.

      “Dog,”	 Anthony	 ordered,	“get	down	 on	the	floor	this	instant.”

      Newton	hung	his	head	and	whined.

      “Now!”

      Letting	 out	a	big	sigh,	Newton	turned	about	and	plopped	down	onto	the
floor.

      “My	 goodness,”	Kate	said,	peering	down	at	the	dog,	who	was	now	moping
under	the	table,	his	snout	lying	sorrowfully	 on	the	carpet,	“I’m	 impressed.”

      “It’s	 all	 in	the	tone	of	voice,”	 Anthony	said	archly,	 snaking	a	viselike	arm
around	her	waist	so	that	she	could	not	get	up.

      Kate	looked	at	his	arm,	then	looked	at	his	face,	her	brows	arching	in
question.	“Why,”	 she	mused,	“do	I	get	the	impression	you	find	 that	tone	of	voice
effective	on	women	as	well?”

      He	shrugged	and	leaned	toward	her	with	a	heavy-lidded	smile.	“It	 usually
is,”	he	murmured.

      “Not	 this	one.”	Kate	 planted	her	hands	on	the	arms	of	the	chair	and	tried	to
wrench	herself	up.

      But	he	was	far	too	strong.	“Especially	 this	one,”	 he	said,	his	voice	dropping
to	an	impossibly	low	 purr.	With	 his	free	hand,	he	cupped	her	chin	and	turned	her
face	to	his.	His	lips	were	soft	but	demanding,	and	he	explored	her	mouth	with	 a
thoroughness	that	left	her	breathless.

      His	mouth	moved	 along	the	line	of	her	jaw	to	her	neck,	pausing	only	 to
whisper,	“Where	is	your	 mother?”

      “Out,”	 Kate	gasped.

      His	teeth	tugged	at	the	edge	of	her	bodice.	“For	how	long?”

      “I	 don’t	know.”	 She	let	out	a	little	 squeal	as	his	tongue	dipped	below	the
muslin	and	traced	an	erotic	line	on	her	skin.	“Good	 heavens,	Anthony,	what	are
you	doing?”

248
you	doing?”

      “How	 long?”	 he	repeated.

      “An	 hour.	Maybe	two.”

      Anthony	 glanced	up	to	make	sure	he’d	shut	the	door	when	he	had	entered
earlier.	“Maybe	two?”	 he	murmured,	smiling	 against	her	skin.	“Really?”

      “M-maybe	 just	one.”

      He	hooked	a	finger	under	the	edge	of	her	bodice	up	near	her	shoulder,
making	sure	to	catch	the	edge	of	her	chemise	as	well.	“One,”	he	said,	“is	still
quite	splendid.”	Then,	pausing	only	 to	bring	his	mouth	to	hers	so	that	she	could
not	utter	any	protest,	he	swiftly	pulled	 her	dress	down,	taking	the	chemise	along
with	it.

      He	felt	 her	gasp	into	his	mouth,	but	he	just	deepened	the	kiss	as	he	palmed
the	round	fullness	of	her	breast.	She	was	perfect	under	his	fingers,	soft	and	pert,
filling	 his	hand	as	if	she’d	been	made	for	him.

      When	he	felt	the	last	of	her	resistance	melt	away,	he	moved	his	kiss	to	her
ear,	nibbling	softly	 on	her	lobe.	“Do	you	 like	this?”	 he	whispered,	squeezing
gently	with	 his	hand.

      She	nodded	jerkily.

      “Mmmm,	 good,”	 he	murmured,	letting	his	tongue	do	a	slow	sweep	of	her
ear.	“It	would	 make	things	very	difficult	  if	you	did	 not.”

      “H-how?”

      He	fought	the	bubble	of	 mirth	that	was	rising	in	 his	throat.	This	absolutely
wasn’t	the	time	to	laugh,	but	she	was	so	damned	innocent.	He’d	never	made	love
to	a	woman	like	her	before;	he	was	finding	it	 surprisingly	 delightful.	 “Let’s	 just
say,”	he	said,	“that	I	like	 it	very	much.”

      “Oh.”	 She	offered	him	the	most	tentative	of	 smiles.

      “There’s	 more,	you	know,”	 he	whispered,	letting	his	breath	caress	her	ear.

      “I’m	  sure	there	must	be,”	she	replied,	her	voice	mere	breath.

249
      “I’m	  sure	there	must	be,”	she	replied,	her	voice	mere	breath.

      “You	 are?”	he	asked	teasingly,	squeezing	her	again.

      “I’m	  not	so	green	that	I	think	one	can	make	a	baby	from	what	we’ve	been
doing.”

      “I’d	 be	happy	to	show	you	the	rest,”	 he	murmured.

      “Not—Oh!”

      He’d	 squeezed	again,	this	time	allowing	his	fingers	to	tickle	 her	skin.	He
loved	that	she	couldn’t	think	 when	he	touched	her	breasts.	“You	were	saying?”
he	prompted,	nibbling	on	her	neck.

      “I—I	  was?”

      He	nodded,	the	faint	stubble	of	his	beard	brushing	her	throat.	“I’m	  sure	you
were.	But	then	again,	perhaps	I’d	rather	not	hear.	You’d	begun	with	 the	word
‘not.’	 Surely,”	he	added	with	a	flick	 of	 his	tongue	against	the	underside	of	her
chin,	“not	a	word	 that	belongs	between	us	at	a	time	like	this.	But”—his	 tongue
moved	down	the	line	of	her	throat	to	the	hollow	 above	her	collarbone—“I
digress.”

      “You—you	  do?”

      He	nodded.	“I	 believe	I	was	trying	 to	determine	what	pleases	you,	as	all
good	husbands	should	do.”

      She	said	nothing,	but	her	breathing	quickened.

      He	smiled	against	her	skin.	“What,	 for	example,	about	this?”	 He	flattened
his	hand	so	that	he	was	no	longer	cupping	her,	instead	just	letting	his	palm	graze
lightly	 over	her	nipple.

      “Anthony!”	  she	choked	out.

      “Good,”	 he	said,	moving	to	her	neck,	nudging	her	chin	 up	so	that	she	was
more	open	to	him.	“I’m	 glad	we’re	 back	to	Anthony.	 ‘My	 lord’	 is	so	formal,
don’t	you	think?	 Far	too	formal	for	 this.”

      And	then	he	did	what	he’d	 been	fantasizing	about	for	weeks.	He	lowered	his

250
      And	then	he	did	what	he’d	 been	fantasizing	about	for	weeks.	He	lowered	his
head	to	her	breast	and	took	her	into	his	mouth,	tasting,	suckling,	teasing,
reveling	in	each	gasp	he	heard	spill	forth	from	her	lips,	 each	spasm	of	desire	he
felt	shivering	across	her	body.

      He	loved	that	she	reacted	this	way,	thrilled	 that	he	did	this	to	her.	“So	good,”
he	murmured,	his	breath	hot	and	moist	against	her	skin.	“You	taste	so	damn
good.”

      “Anthony,”	  she	said,	her	voice	hoarse,	“Are	you	sure—”

      He	put	a	finger	to	her	lips	 without	even	lifting	  his	face	to	look	at	her.	“I	 have
no	idea	what	you’re	asking,	but	whatever	it	 is”—he	moved	his	attention	 to	her
other	breast—“I’m	 sure.”

      She	made	a	soft	little	moaning	sound,	the	sort	that	came	from	the	very
bottom	of	one’s	throat.	Her	body	 arched	under	his	ministrations,	and	with
renewed	fervor,	he	teased	her	nipple,	grazing	it	gently	between	her	teeth.

      “Oh,	 my—oh,	Anthony!”

      He	ran	his	tongue	around	the	aureole.	She	was	perfect,	simply	perfect.	He
loved	the	sound	of	her	voice,	hoarse	and	broken	with	desire,	and	his	body	tingled
at	the	thought	of	their	wedding	night,	 of	her	cries	of	passion	and	need.	She’d	be
an	inferno	beneath	him,	and	he	relished	the	prospect	of	making	her	explode.

      He	pulled	away	so	that	he	could	see	her	face.	She	was	flushed	and	her	eyes
were	dazed	and	dilated.	Her	hair	was	starting	to	come	undone	from	that	hideous
cap.

      “This,”	 he	said,	plucking	 it	from	 her	head,	“has	got	to	go.”

      “My	 lord!”

      “Promise	me	you’ll	  never	wear	it	again.”

      She	twisted	in	her	seat—on	his	lap,	actually,	which	 did	little	 to	help	the
rather	urgent	state	of	his	groin—to	look	 over	the	edge	of	the	chair.	“I’ll	 do	no
such	thing,”	she	retorted.	“I	 quite	like	that	cap.”

      “You	 can’t	possibly,”	 he	said	in	all	seriousness.

251
      “I	 can	and—Newton!”

      Anthony	 followed	 her	line	of	vision	 and	broke	out	into	loud	laughter,
shaking	the	both	of	them	in	their	seats.	Newton	was	happily	munching	 away	on
Kate’s	cap.	“Good	dog!”	 he	said	on	a	laugh.

      “I	 would	make	you	buy	 me	another,”	Kate	muttered,	yanking	her	dress	back
up,	“except	that	you’ve	already	spent	a	fortune	on	me	this	week.”

      This	amused	him.	“I	 have?”	he	inquired	mildly.

      She	nodded.	“I’ve	 been	shopping	with	your	mother.”

      “Ah.	 Good.	I’m	 sure	she	didn’t	let	you	pick	 out	anything	like	 that.”	 He
motioned	toward	the	now	mangled	cap	in	Newton’s	 mouth.

      When	he	looked	back	at	her,	her	mouth	was	twisted	into	a	fetchingly
disgruntled	line.	He	couldn’t	 help	but	smile.	She	was	so	easy	to	read.	His	mother
hadn’t	let	her	buy	such	an	unattractive	cap,	and	it	was	killing	 her	that	she
couldn’t	offer	 a	retort	to	his	last	statement.

      He	sighed	rather	contentedly.	Life	 with	Kate	 wasn’t	going	to	be	dull.

      But	it	 was	getting	late,	and	he	should	probably	be	going.	Kate	had	said	her
mother	wasn’t	expected	for	at	least	an	hour,	but	Anthony	knew	better	than	to
trust	the	female	sense	of	time.	Kate	could	be	wrong,	or	her	mother	could	have
changed	her	mind,	or	any	number	of	things	might	have	happened,	and	even
though	he	and	Kate	were	due	to	be	married	in	just	two	days,	it	didn’t	 seem
particularly	prudent	to	 get	caught	in	the	drawing	room	in	such	a	compromising
position.

      With	 great	reluctance—sitting	in	 the	chair	with	Kate	and	doing	nothing	 but
hold	her	was	surprisingly	satisfying—he	 stood,	lifting	 her	in	his	arms	as	he	did
so,	and	then	set	her	back	in	the	chair.

      “This	 has	been	a	delightful	interlude,”	 he	murmured,	leaning	down	to	drop	a
kiss	on	her	forehead.	“But	I	fear	your	 mother’s	early	return.	I	 shall	see	you
Saturday	morning?”

      She	blinked.	“Saturday?”

252
      “A	 superstition	of	 my	mother’s,”	 he	said	with	a	sheepish	smile.	“She	thinks
it’s	bad	luck	for	 the	bride	and	groom	to	see	one	another	the	day	before	the
wedding.”

      “Oh.”	 She	rose	to	her	feet,	self-consciously	smoothing	her	dress	and	hair.
“And	 do	you	believe	it	as	well?”

      “Not	 at	all,”	 he	said	with	a	snort.

      She	nodded.	“It’s	 very	sweet	of	you	to	indulge	your	 mother,	then.”

      Anthony	 paused	for	a	moment,	well	aware	that	most	men	of	his	reputation
did	not	want	to	appear	tied	to	apron	strings.	But	this	was	Kate,	and	he	knew	that
she	valued	devotion	to	family	as	much	as	he	did,	so	he	finally	said,	“There	 is
little	I	 would	not	do	to	keep	my	mother	 content.”

      She	smiled	shyly.	“It	 is	one	of	the	things	I	 like	best	about	you.”

      He	made	some	sort	of	gesture	designed	to	change	the	subject,	but	she
interrupted	with,	“No,	 it’s	 true.	You’re	 far	more	caring	a	person	than	you’d	like
people	to	believe.”

      Since	he	wasn’t	going	to	be	able	to	win	 the	argument	with	her—and	there
was	little	point	 in	contradicting	a	woman	when	she	was	being	complimentary—
he	put	a	finger	to	his	lips	and	said,	“Shhh.	Don’t	 tell	anyone.”	 And	then,	with
one	last	kiss	to	her	hand	and	a	murmured,	“Adieu,”	he	made	his	way	out	the
door	and	outside.

      Once	on	his	horse	and	on	his	way	back	to	his	small	townhouse	across	town,
he	allowed	himself	to	assess	the	visit.	It	went	well,	 he	thought.	Kate	had	seemed
to	understand	the	limits	he	had	set	upon	their	marriage,	and	she’d	reacted	to	his
lovemaking	with	 a	desire	that	was	sweet	and	fierce	at	the	same	time.

      All	 in	all,	 he	thought	with	a	satisfied	smile,	the	future	 looked	bright.	His
marriage	would	be	a	success.	As	for	his	previous	concerns—well,	it	was	clear	he
had	nothing	to	worry	about.
                                                                	

Kate	was	worried.	Anthony	had	been	practically	tripping	over	himself	to	make	certain	that	she	understood
that	he	would	never	love	her.	And	he	certainly	didn’t	seem	to	want	her	love	in	return.

      Then	he’d	gone	and	kissed	her	as	if	there	were	no	tomorrow,	as	if	she	were

253
      Then	he’d	gone	and	kissed	her	as	if	there	were	no	tomorrow,	as	if	she	were
the	most	beautiful	woman	on	earth.	She’d	be	the	first	to	admit	that	she	had	little
experience	with	men	and	their	desires,	but	he’d	certainly	seemed	to	desire	her.

      Or	was	he	simply	wishing	 she	was	someone	else?	She	was	not	his	first
choice	for	a	wife.	She’d	do	well	 to	remember	that	fact.

      And	even	if	 she	did	fall	in	 love	with	 him—well,	 she’d	simply	 have	to	keep	it
to	herself.	There	was	really	nothing	else	to	do.

254
Chapter	     16


It	has	come	to	This	Author’s	attention	 that	the	wedding	of	Lord	Bridgerton	 and
Miss	Sheffield	is	to	be	a	small,	intimate,	and	private	 affair.

      In	other	words,	 This	Author	is	not	invited.

      But	have	no	fear,	dear	reader,	This	Author	 is	at	her	most	resourceful	at
times	such	as	these,	and	promises	to	uncover	the	details	of	the	ceremony,	both
the	interesting	and	the	banal.

      The	wedding	of	London’s	most	eligible	 bachelor	is	surely	something	which
must	be	reported	in	This	Author’s	humble	column,	don’t	 you	agree?

                                                       LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	13	MAY	1814



The	 night	before	the	wedding,	 Kate	was	sitting	on	her	bed	in	her	favorite
dressing	gown,	looking	dazedly	at	the	multitude	 of	trunks	strewn	across	the
floor.	Her	every	belonging	 was	packed	away,	neatly	folded	or	stored,	ready	for
transport	to	her	new	home.

      Even	Newton	had	been	prepared	for	the	journey.	He’d	been	bathed	and
dried,	a	new	collar	had	been	affixed	to	his	neck,	and	his	favorite	toys	were
loaded	into	a	small	satchel	that	now	sat	in	the	front	hall,	right	 next	to	the
delicately	carved	wooden	chest	Kate	had	had	since	she	was	a	baby.	The	chest
was	filled	with	 Kate’s	childhood	 toys	and	treasures,	and	she’d	found	tremendous
comfort	in	their	 presence	here	in	London.	It	was	silly	and	sentimental,	but	to
Kate	it	made	her	upcoming	transition	a	little	 less	scary.	Bringing	her	things—
funny	little	 items	that	meant	nothing	to	anyone	but	her—to	Anthony’s	 home
made	it	seem	more	like	it	would	truly	 be	her	home	as	well.

      Mary,	 who	always	seemed	to	understand	what	Kate	needed	before	she
understood	it	herself,	had	sent	word	to	friends	back	in	Somerset	as	soon	as	Kate
had	become	betrothed,	asking	them	to	ship	the	chest	to	London	in	time	for	the
wedding.

      Kate	stood	and	wandered	about	the	room,	stopping	to	run	her	fingers	across

255
      Kate	stood	and	wandered	about	the	room,	stopping	to	run	her	fingers	across
a	nightgown	that	was	folded	and	laid	upon	a	table,	awaiting	transfer	to	the	last	of
her	trunks.	It	was	one	that	Lady	Bridgerton—Violet,	  she	had	to	start	thinking	of
her	as	Violet—had	picked	out,	modest	in	cut	but	sheer	in	fabric.	 Kate	had	been
mortified	 throughout	the	entire	visit	to	the	lingerie	 maker.	This	was	her
betrothed’s	mother,	after	all,	selecting	items	for	 the	wedding	night!

      As	Kate	picked	 up	the	gown	and	set	it	carefully	in	a	trunk,	 she	heard	a	knock
at	the	door.	She	called	out	her	greeting,	and	Edwina	poked	her	head	in.	She,	too,
was	dressed	for	bed,	her	pale	hair	pulled	back	into	a	sloppy	bun	at	the	nape	of
her	neck.

      “I	 thought	you	might	 like	some	hot	milk,”	 Edwina	 said.

      Kate	smiled	gratefully.	 “That	 sounds	heavenly.”

      Edwina	reached	down	and	picked	up	the	ceramic	mug	she’d	set	on	the	floor.
“Can’t	 hold	two	mugs	and	twist	the	doorknob	at	the	same	time,”	she	explained
with	a	smile.	Once	inside,	she	kicked	the	door	shut	and	handed	one	of	the	mugs
to	Kate.	Eyes	trained	on	Kate,	Edwina	asked	without	preamble,	“Are	 you
scared?”

      Kate	took	a	gingerly	 sip,	checking	the	temperature	before	gulping	it	down.	 It
was	hot	but	not	scalding,	and	it	somehow	comforted	her.	She’d	been	drinking
hot	milk	since	childhood,	 and	the	taste	and	feel	of	it	always	made	her	feel	warm
and	secure.

      “Not	 scared	precisely,”	she	finally	 replied,	sitting	 down	on	the	edge	of	her
bed,	“but	nervous.	Definitely	 nervous.”

      “Well,	 of	 course	you’re	nervous,”	Edwina	 said,	her	free	hand	waving
animatedly	through	the	air.	“Only	 an	idiot	 wouldn’t	 be	nervous.	Your	whole	life
is	going	to	change.	Everything!	Even	your	 name.	You’ll	 be	a	married	woman.	A
viscountess.	After	tomorrow,	 you	will	 not	be	the	same	woman,	Kate,	and	after
tomorrow	night—”

      “That’s	 enough,	Edwina,”	 Kate	interrupted.

      “But—”

256
      “You	 are	not	doing	anything	to	ease	my	mind.”

      “Oh.”	 Edwina	 offered	her	a	sheepish	smile.	“Sorry.”

      “It’s	 all	 right,”	 Kate	assured	her.

      Edwina	managed	to	hold	her	tongue	for	about	four	 seconds	before	she	asked,
“Has	Mother	been	in	to	speak	with	you?”

      “Not	 yet.”

      “She	must,	don’t	 you	think?	Tomorrow	 is	your	wedding	 day,	and	I’m	sure
there	are	all	sorts	of	things	one	needs	to	know.”	Edwina	took	a	big	gulp	 of	her
milk,	leaving	 a	rather	incongruous	white	mustache	on	her	upper	lip,	then	perched
on	the	edge	of	the	bed	across	from	Kate.	“I	know	there	are	all	sorts	of	things	I
don’t	know.	 And	unless	you’ve	been	up	to	something	I	don’t	 know	about,	I	don’t
see	how	you	could	know	them,	either.”

      Kate	wondered	if	 it	would	 be	impolite	to	muzzle	her	sister	with	 some	of	the
lingerie	Lady	Bridgerton	 had	picked	out.	There	seemed	to	be	some	rather	nice
poetic	justice	in	such	a	maneuver.

      “Kate?”	 Edwina	asked,	blinking	 curiously.	 “Kate?	Why	 are	you	looking	at
me	so	strangely?”

      Kate	gazed	at	the	lingerie	longingly.	 “You	 don’t	 want	to	know.”

      “Hmmph.	 Well,	 I—”

      Edwina’s	 mutterings	were	cut	short	by	a	soft	knock	at	the	door.	“That’ll	  be
Mother,”	 Edwina	said	with	a	wicked	 grin.	“I	 can’t	wait.”

      Kate	rolled	 her	eyes	at	Edwina	as	she	rose	to	open	the	door.	Sure	enough,
Mary	was	standing	in	the	hall,	holding	 two	steaming	mugs.	“I	 thought	you	might
like	some	hot	milk,”	 she	said	with	a	weak	smile.

      Kate	lifted	 her	mug	in	response.	“Edwina	had	the	same	notion.”

      “What	 is	Edwina	doing	here?”	Mary	 asked,	entering	the	room.

      “Since	when	do	I	 need	a	reason	to	talk	with	my	sister?”	Edwina	asked	with	a

257
      “Since	when	do	I	 need	a	reason	to	talk	with	my	sister?”	Edwina	asked	with	a
snort.

      Mary	 shot	her	a	peevish	look	before	turning	her	attention	back	to	Kate.
“Hmmm,”	 she	mused.	“We	do	seem	to	have	a	surfeit	of	hot	milk.”

      “This	 one’s	gone	lukewarm,	anyway,”	 Kate	said,	setting	her	mug	down	on
one	of	the	already-closed-up	trunks	and	replacing	it	with	 the	warmer	one	in
Mary’s	hand.	“Edwina	 can	take	the	other	one	down	to	the	kitchen	when	she
leaves.”

      “Beg	 pardon?”	Edwina	asked,	vaguely	distracted.	“Oh,	of	 course.	I’m	happy
to	help.”	But	 she	didn’t	rise	to	her	feet.	In	fact,	she	didn’t	 even	twitch,	save	for
the	back	and	forth	of	her	head	as	she	looked	from	Mary	to	Kate	and	back	again.

      “I	 need	to	speak	with	Kate,”	Mary	 said.

      Edwina	nodded	enthusiastically.

      “Alone.”

      Edwina	blinked.	 “I	 have	to	leave?”

      Mary	 nodded	and	held	out	the	lukewarm	mug.

      “Now?”

      Mary	 nodded	again.

      Edwina	looked	 stricken,	then	her	expression	melted	into	a	wary	smile.
“You’re	 joking,	 right?	I	may	stay,	right?”

      “Wrong,”	  Mary	replied.

      Edwina	turned	pleading	eyes	to	Kate.

      “Don’t	 look	 to	me,”	Kate	 said	with	a	barely	suppressed	smile.	“It’s	her
decision.	She’ll	be	doing	the	talking,	 after	all.	I’ll	  just	be	listening.”

      “And	 asking	questions,”	Edwina	 pointed	out.	“And	 I	have	questions,	too.”
She	turned	to	her	mother.	“Lots	of	questions.”

      “I’m	  sure	you	do,”	Mary	said,	“and	 I’ll	 be	happy	to	answer	them	all	the

258
      “I’m	sure	you	do,”	Mary	said,	“and	I’ll	be	happy	to	answer	them	all	the
night	before	you	get	married.”

      Edwina	groaned	her	way	upright.	“This	isn’t	fair,”	she	grumbled,	snatching
the	mug	out	of	Mary’s	hand.

      “Life	isn’t	fair,”	 Mary	said	with	a	grin.

      “I’ll	 say,”	Edwina	muttered,	dragging	her	feet	as	she	crossed	the	room.

      “And	no	listening	at	the	door!”	Mary	called	out.

      “I	wouldn’t	dream	of	it,”	Edwina	drawled.	“Not	that	you’d	talk	loudly
enough	for	me	to	hear	a	thing,	anyway.”

      Mary	sighed	as	Edwina	stepped	out	into	the	hall	and	shut	the	door,	her
movements	punctuated	by	a	constant	stream	of	unintelligible	grumbles.	“We
shall	have	to	whisper,”	she	said	to	Kate.

      Kate	nodded,	but	she	did	feel	enough	loyalty	toward	her	sister	to	say,	“She
might	not	be	eavesdropping.”

      The	look	Mary	gave	her	was	dubious	in	the	extreme.	“Do	you	want	to	swing
the	door	open	to	find	out?”

      Kate	grinned	despite	herself.	“Point	taken.”

      Mary	sat	down	in	the	spot	Edwina	had	just	vacated	and	gave	Kate	a	rather
direct	look.	“I’m	sure	you	know	why	I’m	here.”

      Kate	nodded.

      Mary	took	a	sip	of	her	milk	and	was	silent	for	a	long	moment	before	she
said,	“When	I	married—for	the	first	time,	not	to	your	father—I	knew	nothing	of
what	to	expect	in	the	marriage	bed.	It	was	not—”	She	closed	her	eyes	briefly,
and	for	a	moment	she	looked	to	be	in	pain.	“My	lack	of	knowledge	made	it	all
the	more	difficult,”	she	finally	said,	the	slowness	of	her	carefully	chosen	words
telling	Kate	that	“difficult”	was	probably	a	euphemism.

      “I	see,”	Kate	murmured.

      Mary	looked	up	sharply.	“No,	you	don’t	see.	And	I	hope	you	never	do.	But

259
      Mary	 looked	up	sharply.	“No,	 you	don’t	 see.	And	I	hope	you	never	do.	But
that	is	beside	the	point.	I	always	swore	that	no	daughter	of	mine	would	enter	into
marriage	ignorant	of	what	occurs	between	a	husband	and	wife.”

      “I’m	  already	aware	of	the	basics	of	the	maneuver,”	Kate	admitted.

      Clearly	 surprised,	Mary	asked,	“You	are?”

      Kate	nodded.	“It	 can’t	be	very	much	different	 from	 animals.”

      Mary	 shook	her	head,	her	lips	pursed	into	a	slightly	amused	smile.	“No,	it’s
not.”

      Kate	pondered	how	best	to	phrase	her	next	question.	From	what	she’d	seen
on	her	neighbor’s	farm	back	in	Somerset,	the	act	of	procreation	didn’t	 look
terribly	enjoyable	 at	all.	But	when	Anthony	 kissed	her,	she	felt	as	if	she	were
losing	her	mind.	And	 when	he	kissed	her	twice,	she	wasn’t	even	sure	if	she
wanted	it	back!	Her	entire	body	tingled,	 and	she	suspected	that	if	their	recent
encounters	had	occurred	in	more	suitable	locales,	she	would	have	let	him	have
his	way	with	her	with	 nary	a	protest.

      But	then	there	was	that	awful	screaming	mare	at	the	farm….	Frankly,	 the
various	pieces	of	the	puzzle	didn’t	seem	to	reconcile.

      Finally,	 after	much	clearing	of	 her	throat,	she	said,	“It	doesn’t	look	very
pleasant.”

      Mary	 closed	her	eyes	again,	her	face	taking	on	that	same	look	as	before—as
if	she	were	remembering	something	she’d	rather	keep	tucked	away	in	the	darkest
recesses	of	her	mind.	When	she	opened	her	eyes	again,	she	said,	“A	woman’s
enjoyment	depends	entirely	on	her	husband.”

      “And	 a	man’s?”

      “The	 act	of	love,”	 Mary	said,	blushing,	“can	 and	should	be	a	pleasant
experience	for	both	man	and	woman.	But—”	 She	coughed	and	took	a	sip	of	her
milk.	“I	 would	 be	remiss	if	I	did	 not	tell	you	that	a	woman	does	not	always	find
pleasure	in	the	act.”

      “But	 a	man	does?”

260
      Mary	nodded.

      “That	doesn’t	seem	fair.”

      Mary’s	smile	was	wry.	“I	believe	I	just	told	Edwina	that	life	wasn’t	always
fair.”

      Kate	frowned,	staring	down	into	her	milk.	“Well,	this	really	doesn’t	seem
fair.”

      “This	doesn’t	mean,”	Mary	hastened	to	add,	“that	the	experience	is
necessarily	distasteful	to	the	woman.	And	I’m	certain	it	won’t	be	distasteful	to
you.	I	assumed	the	viscount	has	kissed	you?”

      Kate	nodded	without	looking	up.

      When	Mary	spoke,	Kate	could	hear	the	smile	in	her	voice.	“I’ll	assume	from
your	blush,”	Mary	said,	“that	you	enjoyed	it.”

      Kate	nodded	again,	her	cheeks	now	burning.

      “If	you	enjoyed	his	kiss,”	Mary	said,	“then	I	am	certain	you	won’t	be	upset
by	his	further	attentions.	I’m	sure	that	he	will	be	gentle	and	attentive	with	you.”

      “Gentle”	didn’t	quite	capture	the	essence	of	Anthony’s	kisses,	but	Kate
didn’t	think	that	was	the	sort	of	thing	one	was	meant	to	share	with	one’s	mother.
Truly,	the	entire	conversation	was	embarrassing	enough	as	it	was.

      “Men	and	women	are	very	different,”	Mary	continued,	as	if	that	weren’t
completely	obvious,	“and	a	man—even	one	who	is	faithful	to	his	wife,	which
I’m	sure	the	viscount	will	be	to	you—can	find	his	pleasure	with	almost	any
woman.”

      This	was	disturbing,	and	not	what	Kate	had	wanted	to	hear.	“And	a
woman?”	she	had	prompted.

      “It	is	different	for	a	woman.	I	have	heard	that	wicked	women	find	their
pleasure	like	a	man,	in	the	arms	of	any	who	will	satisfy,	but	I	do	not	believe	it.	I
think	that	a	woman	must	care	for	her	husband	in	order	to	enjoy	the	marriage
bed.”

261
      Kate	was	silent	for	 a	moment.	“You	did	 not	love	your	first	 husband,	did
you?”

      Mary	 shook	her	head.	“It	makes	all	the	difference,	sweet	one.	That,	and	a
husband’s	regard	for	his	wife.	But	 I	have	seen	the	viscount	in	your	company.	I
realize	that	your	match	was	sudden	and	unexpected,	but	he	treats	you	with	care
and	respect.	You	will	have	nothing	to	 fear,	I’m	sure	of	it.	 The	viscount	will	 treat
you	well.”

      And	with	 that,	Mary	 kissed	Kate	upon	the	forehead	and	bade	her	good	night,
picking	up	both	empty	milk	 mugs	as	she	left	the	room.	Kate	sat	on	her	bed,
staring	sightlessly	at	the	wall	for	 several	minutes.

      Mary	 was	wrong.	Kate	was	sure	of	it.	She	had	much	to	fear.

      She	hated	that	she	was	not	Anthony’s	first	choice	for	 a	wife,	but	she	was
practical,	and	she	was	pragmatic,	and	she	knew	that	certain	things	in	life	simply
had	to	be	accepted	as	fact.	But	she’d	been	consoling	herself	with	the	memory	of
the	desire	she	had	felt—and	she	thought	Anthony	had	felt—when	she	was	in	his
arms.

      Now	 it	seemed	that	this	desire	wasn’t	even	necessarily	for	her,	but	rather
some	primitive	urge	that	every	man	felt	 for	every	woman.

      And	Kate	 would	never	know	if,	 when	Anthony	 snuffed	the	candles	and	took
her	to	bed,	he	closed	his	eyes…

      And	pictured	 another	woman’s	face.
                                                                	

The	wedding,	which	was	held	in	the	drawing	room	of	Bridgerton	House,	was	a	small,	private	affair.	Well,
as	small	as	one	could	expect	with	the	entire	Bridgerton	family	in	attendance,	from	Anthony	all	the	way
down	to	little	eleven-year-old	Hyacinth,	who’d	taken	her	role	as	flower	girl	very	seriously.	When	her
brother	Gregory,	aged	thirteen,	had	tried	to	tip	her	basket	of	rose	petals,	she’d	walloped	him	in	the	chin,
delaying	the	ceremony	by	a	good	ten	minutes	but	interjecting	a	much-needed	note	of	levity	and	laughter.

      Well,	 for	everyone	except	Gregory,	who’d	 been	quite	put	out	by	the	entire
episode	and	certainly	wasn’t	laughing,	even	though	he	was,	as	Hyacinth	was
quick	to	point	out	 to	anyone	who	would	listen	(and	her	voice	was	loud	enough
so	that	one	didn’t	really	have	the	option	of	 not	listening),	the	one	who’d	 started
it.

262
      Kate	had	seen	it	all	from	her	vantage	point	in	 the	hall,	where	she’d	been
peeking	through	a	crack	in	the	door.	It	had	made	her	smile,	which	was	much
appreciated,	since	her	knees	had	been	knocking	for	over	an	hour.	She	could	only
thank	her	lucky	stars	that	Lady	Bridgerton	 had	not	insisted	upon	a	large,	grand
affair.	Kate,	who’d	 never	thought	of	herself	as	a	nervous	sort	of	person	before,
would	probably	have	passed	out	from	fright.

      Indeed,	Violet	 had	mentioned	the	possibility	of	 a	huge	wedding	as	a	method
by	which	to	combat	the	rumors	that	were	circulating	 about	Kate,	Anthony,	 and
their	rather	sudden	engagement.	Mrs.	Featherington	was,	true	to	her	word,
remaining	mostly	silent	 on	the	details	of	the	matter,	but	she’d	let	enough
innuendo	slip	that	everyone	knew	that	the	betrothal	had	not	come	about	in	the
usual	matter.

      As	a	result,	everyone	was	talking,	and	Kate	knew	it	 was	only	a	matter	of
time	before	Mrs.	Featherington	could	no	longer	restrain	herself	and	everyone
learned	the	true	story	of	her	downfall	at	the	hands—or	rather,	the	stinger—of	 a
bee.

      But	in	 the	end	Violet	had	decided	that	a	quick	marriage	was	best,	and	since
one	couldn’t	throw	 together	a	grand	party	in	one	week,	the	guest	list	had	been
limited	to	family.	 Kate	 was	attended	by	Edwina,	Anthony	by	his	brother
Benedict,	and	in	due	course	they	were	man	and	wife.

      It	was	strange,	Kate	thought	later	that	afternoon	as	she	stared	at	the	gold
band	that	had	joined	the	diamond	on	her	left	hand,	how	quickly	 one’s	life	could
change.	The	ceremony	had	been	brief,	rushing	by	in	a	crazy	blur,	and	yet	her	life
was	forever	altered.	Edwina	had	been	correct.	Everything	was	different.	She	was
a	married	woman	now,	a	viscountess.

      Lady	Bridgerton.

      She	chewed	on	her	lower	lip.	It	 sounded	like	someone	else.	How	long	would
it	take	before	someone	said,	“Lady	Bridgerton,”	 and	she	actually	thought	they
were	talking	to	her,	and	not	Anthony’s	 mother?

      She	was	a	wife	now,	with	 a	wife’s	responsibilities.

      It	terrified	 her.

      Now	 that	the	wedding	was	done,	Kate	reflected	upon	Mary’s	words	from	 the

263
      Now	 that	the	wedding	was	done,	Kate	reflected	upon	Mary’s	words	from	 the
previous	night	and	knew	that	she	was	right.	In	many	respects,	she	was	the
luckiest	woman	alive.	Anthony	 would	 treat	her	well.	He	would	 treat	any	woman
well.	And	 that	was	the	problem.

      And	now	 she	was	in	a	carriage,	traveling	the	short	distance	between
Bridgerton	House,	where	the	reception	had	been	held,	and	Anthony’s	private
residence,	which	she	supposed	could	no	longer	be	referred	to	as	“bachelor’s
lodgings.”

      She	stole	a	glance	at	her	new	husband.	He	was	facing	straight	ahead,	his	face
oddly	serious.

      “Do	 you	plan	to	move	into	 Bridgerton	House	now	that	you	are	married?”	 she
inquired	quietly.

      Anthony	 started,	almost	as	if	he’d	forgotten	she	was	there.	“Yes,”	he	replied,
turning	to	face	her,	“although	 not	for	several	months.	I	thought	we	could	do	with
a	bit	of	privacy	 at	the	start	of	our	marriage,	don’t	you	think?”

      “Of	 course,”	Kate	murmured.	She	looked	down	at	her	hands,	which	were
fidgeting	in	 her	lap.	She	tried	to	still	them,	but	it	 was	impossible.	It	was	a
wonder	she	had	not	burst	out	of	her	gloves.

      Anthony	 followed	 the	line	of	her	gaze	and	placed	one	of	his	large	hands	over
both	of	hers.	She	went	still	instantly.

      “Are	 you	nervous?”	he	inquired.

      “Did	 you	think	 I	wouldn’t	 be?”	she	replied,	trying	 to	keep	her	voice	dry	and
ironic.

      He	smiled	in	 response.	“There	is	nothing	to	fear.”

      Kate	nearly	burst	out	in	 jittery	 laughter.	It	seemed	she	was	destined	to	hear
that	platitude	over	and	over	again.	“Perhaps,”	she	allowed,	“but	still	 much	about
which	to	be	nervous.”

      His	smile	 broadened.	“Touché,	my	dear	wife.”

      Kate	swallowed	 convulsively.	It	 was	strange	to	be	someone’s	wife,

264
especially	strange	to	be	this	man’s	wife.	“And	 are	you	nervous?”	she	countered.

      He	leaned	in	toward	her,	his	dark	eyes	hot	and	heavy	with	the	promise	of
things	to	come.	“Oh,	desperately,”	he	murmured.	He	closed	the	rest	of	the
distance	between	them,	his	lips	finding	the	sensitive	hollow	 of	her	ear.	“My
heart	is	pounding,”	he	whispered.

      Kate’s	body	 seemed	to	stiffen	and	melt	at	the	same	time.	And	then	she
blurted	out,	“I	 think	we	should	wait.”

      He	nibbled	on	her	ear.	“Wait	 for	what?”

      She	tried	to	wiggle	 away.	He	didn’t	 understand.	If	he’d	understood,	he’d	be
furious,	and	he	didn’t	seem	particularly	 upset.

      Yet.

      “F-for	 the	marriage,”	 she	stammered.

      That	seemed	to	amuse	him,	and	he	playfully	wiggled	 the	rings	that	now
rested	on	her	gloved	fingers.	“It’s	 a	bit	late	for	that,	don’t	 you	think?”

      “For	 the	wedding	night,”	 she	clarified.

      He	drew	back,	his	dark	brows	flattening	 into	a	straight,	and	perhaps	a	little
bit	angry,	line.	“No,”	  he	said	simply.	But	he	did	not	move	to	 embrace	her	again.

      Kate	tried	to	think	 of	words	 that	would	make	him	understand,	but	it	wasn’t
easy;	she	wasn’t	so	sure	that	she	understood	herself.	And	she	was	rather	certain
that	he	would	not	believe	her	if	she	told	him	 that	she’d	not	intended	to	make	this
request;	it	had	just	burst	forth	from	within	 her,	born	of	 a	panic	she	hadn’t	even
known	was	there	until	that	very	moment.

      “I’m	  not	asking	for	forever,”	 she	said,	hating	the	tremor	that	shook	her
words.	“Just	a	week.”

      This	caught	his	attention,	and	one	of	his	brows	rose	in	ironic	 query.	“And
what,	pray	tell,	do	you	hope	to	gain	by	a	week?”

      “I	 don’t	know,”	 she	answered	quite	honestly.

265
      His	eyes	focused	onto	hers,	hard,	hot,	and	sardonic.	“You’re	going	 to	have	to
do	better	than	that,”	he	said.

      Kate	didn’t	 want	to	look	 at	him,	didn’t	 want	the	intimacy	 he	forced	upon	her
when	she	was	caught	in	his	dark	gaze.	It	was	easy	to	hide	her	feelings	when	she
could	keep	her	focus	on	his	chin	or	his	shoulder,	but	when	she	had	to	look
straight	into	his	eyes…

      She	was	afraid	he	could	see	into	her	very	soul.

      “This	 has	been	a	week	of	a	great	many	changes	in	my	life,”	she	began,
wishing	she	knew	where	she	was	going	with	the	statement.

      “For	 me	as	well,”	he	interjected	softly.

      “Not	 so	much	for	you,”	 she	returned.	“The	intimacies	of	 marriage	are
nothing	new	to	you.”

      One	corner	of	his	mouth	quirked	 into	a	lopsided,	slightly	 arrogant	smile.	“I
assure	you,	my	lady,	that	I	have	never	before	been	married.”

      “That’s	 not	what	I	meant,	and	you	know	 it.”

      He	did	not	contradict	 her.

      “I	 simply	 would	like	 a	bit	of	time	to	prepare,”	 she	said,	primly	folding	 her
hands	in	her	lap.	But	she	couldn’t	keep	her	thumbs	still,	and	they	twiddled
anxiously,	giving	 proof	to	the	state	of	her	nerves.

      Anthony	 stared	at	her	for	a	long	moment,	then	leaned	back,	propping	his	left
ankle	rather	casually	on	his	right	knee.	“Very	 well,”	 he	allowed.

      “Really?”	 She	straightened	with	surprise.	She	had	not	expected	him	to
capitulate	with	such	ease.

      “Provided…”	  he	continued.

      She	slumped.	She	should	have	known	that	there	would	be	a	contingency.

      “…that	 you	edify	 me	on	one	point.”

      She	gulped.	“And	 what	would	that	be,	my	lord?”

266
      She	gulped.	“And	 what	would	that	be,	my	lord?”

      He	leaned	forward,	the	very	devil	 in	his	eyes.	“How,	 precisely,	do	you	plan
to	prepare?”

      Kate	glanced	out	the	window,	 then	swore	under	her	breath	when	she	realized
they	weren’t	even	to	Anthony’s	 street.	There	would	be	no	escaping	his	question;
she	was	stuck	in	the	carriage	for	at	least	another	five	minutes.	“We-e-e-e-ll,”	 she
stalled,	“I’m	 sure	I	don’t	 understand	what	you	mean.”

      He	chuckled.	“I’m	  sure	you	don’t,	either.”

      Kate	scowled	at	him.	There	was	nothing	worse	than	being	the	butt	of
someone	else’s	joke,	and	it	seemed	especially	inappropriate	when	one	happened
to	be	a	bride	on	her	wedding	day.	“Now	 you’re	having	fun	 with	me,”	 she
accused.

      “No,”	 he	said	with	 what	could	only	 have	been	called	a	leer,	“I’d	like	to	have
fun	with	you.	 There’s	quite	a	difference.”

      “I	 wish	you	wouldn’t	  talk	like	that,”	 she	grumbled.	“You	 know	I	 don’t
understand.”

      His	eyes	focused	on	her	lips	as	his	tongue	darted	out	to	wet	his	own.	“You
would,”	 he	murmured,	“if	 you’d	simply	 give	in	 to	the	inevitable	and	forget	your
silly	request.”

      “I	 don’t	enjoy	 being	condescended	to,”	Kate	said	stiffly.

      His	eyes	flashed.	“And	 I	don’t	 like	being	denied	my	rights,”	 he	returned,	his
voice	cold	and	his	face	a	harsh	rendition	of	aristocratic	power.

      “I’m	  not	denying	you	anything,”	 she	insisted.

      “Oh,	 really?”	His	 drawl	lacked	all	 humor.

      “I’m	  just	asking	for	a	reprieve.	A	brief,	 temporary,	brief”—she	 repeated	the
word,	just	in	case	his	brain	was	too	dulled	by	single-minded	 male	pride	to	have
understood	her	the	first	time—“reprieve.	 Surely	you	would	 not	deny	me	such	a
simple	request.”

267
      “Of	 the	two	of	 us,”	he	said,	his	voice	clipped,	“I	 don’t	think	 I’m	 the	one
doing	the	denying.”

      He	was	right,	drat	the	man,	and	she	had	no	idea	what	else	to	say.	She	knew
she	hadn’t	a	leg	to	stand	on	with	her	spur-of-the-moment	request;	he	had	every
right	to	toss	her	over	his	shoulder,	drag	her	off	to	bed,	and	lock	her	in	the	room
for	a	week	if	he	so	desired.

      She	was	acting	foolishly,	 a	prisoner	of	her	own	insecurities—insecurities	 she
hadn’t	even	known	she	possessed	until	she’d	met	Anthony.

      All	 her	life,	 she’d	been	the	one	who’d	received	the	second	glance,	the
second	greeting,	the	second	kiss	on	the	hand.	As	the	elder	daughter,	it	should
have	been	her	due	to	be	addressed	before	her	younger	sister,	but	Edwina’s
beauty	was	so	stunning,	the	pure	and	perfect	blue	of	her	eyes	so	startling,	that
people	simply	forgot	themselves	in	her	presence.

      Introductions	 to	Kate	were	usually	met	with	 an	embarrassed,	“Of	course,”
and	a	polite	murmured	greeting	while	their	 eyes	slid	back	to	Edwina’s	pure	and
shining	face.

      Kate	had	never	minded	it	much.	If	 Edwina	had	been	spoiled	or	bad-tempered
it	might	have	been	difficult,	 and	in	all	 truth,	most	of	the	men	she’d	met	were
shallow	and	silly,	and	she	hadn’t	much	cared	if	they	only	 took	the	time	to
acknowledge	her	after	her	sister.

      Until	 now.

      She	wanted	Anthony’s	eyes	to	light	 up	when	she	entered	the	room.	She
wanted	him	to	scan	a	crowd	until	he	saw	her	face.	She	didn’t	need	him	to	love
her—or	at	least	that’s	what	she	was	telling	herself—but	she	desperately	wanted
to	be	first	in	his	affections,	 first	in	 his	desires.

      And	she	had	an	awful,	terrible	 feeling	that	all	this	 meant	she	was	falling	in
love.

      Falling	 in	love	with	 one’s	husband—who	would	 have	thought	it	could	be
such	a	disaster?

      “I	 see	you	have	no	response,”	Anthony	said	quietly.

268
      The	carriage	rolled	to	a	halt,	thankfully	 sparing	her	from	 having	to	make	a
reply.	But	when	a	liveried	 footman	rushed	forward	and	attempted	to	open	the
door,	Anthony	yanked	it	 back	shut,	never	once	taking	his	eyes	off	of	her	face.

      “How,	 my	lady?”	 he	repeated.

      “How…”	  she	echoed.	She’d	quite	forgotten	what	he	was	asking.

      “How,”	  he	said	yet	again,	his	voice	hard	as	ice	but	hot	as	flame,	“do	you
plan	to	prepare	for	your	wedding	night?”

      “I—I	  had	not	considered,”	Kate	replied.

      “I	 thought	not.”	 He	let	go	of	the	door	handle,	and	the	door	swung	open,
revealing	the	faces	of	two	footmen	who	were	obviously	 trying	 very	hard	not	to
look	curious.	Kate	remained	silent	as	Anthony	 helped	her	down	and	led	her	into
the	house.

      His	household	staff	was	assembled	in	the	small	entry	hall,	and	Kate
murmured	her	greetings	as	each	member	was	introduced	to	her	by	the	butler	and
housekeeper.	The	staff	wasn’t	very	extensive,	as	the	house	was	small	by	ton
standards,	but	the	introductions	took	a	good	twenty	minutes.

      Twenty	 minutes	which,	unfortunately,	 did	little	 to	calm	her	nerves.	By	the
time	he	placed	his	hand	at	the	small	of	her	back	and	guided	her	toward	the	stairs,
her	heart	was	racing,	and	for	the	first	time	in	her	life,	 she	thought	she	might
actually	pass	out.

      It	wasn’t	 that	she	feared	the	marriage	bed.

      It	wasn’t	 even	that	she	feared	not	pleasing	her	husband.	Even	an	innocent
virgin	such	as	herself	could	tell	that	his	actions	and	reactions	when	they	kissed
were	proof	enough	of	his	desire.	He	would	show	her	what	to	do;	of	 that	she	had
no	doubt.

      What	she	feared…

      What	she	feared…

      She	caught	her	throat	closing,	choking,	and	she	brought	her	fist	to	her
mouth,	biting	on	the	knuckle	 to	steady	her	stomach,	as	if	that	might	actually	do

269
mouth,	biting	on	the	knuckle	 to	steady	her	stomach,	as	if	that	might	actually	do
something	to	help	the	awful	churning	 that	had	her	in	knots.

      “My	 God,”	 Anthony	 whispered	as	the	reached	the	landing.	“You’re
terrified.”

      “No,”	 she	lied.

      He	took	her	by	the	shoulders	and	twisted	her	to	face	him,	staring	deeply	into
her	eyes.	Cursing	under	his	breath,	he	grabbed	her	hand	and	pulled	her	into	his
bedroom,	muttering,	“We	 need	privacy.”

      When	they	reached	his	chamber—a	richly	appointed,	masculine	room
exquisitely	decorated	in	shades	of	burgundy	and	gold—he	planted	his	hands	on
his	hips	and	demanded,	“Didn’t	your	 mother	tell	you	 about…ah…about…”

      Kate	would	 have	laughed	at	his	flailings	if	 she	hadn’t	been	so	nervous.	“Of
course,”	she	said	quickly.	“Mary	 explained	everything.”

      “Then	 what	the	hell	is	the	problem?”	He	cursed	again,	then	apologized.	“I
beg	your	pardon,”	he	said	stiffly.	 “That	 certainly	is	not	the	way	to	set	you	at
ease.”

      “I	 can’t	say,”	 she	whispered,	her	eyes	sliding	to	the	floor,	focusing	on	the
intricate	pattern	of	the	carpet	until	they	swam	with	 tears.

      A	strange,	horrible	 choking	noise	emerged	from	Anthony’s	 throat.	“Kate?”
he	asked	hoarsely.	“Did	someone…has	a	man…ever	forced	unwelcome
attentions	on	you?”

      She	looked	up,	and	the	concern	and	terror	on	his	face	nearly	made	her	heart
melt.	“No!”	  she	cried	out.	“It	isn’t	 that.	Oh,	don’t	 look	that	way,	I	 can’t	bear	it.”

      “I	 can’t	bear	it,”	 Anthony	 whispered,	closing	the	distance	between	them	as
he	took	her	hand	and	raised	it	to	his	lips.	“You	 must	tell	me,”	he	said,	his	voice
oddly	choked.	“Do	 you	fear	me?	Do	I	repulse	you?”

      Kate	shook	her	head	frantically,	 unable	to	believe	that	he	could	possibly
think	any	woman	would	 find	him	 repulsive.

      “Tell	 me,”	 he	whispered,	his	lips	pressing	against	her	ear.	“Tell	me	how	to

270
make	it	right.	For	I	 don’t	think	 I	can	grant	you	your	reprieve.”	 He	molded	his
body	against	hers,	his	strong	arms	holding	her	close	as	he	groaned,	“I	can’t	wait
a	week,	Kate.	I	simply	cannot	do	it.”

      “I…”	  Kate	made	the	mistake	of	looking	 up	into	his	eyes,	and	she	forgot
everything	she’d	meant	to	say.	He	was	staring	at	her	with	a	burning	intensity	that
forged	a	fire	in	the	very	center	of	her	being,	leaving	 her	breathless,	hungry,	and
desperate	for	something	she	did	not	quite	understand.

      And	she	knew	that	she	could	not	make	him	wait.	 If	she	looked	into	her	own
soul,	and	looked	with	honesty	and	without	 delusion,	she	was	forced	to	admit	that
she	did	not	wish	to	wait,	either.

      For	what	could	be	the	point?	Maybe	 he	would	never	love	her.	Maybe	his
desire	would	never	be	focused	as	single-mindedly	on	her	as	hers	was	for	him.

      But	she	could	pretend.	And	when	he	held	her	in	his	arms	and	pressed	his	lips
to	her	skin,	it	was	so,	so	easy	to	pretend.

      “Anthony,”	  she	whispered,	his	name	a	benediction,	a	plea,	a	prayer	all	in
one.

      “Anything,”	  he	replied	raggedly,	dropping	 to	his	knees	before	her,	his	lips
trailing	a	hot	path	along	her	skin	as	his	fingers	frantically	 worked	 to	release	her
from	her	gown.	“Ask	 me	anything,”	 he	groaned.	“Anything	 in	my	 power,	I	give
to	you.”

      Kate	felt	 her	head	fall	back,	felt	the	last	of	her	resistance	melting	away.	“Just
love	me,”	she	whispered.	“Just	love	me.”

      His	only	 answer	was	a	low	growl	of	 need.

271
Chapter	     17


The	deed	is	done!	Miss	Sheffield	is	now	Katharine,	Viscountess	Bridgerton.

      This	Author	 extends	the	very	best	of	wishes	to	the	happy	couple.	Sensible
and	honorable	people	are	surely	scarce	among	the	ton,	and	it’s	certainly
gratifying	 to	see	two	of	this	rare	breed	joined	in	marriage.

                                                       LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	16	MAY	1814



Until	  that	moment,	Anthony	 had	not	even	realized	just	how	badly	he’d	 needed
for	her	to	say	yes,	to	admit	to	her	need.	He	clutched	her	to	him,	his	cheek
pressing	against	the	gentle	curve	of	her	belly.	Even	in	her	wedding	gown	she
smelled	of	lilies	 and	soap,	that	maddening	scent	that	had	haunted	him	for	weeks.

      “I	 need	you,”	he	growled,	not	sure	if	 his	words	were	getting	lost	in	 the	layers
of	silk	that	still	 kept	her	from	 him.	“I	 need	you	now.”

      He	rose	to	his	feet	and	lifted	her	in	his	 arms,	taking	remarkably	few	steps	to
reach	the	large	four-poster	bed	that	dominated	his	bedroom.	He’d	never	taken	a
woman	there	before,	always	preferring	to	conduct	his	liaisons	elsewhere,	and
suddenly	he	was	absurdly	glad	of	that	fact.

      Kate	was	different,	 special,	his	wife.	He	wanted	no	other	memories	to
intrude	upon	this	or	any	night.

      He	laid	her	down	 on	the	mattress,	his	eyes	never	leaving	her	charmingly
disheveled	form	as	he	methodically	stripped	off	 his	clothing.	First	 his	gloves,
one	by	one,	then	his	coat,	already	rumpled	by	his	ardor.

      He	caught	her	eyes,	dark	and	large	and	filled	with	wonder,	 and	he	smiled,
slowly	and	with	 satisfaction.	“You’ve	 never	seen	a	naked	man	before,	have
you?”	he	murmured.

      She	shook	her	head.

      “Good.”	 He	leaned	forward	and	plucked	one	of	her	slippers	from	 her	foot.

272
      “Good.”	 He	leaned	forward	and	plucked	one	of	her	slippers	from	 her	foot.
“You’ll	  never	see	another.”

      He	moved	to	the	buttons	of	his	shirt,	 slowly	slipping	 each	from	its
buttonhole,	his	desire	increased	tenfold	when	he	saw	her	tongue	dart	out	to	wet
her	lips.

      She	wanted	him.	He	knew	enough	of	women	to	be	positive	 of	that.	And	by
the	time	this	night	was	through,	she	wouldn’t	 be	able	to	live	without	 him.

      That	he	might	not	be	able	to	live	 without	her	 was	something	he	refused	to
consider.	What	smoldered	in	the	bedroom	and	what	whispered	in	his	heart	were
two	different	 things.	He	could	keep	them	separate.	He	would	keep	them	separate.

      He	might	 not	wish	to	love	his	wife,	 but	that	did	not	mean	they	could	not
enjoy	each	other	thoroughly	in	bed.

      His	hands	slid	to	the	top	button	of	 his	trousers	and	unfastened	it,	but	stopped
there.	She	was	still	fully	 clothed,	and	still	fully	 an	innocent.	She	wasn’t	yet	ready
to	see	the	proof	of	his	desire.

      He	climbed	onto	 the	bed	and,	like	a	feral	cat,	crawled	toward	her,	inching
closer	and	closer	until	her	elbows,	which	had	been	propping	her	up,	slid	out	from
under	her	and	she	was	flat	on	her	back,	staring	up	at	him,	her	breath	coming	fast
and	shallow	through	her	parted	lips.

      There	was	nothing,	he	decided,	more	breathtaking	than	Kate’s	face	when
flushed	with	desire.	Her	hair,	dark	and	silky	 and	thick,	was	already	pulling	 free
of	the	pins	and	fasteners	that	had	held	her	elaborate	wedding	day	coiffure	in
place.	Her	lips,	always	a	bit	too	full	 for	conventional	 beauty,	had	taken	on	a
dusky	pink	color	in	 the	slanted	light	of	the	late	afternoon.	And	 her	skin—never
had	it	seemed	so	flawless,	so	luminescent.	A	pale	blush	tinted	her	cheeks,
denying	her	the	bloodless	complexion	that	the	fashionable	ladies	always	seemed
to	desire,	but	Anthony	found	the	color	 enchanting.	She	was	real,	human,	and
trembling	with	 desire.	He	couldn’t	have	wished	for	 more.

      With	 a	reverent	hand,	he	stroked	her	cheek	with	the	backs	of	his	fingers,
then	slid	them	down	her	neck	to	the	tender	skin	that	peeked	above	the	edge	of
her	bodice.	Her	gown	was	fastened	by	a	maddening	row	of	buttons	at	the	back,
but	he’d	already	undone	nearly	a	third	of	them,	and	it	was	now	loose	enough	to
slide	the	silken	fabric	over	her	breasts.

273
slide	the	silken	fabric	over	her	breasts.

      If	 anything,	they	looked	even	more	beautiful	 than	they	had	two	days	earlier.
Her	nipples	were	rosy	pink,	cresting	breasts	that	he	knew	fit	his	hands	to
perfection.	“No	 chemise?”	he	murmured	appreciatively,	running	 his	finger	along
the	prominent	line	of	her	collarbone.

      She	shook	her	head,	her	voice	breathy	as	she	answered,	“The	cut	of	the
gown	didn’t	 allow	it.”

      One	side	of	his	mouth	lifted	 into	a	very	male	smile.	 “Remind	me	to	send	a
bonus	to	your	modiste.”

      His	hand	moved	ever	lower,	and	he	cupped	one	of	her	breasts,	squeezing	it
softly,	feeling	 a	groan	of	desire	rise	up	within	him	 as	he	heard	a	similar	moan
escape	her	lips.

      “So	lovely,”	  he	murmured,	lifting	 his	hand	and	letting	his	eyes	caress	her.	It
had	never	occurred	to	him	that	there	could	be	such	pleasure	from	the	simple	act
of	gazing	at	a	woman.	Lovemaking	had	always	been	about	touch	and	taste;	for
the	first	time	sight	was	equally	 seductive.

      She	was	so	perfect,	so	utterly	beautiful	to	him,	 and	he	felt	a	rather	strange
and	primitive	sense	of	satisfaction	that	most	men	were	blind	to	her	beauty.	It	was
as	if	a	certain	side	of	her	were	visible	only	to	 him.	He	loved	that	her	charms
were	hidden	to	the	rest	of	the	world.

      It	made	her	seem	more	his.

      Suddenly	eager	to	be	touched	as	he	was	touching,	he	lifted	one	of	her	hands,
still	wrapped	in	a	long	 satin	glove,	and	brought	it	to	his	chest.	He	could	feel	the
heat	of	her	skin	even	through	the	fabric,	but	it	wasn’t	 enough.	“I	want	to	 feel
you,”	he	whispered,	then	removed	the	two	rings	that	rested	on	her	fourth	finger.
He	laid	them	in	the	hollow	 between	her	breasts,	a	space	made	shallow	by	her
supine	position.

      Kate	gasped	and	shivered	at	the	touch	of	the	cold	metal	against	her	skin,
then	watched	with	breathless	fascination	as	Anthony	went	to	work	 on	her	glove,
tugging	gently	at	each	finger	until	 it	was	loose,	then	sliding	the	length	of	 it	down
her	arm	and	over	her	hand.	The	rush	of	satin	was	like	an	endless	kiss,	raising
goose	bumps	over	her	entire	body.

274
      Then,	with	 a	tenderness	that	nearly	brought	tears	to	her	eyes,	he	replaced	the
rings	on	her	finger,	one	by	one,	stopping	only	to	kiss	the	sensitive	palm	of	 her
hand	in	between.

      “Give	 me	your	other	hand,”	he	gently	ordered.

      She	did,	and	he	repeated	the	same	exquisite	torture,	tugging	and	sliding	the
satin	along	her	skin.	But	this	time,	when	he	was	through,	he	brought	her	pinkie
finger	to	his	mouth,	then	drew	it	 between	his	lips	and	sucked,	swirling	his	tongue
around	the	tip.

      Kate	felt	 an	answering	tug	of	desire	pulling	through	 her	arm,	shivering
through	her	chest,	snaking	through	her	until	it	pooled,	hot	and	mysterious,
between	her	legs.	He	was	awakening	something	within	her,	something	dark	and
maybe	just	a	little	bit	 dangerous,	something	that	had	lain	dormant	for	years,	just
waiting	for	 a	single	kiss	from	this	man.

      Her	entire	life	 had	been	preparation	for	this	very	moment,	and	she	didn’t
even	know	what	to	expect	next.

      His	tongue	slid	 down	the	inner	length	of	her	finger,	 then	traced	the	lines	on
her	palm.	“Such	lovely	 hands,”	he	murmured,	nibbling	 on	the	fleshy	part	of	her
thumb	as	his	fingers	entwined	with	hers.	“Strong,	 and	yet	so	graceful	and
delicate.”

      “You’re	 talking	 nonsense,”	Kate	said	self-consciously.	“My	 hands—”

      But	he	silenced	her	with	a	finger	 to	her	lips.	“Shhh,”	 he	admonished.
“Haven’t	 you	learned	that	you	should	never	ever	contradict	your	husband	when
he	is	admiring	your	form?”

      Kate	shivered	with	 delight.

      “For	 example,”	he	continued,	the	very	devil	 in	his	voice,	“if	 I	 want	to	spend
an	hour	examining	the	inside	of	your	wrist”—with	   lightning-quick	 movements,
his	teeth	grazed	the	delicate	thin	skin	on	the	inside	of	her	wrist—“it	 is	 certainly
my	prerogative,	don’t	 you	think?”

      Kate	had	no	response,	and	he	chuckled,	the	sound	low	and	warm	in	her	ears.

275
      “And	 don’t	 think	I	 won’t,”	 he	warned,	using	the	pad	of	his	finger	to	trace	the
blue	veins	that	pulsed	under	her	skin.	“I	may	decide	to	spend	two	hours
examining	your	wrist.”

      Kate	watched	with	 fascination	as	his	fingers,	touching	her	so	softly	that	she
tingled	from	 the	contact,	made	their	way	to	the	inside	of	her	elbow,	then	stopped
to	twirl	 circles	on	her	skin.

      “I	 can’t	imagine,”	 he	said	softly,	“that	 I	could	spend	two	hours	examining
your	wrist	and	not	find	 it	lovely.”	  His	hand	made	the	jump	to	her	torso,	and	he
used	his	palm	to	lightly	 graze	the	tip	of	her	puckered	breast.	“I	should	be	most
aggrieved	were	you	to	disagree.”

      He	leaned	down	and	captured	her	lips	in	a	brief,	yet	searing	kiss.	Lifting	 his
head	just	an	inch,	he	murmured,	“It	is	a	wife’s	 place	to	agree	with	her	husband	in
all	things,	hmmm?”

      His	words	were	so	absurd	that	Kate	finally	 managed	to	find	her	voice.	“If,”
she	said	with	an	amused	smile,	“his	opinions	are	agreeable,	my	lord.”

      One	of	his	brows	arched	imperiously.	 “Are	 you	arguing	with	 me,	my	lady?
And	on	my	wedding	 night,	no	less.”

      “It’s	 my	 wedding	night,	too,”	 she	pointed	out.

      He	made	a	clucking	noise	and	shook	his	head.	“I	may	have	to	punish	you,”
he	said.	“But	how?	By	touching?”	 His	hand	skimmed	over	one	breast,	then	the
next.	“Or	not	touching?”

      He	lifted	 his	hands	from	her	skin,	but	he	leaned	down,	and	through	pursed
lips,	blew	a	soft	stream	of	air	over	her	nipple.

      “Touching,”	  Kate	gasped,	arching	off	the	bed.	“Definitely	 touching.”

      “You	 think?”	 He	smiled,	slowly	 like	 a	cat.	“I	never	thought	I’d	 say	this,	but
not	touching	has	its	appeal.”

      Kate	stared	up	at	him.	He	loomed	over	her	on	his	hands	and	knees	like	some
primitive	 hunter	coming	in	for	 the	final	kill.	 He	looked	 feral,	triumphant,	and
powerfully	 possessive.	His	thick	chestnut	hair	fell	over	his	forehead,	giving	 him
an	oddly	boyish	air,	but	his	eyes	burned	and	gleamed	with	a	very	adult	desire.

276
an	oddly	boyish	air,	but	his	eyes	burned	and	gleamed	with	a	very	adult	desire.

      He	wanted	her.	It	was	thrilling.	 He	might	 be	a	man,	and	thus	able	to	find	his
satisfaction	with	any	woman,	but	right	 now,	in	 this	moment,	he	wanted	her.	Kate
was	sure	of	it.

      And	it	 made	her	feel	like	the	most	beautiful	woman	 alive.

      Emboldened	by	the	knowledge	of	 his	desire,	she	reached	up	and	cupped	one
hand	around	the	back	of	his	head,	drawing	him	down	until	 his	lips	were	just	a
whisper	away	from	hers.	“Kiss	 me,”	she	ordered,	surprised	by	the	imperiousness
of	her	voice.	“Kiss	 me	now.”

      He	smiled	in	 vague	disbelief,	but	his	words,	in	that	last	second	before	their
lips	met,	were,	“Anything	 you	 wish,	Lady	Bridgerton.	 Anything	 you	wish.”

      And	then	it	 all	seemed	to	happen	at	once.	His	lips	were	on	hers,	teasing	and
devouring,	while	his	 hands	were	lifting	her	up	into	 a	seated	position.	His	fingers
worked	nimbly	 at	the	buttons	of	her	gown,	and	she	could	feel	the	cool	brush	of
the	air	on	her	skin	as	the	fabric	slipped	down,	inch	by	inch,	 exposing	her	rib
cage,	then	her	navel,	and	then…

      And	then	his	hands	slid	beneath	her	hips,	and	he	was	lifting	her	up,	yanking
the	dress	out	from	underneath	her.	Kate	gasped	at	the	intimacy	of	it.	She	was
clad	only	in	her	unmentionables,	stockings,	and	garters.	She’d	never	felt	so
exposed	in	her	life,	and	yet	she	thrilled	in	every	moment,	every	sweep	of	his
eyes	over	her	body.

      “Lift	  your	leg,”	 Anthony	ordered	softly.

      She	did,	and	with	a	slowness	that	was	exquisite	and	agonizing	at	the	same
time,	he	rolled	one	of	her	silk	 stockings	down	to	her	toes.	The	other	soon
followed,	and	then	her	drawers	came	next,	and	before	she	knew	it	she	was	nude,
completely	bared	before	him.

      His	hand	skimmed	softly	 over	her	stomach,	then	he	said,	“I	think	I’m	 a	little
overdressed,	don’t	you?”

      Kate’s	eyes	widened	as	he	left	the	bed	and	stripped	off	the	rest	of	his
clothing.	His	body	 was	perfection,	his	chest	finely	muscled,	his	arms	and	legs
powerful,	and	his—

277
      “Oh,	 my	God,”	 she	gasped.

      He	grinned.	“I’ll	  take	that	as	a	compliment.”

      Kate	swallowed	 convulsively.	No	 wonder	those	animals	on	her	neighbor’s
farm	hadn’t	looked	as	if	 they	were	enjoying	the	act	of	procreation.	At	 least	not
the	female	ones.	Surely	this	wasn’t	going	to	work.

      But	she	didn’t	 want	to	seem	naive	and	foolish,	so	she	didn’t	say	anything,
just	gulped	and	tried	to	smile.

      Anthony	 caught	the	flash	of	terror	in	her	eyes	and	smiled	gently.	“Trust	 me,”
he	murmured,	sliding	onto	the	bed	beside	her.	His	hands	settled	on	the	curve	of
her	hip	as	he	nuzzled	her	neck.	“Just	trust	me.”

      He	felt	 her	nod,	and	he	propped	himself	up	on	one	of	his	elbows,	using	his
free	hand	to	idly	trace	circles	and	swirls	on	her	abdomen,	moving	lower	 and
lower,	until	 he	brushed	the	edge	of	the	dark	thatch	of	hair	nestling	between	her
legs.

      Her	muscles	quivered,	and	he	heard	a	rush	of	indrawn	breath	pass	over	her
lips.	“Shhhh,”	 he	said	soothingly,	leaning	down	to	distract	 her	with	a	kiss.	The
last	time	he’d	lain	with	 a	virgin	 he’d	been	one	himself,	and	he	was	relying	on
instinct	to	guide	him	 with	Kate.	He	wanted	this,	her	first	 time,	to	be	perfect.	Or	if
not	perfect,	then	at	least	damn	good.

      While	 his	lips	and	tongue	explored	her	mouth,	his	hand	dipped	ever	lower,
until	he	reached	the	moist	heat	of	her	womanhood.	She	gasped	again,	but	he	was
relentless,	teasing	and	tickling,	delighting	in	 each	of	her	squirms	and	moans.

      “What	 are	you	doing?”	she	whispered	against	his	lips.

      He	gave	her	a	lopsided	grin,	as	one	of	his	fingers	slid	inside.	“Making	  you
feel	really,	really	 good?”

      She	moaned,	which	pleased	him.	If	she’d	managed	intelligible	 speech	he
would	have	known	he	wasn’t	doing	 his	job	correctly.

      He	moved	over	her,	nudging	her	legs	farther	apart	with	 one	of	his	thighs,	and
letting	out	a	moan	of	his	own	as	his	manhood	settled	against	her	hip.	Even	there,

278
letting	out	a	moan	of	his	own	as	his	manhood	settled	against	her	hip.	Even	there,
she	felt	perfect,	and	he	was	nearly	bursting	at	the	thought	of	sinking	within	 her.

      He	was	trying	 to	hold	his	control,	trying	 to	make	sure	that	he	remained	slow
and	gentle,	but	his	need	was	getting	stronger	and	stronger,	and	his	own	breath
was	growing	fast	and	ragged.

      She	was	ready	for	him,	or	at	least	as	ready	as	she	was	going	to	be.	He	knew
that	this	first	time	 would	bring	her	pain,	but	he	prayed	it	wouldn’t	  last	more	than
a	moment.

      He	fitted	 himself	against	her	opening,	using	his	arms	to	brace	his	body	a	few
inches	above	hers.	He	whispered	her	name,	and	her	dark	eyes,	hazed	by	passion,
focused	on	his.

      “I’m	  going	to	make	you	mine	now,”	 he	said,	inching	forward	 as	he	spoke.
Her	body	tightened	spasmodically	around	him;	the	feeling	 was	so	exquisite	he
had	to	grit	his	teeth	against	it.	It	would	 be	so,	so	easy	to	lose	himself	in	the
moment,	to	plunge	forward	and	seek	only	his	own	pleasure.

      “Tell	 me	if	 it	hurts,”	 he	whispered	hoarsely,	allowing	himself	 to	move
forward	only	 by	tiny	increments.	She	was	certainly	aroused,	but	she	was	very
small,	and	he	knew	he	needed	to	give	her	time	to	adjust	to	his	intimate	invasion.

      She	nodded.

      He	froze,	barely	able	to	comprehend	the	stab	of	pain	in	his	chest.	“It	 hurts?”

      She	shook	her	head.	“No,	I	only	meant	I’ll	  tell	you	if	 it	does.	It	doesn’t	hurt,
but	it	feels	so	very…odd.”

      Anthony	 fought	a	smile	and	he	leaned	down	to	kiss	the	tip	of	her	nose.	“I
don’t	know	 that	I’ve	ever	been	called	odd	while	making	 love	to	a	woman
before.”

      For	a	moment	it	looked	 as	if	she	were	afraid	that	she’d	insulted	him,	then	her
mouth	quivered	into	a	small	smile.	“Perhaps,”	 she	said	softly,	“you’ve	 been
making	love	to	the	wrong	women.”

      “Perhaps	so,”	he	replied,	moving	 forward	yet	another	inch.

      “May	 I	tell	 you	a	secret?”	she	asked.

279
      “May	I	tell	you	a	secret?”	she	asked.

      He	nudged	farther.	“Of	course,”	he	murmured.

      “When	I	first	saw	you…tonight,	I	mean…”

      “In	all	my	glory?”	he	teased,	lifting	his	brows	into	an	arrogant	arch.

      She	shot	him	a	rather	enchanting	scowl.	“I	didn’t	think	this	could	possibly
work.”

      He	moved	forward.	He	was	close,	so	close	to	embedding	himself	fully
within	her.	“May	I	tell	you	a	secret?”	he	returned.

      “Of	course.”

      “Your	secret”—one	more	little	thrust	and	he	was	resting	against	her
maidenhead—“wasn’t	very	much	of	a	secret.”

      Her	brows	drew	together	in	question.

      He	grinned.	“It	was	written	all	over	your	face.”

      She	scowled	again,	and	it	made	him	want	to	explode	in	laughter.	“But	now,”
he	said,	keeping	a	scrupulously	straight	face,	“I	have	a	question	for	you.”

      She	gazed	at	him	in	response,	clearly	waiting	for	him	to	elucidate	further.

      He	leaned	down,	brushed	his	lips	against	her	ear,	and	whispered,	“What	do
you	think	now?”

      For	a	moment	she	didn’t	respond	in	any	way,	then	he	felt	her	start	in	surprise
when	she	finally	figured	out	what	he	was	asking.	“Are	we	done?”	she	asked	in
clear	disbelief.

      This	time	he	did	burst	out	in	laughter.	“Far	from	it,	my	dear	wife,”	he
gasped,	wiping	his	eyes	with	one	hand	as	he	tried	to	hold	himself	up	with	the
other.	“Far,	far	from	it.”	His	eyes	growing	serious,	he	added,	“This	is	where	it
might	hurt	a	little,	Kate.	But	I	promise	you,	the	pain	will	never	be	repeated.”

      She	nodded,	but	he	could	feel	her	body	tense	up,	which	he	knew	would	only
make	it	worse.	“Shhh,”	he	crooned.	“Relax.”

280
make	it	worse.	“Shhh,”	 he	crooned.	“Relax.”

      She	nodded,	her	eyes	shut.	“I	am	relaxed.”

      He	was	glad	she	couldn’t	see	him	smile.	“You	 are	most	definitely	 not
relaxed.”

      Her	eyes	flew	open.	“Yes,	 I	am.”

      “I	 can’t	believe	this,”	 Anthony	 said,	as	if	there	were	someone	else	in	the
room	to	hear	him.	“She’s	arguing	with	 me	on	our	wedding	night.”

      “I’m—”

      He	cut	her	off	 with	a	finger	 to	her	lips.	“Are	 you	ticklish?”

      “Am	 I	ticklish?”

      He	nodded.	“Ticklish.”

      Her	eyes	narrowed	suspiciously.	“Why?”

      “That	 sounds	like	a	yes	to	me,”	he	said	with	a	grin.

      “Not	 at—Oooohhh!”	 She	let	out	a	squeal	as	one	of	his	hands	found	a
particularly	sensitive	spot	under	arm.	“Anthony,	 stop!”	 she	gasped,	squirming
desperately	beneath	him.	“I	can’t	bear	it!	I—”

      He	plunged	forward.

      “Oh,”	 she	breathed.	“Oh,	my.”

      He	groaned,	barely	able	to	believe	just	how	good	it	 felt	to	be	buried
completely	within	 her.	“Oh,	my,	 indeed.”

      “We’re	 not	done	now,	are	we?”

      He	shook	his	head	slowly	as	his	body	began	to	move	in	an	ancient	rhythm.
“Not	even	close,”	 he	murmured.

      His	mouth	took	 hers	as	one	of	his	hands	snaked	up	to	caress	her	breast.	She
was	utter	perfection	beneath	him,	her	hips	rising	to	meet	his,	moving	tentatively

281
was	utter	perfection	beneath	him,	her	hips	rising	to	meet	his,	moving	tentatively
at	first,	then	with	 a	vigor	that	matched	her	rising	passion.

      “Oh,	 God,	Kate,”	he	moaned,	his	ability	 to	form	flowery	 sentences
completely	lost	in	the	primitive	  heat	of	the	moment.	“You’re	 so	good.	So	good.”

      Her	breath	was	coming	faster	and	faster,	and	each	little	wispy	gasp	inflamed
his	passion	even	more.	He	wanted	to	possess	her,	to	own	her,	to	hold	her	beneath
him	and	never	let	her	go.	And	with	 each	thrust	it	was	getting	more	difficult	 to
put	her	needs	before	his.	His	mind	screamed	that	this	was	her	first	time	and	he
had	to	have	a	care	for	her,	but	his	body	demanded	release.

      With	 a	ragged	groan,	he	forced	himself	to	stop	thrusting	and	catch	his
breath.	“Kate?”	he	said,	barely	recognizing	his	own	 voice.	It	sounded	hoarse,
detached,	desperate.

      Her	eyes,	which	had	been	closed	as	her	head	tossed	from	side	to	side,	flew
open.	“Don’t	 stop,”	she	gasped,	“please	don’t	stop.	I’m	so	close	to	something…I
don’t	know	 what.”

      “Oh,	 God,”	he	groaned,	plunging	back	in	to	the	hilt,	 throwing	 his	head	back
as	his	spine	arched.	“You’re	so	beautiful,	so	unbelievably—Kate?”

      She’d	stiffened	beneath	him,	and	not	in	climax.

      He	froze.	“What’s	 wrong?”	 he	whispered.

      He	saw	a	brief	flash	of	 pain—the	emotional	sort,	not	the	physical—flash
across	her	face	before	she	hid	it	and	whispered,	“Nothing.”

      “That’s	 not	true,”	 he	said	in	a	low	voice.	His	arms	were	straining	from
holding	himself	 above	her,	but	he	barely	noticed.	Every	fiber	of	his	 being	was
focused	on	her	face,	which	was	shuttered	and	pained,	despite	her	obvious
attempts	to	hide	it.

      “You	 called	me	beautiful,”	 she	whispered.

      For	a	good	ten	seconds	he	just	stared	at	her.	For	the	life	of	him,	he	couldn’t
understand	how	that	was	a	bad	thing.	But	then	again,	he’d	never	professed	to
understand	the	female	mind.	He	thought	he	should	simply	reaffirm	 the
statement,	that	she	was	beautiful,	and	what	the	hell	was	the	problem,	but	a	little

282
voice	inside	warned	him	that	this	was	one	of	those	moments,	and	no	matter	what
he	said,	it	would	be	the	wrong	thing,	so	he	decided	to	tread	very,	very	carefully,
and	he	just	murmured	her	name,	which	he	had	a	feeling	might	be	the	only	word
guaranteed	not	to	get	him	into	trouble.

      “I’m	  not	beautiful,”	 she	whispered,	her	eyes	meeting	his.	She	looked
shattered	and	broken,	but	before	he	could	contradict	her,	she	asked,	“Who	were
you	picturing?”

      He	blinked.	 “I	beg	your	 pardon?”

      “Who	 do	you	think	 of	when	you	make	love	to	me?”

      Anthony	 felt	as	if	he’d	 been	punched	in	the	gut.	The	breath	whooshed	from
his	body.	“Kate,”	 he	said	slowly.	“Kate,	 you’re	 mad,	you’re—”

      “I	 know	a	man	doesn’t	have	to	feel	desire	for	a	woman	to	find	 pleasure	with
her,”	she	cried	out.

      “You	 think	 I	don’t	 desire	you?”	he	choked	out.	God	in	heaven,	he	was	ready
to	explode	right	now	within	 her	and	he	hadn’t	even	moved	for	the	last	thirty
seconds.

      Her	lower	 lip	trembled	between	her	teeth,	and	a	muscle	spasmed	in	her	neck.
“Do	you—do	 you	think	 of	Edwina?”

      Anthony	 froze.	“How	 could	I	 possibly	confuse	the	two	of	you?”

      Kate	felt	 her	face	crumple,	felt	hot	tears	stinging	at	her	eyes.	She	didn’t	want
to	cry	in	front	 of	him,	oh,	God,	especially	 not	now,	but	it	hurt,	 it	hurt	so	much,
and—

      His	hand	grasped	her	cheeks	with	stunning	speed,	forcing	her	to	look	up	at
him.

      “Listen	 to	me,”	he	said,	his	voice	even	and	intense,	“and	listen	well,	 because
I’m	only	 going	to	say	this	once.	I	desire	you.	I	burn	for	 you.	I	can’t	 sleep	at	night
for	wanting	you.	 Even	when	I	didn’t	 like	you,	I	 lusted	for	you.	It’s	 the	most
maddening,	beguiling,	damnable	thing,	but	there	it	is.	And	 if	I	 hear	one	more
word	of	nonsense	from	your	lips,	I’m	 going	 to	have	to	tie	you	to	the	bloody	bed

283
and	have	my	way	with	you	a	hundred	different	 ways,	until	you	 finally	 get	it
through	your	silly	 skull	that	you	 are	the	most	beautiful	and	desirable	woman	in
England,	and	if	everyone	else	doesn’t	see	that,	then	they’re	all	bloody	fools.”

      Kate	wouldn’t	 have	thought	it	 possible	for	her	mouth	to	fall	 open	while	she
was	lying	down,	but	somehow	it	 did.

      One	of	his	brows	arched	into	what	had	to	be	the	most	arrogant	expression
ever	to	grace	a	face.	“Is	that	understood?”

      She	just	stared	at	him,	not	quite	able	to	form	a	response.

      He	leaned	down	until	 his	nose	was	a	mere	inch	from	hers.	“Is	that
understood?”

      She	nodded.

      “Good,”	 he	grunted,	and	then,	before	she	had	a	moment	even	to	catch	her
breath,	his	lips	were	devouring	hers	in	a	kiss	so	fierce	she	was	clutching	the	bed
just	to	keep	from	screaming.	His	hips	ground	into	 hers,	frenzied	in	their	power,
thrusting,	rotating,	stroking	 her	until	she	was	certain	she	must	be	on	fire.

      She	clutched	at	him,	not	certain	whether	she	was	trying	to	bind	him	 to	her	or
tear	him	away.	“I	 can’t	do	this,”	 she	moaned,	certain	she	would	shatter.	Her
muscles	were	stiff,	tense,	and	it	was	getting	hard	to	breathe.

      But	if	 he’d	heard	her,	he	didn’t	care.	His	face	was	a	harsh	mask	of
concentration,	sweat	beading	on	his	brow.

      “Anthony,”	  she	gasped,	“I	can—”

      One	of	his	hands	slipped	between	them	and	touched	her	intimately,	and	she
screamed.	He	slammed	forward	one	last	time,	and	her	world	simply	fell	 apart.
She	was	stiff,	then	shaking,	then	she	thought	she	must	be	falling.	She	couldn’t
breathe,	couldn’t	even	gasp.	Her	throat	had	to	be	closing,	and	her	head	fell	back
as	her	hands	grabbed	at	the	mattress	with	a	ferocity	she’d	never	have	believed
she	possessed.

      He	went	utterly	 still	 above	her,	his	mouth	open	in	a	silent	scream,	and	then
he	collapsed,	the	weight	of	him	pressing	her	farther	into	the	mattress.

284
      “Oh,	 my	God,”	 he	gasped,	his	body	now	shaking.	“Never…it’s	 never…so
good…it’s	 never	been	so	good.”

      Kate,	who’d	 had	a	few	seconds	longer	to	recover,	smiled	as	she	smoothed
his	hair.	A	wicked	 thought	came	to	her,	a	perfectly	wonderful	 wicked	thought.
“Anthony?”	 she	murmured.

      How	 he	lifted	his	head	she	would	never	know,	because	it	looked	like	it	 took
a	Herculean	effort	just	to	open	his	eyes	and	grunt	his	response.

      She	smiled,	slowly,	 and	with	a	womanly	seductiveness	she’d	learned	just
that	evening.	Letting	one	of	her	fingers	trail	 down	the	angular	edge	of	his	jaw,
she	whispered,	“Are	we	done	yet?”

      For	a	second	he	made	no	response,	then	his	lips	broke	into	a	smile	far	more
devilish	than	she	could	ever	have	imagined.	“For	now,”	 he	murmured	huskily,
rolling	 onto	his	side	and	pulling	her	along	with	 him.	“But	 only	for	 now.”

285
Chapter	     18


Although	gossip	still	surrounds	 the	hasty	marriage	of	Lord	 and	Lady	Bridgerton
(formerly	Miss	Katharine	 Sheffield,	for	 those	of	you	who	have	been	in
hibernation	for	 these	past	few	weeks),	This	Author	is	of	the	firm	opinion	that
theirs	was	a	love	match.	Viscount	Bridgerton	 does	not	escort	his	wife	to	every
society	function	(but	then	again,	what	husband	does?),	but	when	he	is	present,
This	Author	cannot	fail	 to	note	that	he	always	seems	to	be	murmuring	something
in	his	lady’s	ear,	and	that	 something	always	seems	to	make	her	smile	and	blush.

      Furthermore,	 he	always	dances	with	her	one	more	time	than	is	considered
de	rigueur.	Considering	how	 many	husbands	don’t	like	to	dance	with	their	 wives
at	all,	this	is	romantic	 stuff,	indeed.

                                                      LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	10	JUNE	1814



The	 next	few	 weeks	flew	by	in	a	delirious	 rush.	After	a	brief	 stay	in	the	country
at	Aubrey	Hall,	 the	newlyweds	returned	to	London,	where	the	season	was	in	full
swing.	Kate	had	hoped	to	use	her	afternoons	to	resume	her	flute	lessons,	but	she
quickly	discovered	that	she	was	in	great	demand,	and	her	days	were	filled	with
social	calls,	shopping	excursions	with	her	family,	 and	the	occasional	ride	in	the
park.	Her	evenings	were	a	whirlwind	 of	balls	and	parties.

      But	her	nights	were	for	 Anthony	alone.

      Marriage,	she	decided,	agreed	with	her.	She	saw	less	of	Anthony	than	she
would	have	liked,	but	she	understood	and	accepted	that	he	was	a	very	busy	man.
His	many	concerns,	both	in	Parliament	and	on	his	estates,	took	up	a	great	deal	of
his	time.	But	when	he	returned	home	at	night	and	met	her	in	the	bedroom	(no
separate	bedchambers	for	Lord	and	Lady	Bridgerton!)	he	was	marvelously
attentive,	asking	about	her	day,	telling	her	of	his,	and	making	love	 to	her	until
the	wee	hours	of	the	night.

      He’d	 even	taken	the	time	to	listen	to	her	practice	her	flute.	She’d	managed	to
hire	a	musician	to	come	and	tutor	her	two	mornings	a	week.	Considering	the	(not
very	expert)	level	of	 play	which	Kate	had	achieved,	Anthony’s	 willingness	 to	sit
through	an	entire	thirty	minutes	of	 rehearsal	could	only	be	interpreted	as	a	sign

286
through	an	entire	thirty	minutes	of	 rehearsal	could	only	be	interpreted	as	a	sign
of	great	affection.

      Of	course,	it	did	 not	escape	her	notice	that	he’d	never	repeated	the	gesture.

      Hers	was	a	fine	existence,	a	far	better	marriage	than	most	women	of	her
station	could	expect.	If	her	husband	did	not	love	her,	if	 he	would	never	love	her,
then	at	least	he	did	a	good	job	of	making	her	feel	cared	for	and	appreciated.	And
for	now	Kate	was	able	to	content	herself	with	 that.

      And	if	 he	seemed	distant	during	the	day,	well,	he	certainly	wasn’t	 distant	at
night.

      The	rest	of	society,	however,	and	Edwina	in	 particular,	had	gotten	it	into
their	heads	that	Lord	and	Lady	Bridgerton’s	 marriage	was	a	love	match.	Edwina
had	taken	to	visiting	in	the	afternoons,	and	this	day	was	no	exception.	She	and
Kate	were	sitting	in	the	drawing	 room,	sipping	tea	and	nibbling	 on	biscuits,
enjoying	a	rare	moment	of	privacy	 now	that	Kate	had	bidden	farewell	to	her
daily	swarm	of	visitors.

      Everyone,	it	seemed,	wanted	to	see	how	the	new	viscountess	was	getting
along,	and	Kate’s	drawing	room	was	almost	never	empty	in	the	afternoon.

      Newton	had	hopped	up	onto	the	sofa	beside	Edwina,	and	she	was	idly
stroking	his	fur	as	she	said,	“Everyone	is	talking	 about	you	today.”

      Kate	didn’t	 even	pause	as	she	lifted	her	tea	to	her	lips	and	took	a	sip.
“Everyone	is	always	talking	 about	me,”	she	said	with	a	shrug.	“They’ll	  soon	find
another	topic.”

      “Not,”	 Edwina	 replied,	“as	long	as	your	husband	keeps	looking	at	you	the
way	he	did	last	night.”

      Kate	felt	 her	cheeks	grow	warm.	“He	did	nothing	 out	of	the	ordinary,”	 she
murmured.

      “Kate,	 he	was	positively	smoldering!”	 Edwina	 shifted	her	position	as
Newton	shifted	his,	letting	 her	know	with	 a	little	whine	 that	he	wanted	his	belly
rubbed.	“I	personally	saw	him	 push	Lord	Haveridge	out	of	the	way	 in	his	haste
to	reach	your	side.”

287
      “We	 arrived	separately,”	Kate	explained,	although	her	heart	was	filling	 with
a	secret—and	most	probably	foolish—joy.	 “I’m	 sure	he	just	had	something	he
needed	to	tell	me.”

      Edwina	looked	 dubious.	“And	 did	he?”

      “Did	 he	what?”

      “Tell	 you	something,”	 Edwina	said	with	 palpable	exasperation.	“You	just
said	you	were	sure	he	just	had	something	he	needed	to	tell	you.	If	that	were	the
case,	wouldn’t	he	have	told	you	whatever	it	was?	And	then	you’d	 know	he	had
something	to	tell	you,	right?”

      Kate	blinked.	 “Edwina,	 you’re	making	 me	dizzy.”

      Edwina’s	 lips	smooshed	together	in	a	disgruntled	frown.	“You	 never	tell	 me
anything.”

      “Edwina,	 there’s	nothing	to	tell!”	  Kate	reached	forward,	grabbed	a	biscuit,
and	took	a	large,	extremely	uncouth	bite	so	that	her	mouth	would	be	too	full	 to
speak.	What	was	she	supposed	to	say	to	her	sister—that	before	they’d	even	wed,
her	husband	had	informed	her	in	a	most	matter-of-fact	and	straightforward
manner	that	he	would	never	love	her?

      That	would	 make	for	charming	conversation	over	tea	and	biscuits.

      “Well,”	  Edwina	finally	 announced,	after	watching	Kate	chew	for	 an
improbable	full	 minute,	“I	 actually	had	another	reason	for	coming	here	today.	I
have	something	I	wish	to	tell	you.”

      Kate	swallowed	 gratefully.	“Really?”

      Edwina	nodded,	then	blushed.

      “What	 is	it?”	 Kate	implored,	sipping	 at	her	tea.	Her	mouth	was	awfully	dry
after	all	that	chewing.

      “I	 think	I’m	 in	 love.”

      Kate	nearly	spit	out	her	tea.	“With	 whom?”

288
      “Mr.	 Bagwell.”

      Try	 as	she	might,	Kate	could	not	for	the	life	 of	her	recall	who	Mr.	 Bagwell
was.

      “He’s	 a	scholar,”	Edwina	said	with	 a	dreamy	sigh.	“I	 met	him	at	Lady
Bridgerton’s	country	 house	party.”

      “I	 don’t	recall	 meeting	him,”	 Kate	said,	her	brow	knitting	 into	thoughtful
lines.

      “You	 were	rather	busy	throughout	the	visit,”	 Edwina	replied	 in	an	ironic
voice.	“Getting	 yourself	betrothed	and	all	that.”

      Kate	pulled	the	sort	of	 face	one	could	only	display	with	 a	sibling.	“Just	tell
me	about	Mr.	Bagwell.”

      Edwina’s	 eyes	grew	warm	and	bright.	“He’s	 a	second	son,	I’m	afraid,	so	he
cannot	expect	much	in	the	way	of	income.	But	now	 that	you’ve	married	so	well,
I	needn’t	worry	 about	that.”

      Kate	felt	 an	unexpected	welling	of	tears	in	her	eyes.	She	hadn’t	realized	just
how	pressured	Edwina	must	have	felt	earlier	that	season.	She	and	Mary	had	been
careful	to	assure	Edwina	that	she	might	marry	anyone	she	liked,	but	they	had	all
known	exactly	where	their	finances	stood,	and	they	had	certainly	all	 been	guilty
of	making	jokes	about	how	it	 was	just	as	easy	to	fall	in	love	with	 a	wealthy	man
as	it	was	with	a	poor	one.

      It	only	 took	one	look	at	Edwina’s	 face	to	realize	that	a	huge	burden	had	been
lifted	from	 her	shoulders.

      “I’m	  glad	you’ve	found	 someone	who	suits	you,”	Kate	murmured.

      “Oh,	 he	does.	I	know	that	we	shall	not	have	much	in	the	way	of	money,	but
truly,	I	 don’t	need	silks	and	jewels.”	Her	 eyes	fell	on	the	glittering	 diamond	on
Kate’s	hand.	“Not	 that	I	think	you	 do,	of	course!”	she	quickly	 interjected,	her
face	growing	red.	“Just	that—”

      “Just	that	it’s	 nice	not	to	have	to	worry	 about	supporting	your	sister	and
mother,”	Kate	finished	 for	her	in	a	gentle	voice.

289
      Edwina	let	 out	a	huge	sigh.	“Exactly.”

      Kate	reached	across	the	table	and	took	her	sister’s	hands	in	hers.	“You
certainly	needn’t	worry	 about	me,	and	I’m	sure	that	Anthony	 and	I	will	 always
be	able	to	provide	for	Mary,	 should	she	ever	need	assistance.”

      Edwina’s	 lips	curved	into	a	wobbly	 smile.

      “As	 for	you,”	 Kate	added,	“I	think	 it’s	 high	time	you	were	able	to	think	 only
of	yourself	for	 a	change.	To	make	a	decision	based	on	what	you	desire,	not	what
you	think	others	need.”

      Edwina	pulled	 one	of	her	hands	free	to	brush	back	a	tear.	“I	really	like	him,”
she	whispered.

      “Then	 I	am	certain	I	will	 like	 him	as	well,”	 Kate	said	firmly.	 “When	 may	I
meet	him?”

      “He	 is	in	Oxford	 for	the	next	fortnight,	 I’m	 afraid.	He	has	prior
commitments	which	I	 should	not	want	him	to	break	on	my	 account.”

      “Of	 course	not,”	Kate	murmured.	 “You	 wouldn’t	 want	to	marry	the	sort	of
gentleman	who	does	not	honor	his	commitments.”

      Edwina	nodded	in	agreement.	“I	 received	a	letter	from	him	this	 morning,
though,	and	he	says	he	will	come	down	to	London	at	the	end	of	the	month	and
hopes	that	he	might	call	on	me.”

      Kate	smiled	wickedly.	 “He’s	 already	sending	you	letters?”

      Edwina	nodded	and	blushed.	“Several	per	week,”	she	admitted.

      “And	 what	is	his	area	of	study?”

      “Archaeology.	 He’s	quite	 brilliant.	 He	has	been	to	Greece.	Twice!”

      Kate	hadn’t	thought	 that	her	sister—already	renowned	throughout	the	land
for	her	beauty—could	possibly	 grow	any	lovelier,	 but	when	Edwina	spoke	of	her
Mr.	Bagwell,	 her	face	shone	with	a	radiance	that	was	nothing	short	of	heart-
stopping.

290
      “I	 cannot	wait	to	meet	him,”	 Kate	announced.	“We	must	have	an	informal
dinner	party	with	 him	as	our	guest	of	honor.”

      “That	 would	be	wonderful.”

      “And	 perhaps	the	three	of	us	might	go	for	a	ride	in	the	park	ahead	of	time	so
that	we	might	become	better	acquainted.	Now	that	I	am	an	old	married	lady,	I
qualify	as	a	suitable	chaperone.”	Kate	let	out	a	little	 laugh.	“Isn’t	 that	funny?”

      A	very	 amused,	very	male	voice	sounded	from	the	doorway:	“Isn’t	 what
funny?”

      “Anthony!”	  Kate	exclaimed,	surprised	to	see	her	husband	in	the	middle	of
the	day.	He	always	seemed	to	have	appointments	and	meetings	that	kept	him
from	their	home.	“How	 delightful	 to	see	you.”

      He	smiled	slightly	 as	he	nodded	toward	Edwina	in	greeting.	“I	 found	myself
with	an	unexpected	block	of	free	time.”

      “Would	 you	care	to	join	 us	for	tea?”

      “I’ll	  join	 you,”	he	murmured	as	he	crossed	the	room	and	picked	up	a	crystal
decanter	that	sat	on	a	mahogany	side	table,	“but	I	believe	I’ll	have	a	brandy
instead.”

      Kate	watched	as	he	poured	himself	a	drink,	then	swirled	it	 absently	in	his
hand.	It	was	at	times	like	these	that	she	found	it	so	difficult	 to	keep	her	heart	out
of	her	eyes.	He	was	so	handsome	in	the	late	afternoon.	She	wasn’t	sure	why;
maybe	it	was	the	faint	hint	of	 stubble	on	his	cheeks	or	the	fact	that	his	hair	was
always	slightly	 mussed	from	whatever	it	was	he	did	all	day.	Or	maybe	it	was
simply	that	she	didn’t	 often	get	to	see	him	this	time	of	day;	she’d	once	read	a
poem	that	said	the	unexpected	moment	was	always	sweeter.

      As	Kate	gazed	upon	her	husband,	she	rather	thought	that	poet	might	be	right.

      “So,”	 Anthony	 said	after	taking	a	sip	of	his	drink,	 “what	have	you	two	 ladies
been	discussing?”

      Kate	looked	to	her	sister	for	 permission	to	share	her	news,	and	when	Edwina
nodded,	she	said,	“Edwina	has	met	a	gentleman	she	fancies.”

291
      “Really?”	 Anthony	 asked,	sounding	interested	in	a	strangely	paternal	sort	of
manner.	He	perched	on	the	arm	of	Kate’s	chair,	a	relaxed,	overstuffed	piece	of
furniture	that	was	not	at	all	in	 fashion	but	well	loved	 nonetheless	in	the
Bridgerton	household	for	its	 uncommon	comfort.	“I	 should	like	 to	meet	him,”	 he
added.

      “You	 should?”	Edwina	 echoed,	blinking	like	 an	owl.	“You	 would?”

      “Of	 course.	In	fact,	I	insist	 upon	it.”	When	 neither	lady	commented,	he
scowled	a	bit	and	added,	“I	am	the	head	of	the	family,	after	all.	 That’s	what	we
do.”

      Edwina’s	 lips	parted	with	surprise.	“I—I	  hadn’t	realized	you	felt	 a
responsibility	toward	 me.”

      Anthony	 looked	at	her	as	if	she’d	gone	momentarily	insane.	“You’re	 Kate’s
sister,”	he	said,	as	if	that	should	explain	everything.

      Edwina’s	 blank	expression	remained	fixed	on	her	face	for	another	second,
and	then	it	melted	into	a	rather	radiant	delight.	“I	 have	always	wondered	what	it
would	be	like	to	have	a	brother,”	 she	said.

      “I	 hope	I	pass	muster,”	Anthony	grunted,	not	entirely	 comfortable	with	 the
sudden	outpouring	of	emotion.

      She	beamed	at	him.	“Brilliantly.	  I	vow	 I	do	not	understand	why	Eloise
complains	so	much.”

      Kate	turned	to	Anthony	 and	explained,	“Edwina	 and	your	sister	have
become	fast	friends	since	our	marriage.”

      “God	 help	us,”	he	muttered.	“And	 what,	may	I	ask,	could	Eloise	possibly
have	to	complain	about?”

      Edwina	smiled	 innocently.	“Oh,	 nothing,	really.	 Just	that	you	can,	at	times,
be	a	touch	overprotective.”

      “That’s	 ridiculous,”	 he	scoffed.

      Kate	choked	on	her	tea.	She	was	quite	certain	that	by	the	time	their
daughters	were	of	marriageable	age,	Anthony	would	have	converted	to

292
daughters	were	of	marriageable	age,	Anthony	would	have	converted	to
Catholicism	just	so	that	he	could	lock	them	in	 a	convent	with	twelve-foot	 walls!

      Anthony	 glanced	at	her	with	narrowed	eyes.	“What	are	you	laughing	about?”

      Kate	quickly	 patted	her	mouth	with	 a	napkin,	mumbling,	“Nothing,”	  under
the	folds	of	the	cloth.

      “Hmmmph.”

      “Eloise	 says	that	you	were	quite	the	bear	when	Daphne	was	being	courted	by
Simon,”	Edwina	 said.

      “Oh,	 did	she?”

      Edwina	nodded.	“She	says	the	two	of	you	dueled!”

      “Eloise	 talks	too	much,”	 Anthony	grumbled.

      Edwina	nodded	happily.	 “She	always	knows	everything.	Everything!	 Even
more	than	Lady	Whistledown.”

      Anthony	 turned	to	Kate	with	 an	expression	that	was	one	part	beleaguered
and	one	part	pure	irony.	“Remind	me	to	buy	a	muzzle	for	 my	sister,”	he	said
drolly.	“And	 one	for	 your	sister	as	well.”

      Edwina	let	 out	a	musical	laugh.	“I	never	dreamed	a	brother	would	be	as
much	fun	to	tease	as	a	sister.	I’m	so	glad	you	decided	to	marry	him,	Kate.”

      “I	 didn’t	 have	much	choice	in	the	matter,”	Kate	said	with	 a	dry	smile,	“but
I’m	rather	pleased	with	the	way	things	 turned	out	myself.”

      Edwina	stood,	waking	 up	Newton,	who	had	fallen	 into	blissful	 sleep	next	to
her	on	the	sofa.	He	let	out	an	affronted	whine	and	toddled	to	the	floor,	where	he
promptly	curled	up	under	a	table.

      Edwina	watched	the	dog	and	chuckled	before	saying,	“I	 should	be	going.
No,	don’t	see	me	out,”	she	added	when	both	Kate	and	Anthony	stood	to	escort
her	to	the	front	door.	“I	 can	make	my	own	way.”

      “Nonsense,”	Kate	 said,	linking	her	arm	in	 Edwina’s.	“Anthony,	  I	shall	be
right	back.”

293
right	back.”

      “I	 shall	be	counting	the	seconds,”	he	murmured,	and	then,	as	he	took	another
sip	of	his	drink,	 the	two	ladies	left	the	room,	followed	 by	Newton,	 who	was	now
barking	enthusiastically,	presumably	guessing	that	someone	was	going	to	take
him	for	a	walk.

      Once	the	two	sisters	were	gone,	he	settled	into	the	comfortable	chair	so
recently	vacated	by	Kate.	It	was	still	 warm	from	her	body,	and	he	rather	fancied
that	he	could	smell	her	scent	in	the	fabric.	More	soap	than	lilies	this	time,	 he
thought	with	a	careful	sniff.	 Perhaps	the	lilies	were	a	perfume,	something	she
added	at	night.

      He	wasn’t	entirely	 sure	why	he’d	returned	home	this	afternoon;	he	certainly
hadn’t	intended	to.	Contrary	to	what	he’d	 been	telling	Kate,	his	many	meetings
and	responsibilities	did	not	require	him	 to	be	away	from	the	house	all	the	day
long;	quite	a	few	of	his	 appointments	could	easily	have	been	scheduled	at	home.
And	while	 he	was	indeed	a	busy	man—he’d	never	subscribed	to	the	indolent
lifestyle	of	 so	many	of	the	ton—he’d	spent	many	a	recent	afternoon	at	White’s,
reading	the	paper	and	playing	cards	with	his	friends.

      He’d	 thought	it	best.	It	was	important	to	 keep	a	certain	distance	from	one’s
wife.	Life—or	  at	least	his	life—was	meant	to	be	compartmentalized,	and	a	wife
fit	rather	neatly	in	 the	sections	he’d	mentally	labeled	“society	affairs”	 and	“bed.”

      But	when	he’d	 reached	White’s	that	afternoon,	there	was	no	one	there	with
whom	he	felt	a	particular	urge	to	converse.	He’d	skimmed	 through	the	paper,	but
there	was	very	little	of	 interest	in	the	most	recent	edition.	And	as	he	sat	by	the
window,	trying	 to	enjoy	his	own	 company	(but	finding	 it	pathetically	 lacking),
he’d	been	struck	by	the	most	ridiculous	urge	to	return	home	and	see	what	Kate
was	up	to.

      One	afternoon	couldn’t	 hurt.	He	wasn’t	likely	 to	 fall	in	 love	with	 his	wife	for
having	spent	one	afternoon	in	her	presence.	Not	that	he	thought	there	was	a
danger	of	his	falling	in	 love	with	 her	at	all,	he	reminded	himself	sternly.	He’d
been	married	nearly	a	month	now	and	he’d	managed	to	keep	his	life	blessedly
free	of	such	entanglements.	There	was	no	reason	to	think	that	he	could	not
maintain	the	status	quo	indefinitely.

      Feeling	rather	satisfied	with	 himself,	he	took	another	sip	of	his	brandy,
looking	up	when	he	heard	Kate	reenter	the	room.

294
looking	up	when	he	heard	Kate	reenter	the	room.

      “I	 do	think	Edwina	 might	be	in	love,”	 she	said,	her	entire	face	lit	up	with	 a
radiant	smile.

      Anthony	 felt	his	body	tighten	 in	response.	It	was	rather	ridiculous,	actually,
how	he	reacted	to	her	smiles.	Happened	all	the	time,	and	it	was	a	damned
nuisance.

      Well,	 most	of	the	time	it	 was	a	nuisance.	He	didn’t	mind	it	much	when	he
was	able	to	follow	it	 with	 a	nudge	and	a	trip	to	the	bedroom.

      But	Kate’s	 mind	was	obviously	 not	lodged	as	firmly	 in	the	gutter	as	his,
since	she	chose	to	sit	in	the	chair	opposite	him,	even	though	there	was	plenty	of
room	in	his	chair,	provided	 they	didn’t	 mind	squeezing	next	to	each	other.	Even
the	chair	kitty-corner	 to	his	would	have	been	better;	at	least	then	he	could	have
yanked	her	up	and	hauled	her	onto	his	lap.	If	he	tried	that	maneuver	where	she
was	seated	across	the	table,	he’d	have	to	drag	her	through	the	middle	of	the	tea
service.

      Anthony	 narrowed	his	eyes	as	he	assessed	the	situation,	trying	to	guess
exactly	how	much	tea	would	spill	 on	the	rug,	and	then	how	much	it	would	 cost
to	replace	the	rug,	and	then	whether	he	really	cared	about	such	a	piddling
amount	of	money,	anyway…

      “Anthony?	 Are	you	 listening	to	me?”

      He	looked	up.	Kate	was	resting	her	arms	on	her	knees	as	she	leaned	forward
to	talk	with	 him.	She	looked	very	intent	and	just	a	little	 bit	irritated.

      “Were	 you?”	she	persisted.

      He	blinked.

      “Listening	 to	me?”	she	ground	out.

      “Oh.”	 He	grinned.	“No.”

      She	rolled	her	eyes	but	didn’t	bother	to	scold	him	 any	further	than	that.	“I
was	saying	that	we	should	have	Edwina	and	her	young	man	over	for	dinner	one
night.	To	see	if	we	think	 they	suit.	I	have	never	before	seen	her	so	interested	in	a
gentleman,	and	I	do	so	want	her	to	be	happy.”

295
gentleman,	and	I	do	so	want	her	to	be	happy.”

      Anthony	 reached	for	a	biscuit.	He	was	hungry,	and	he’d	pretty	much	given
up	on	the	prospect	of	getting	his	wife	into	 his	lap.	On	the	other	hand,	if	he
managed	to	clear	off	the	cups	and	saucers,	yanking	her	across	the	table	might	not
have	such	messy	consequences…

      He	surreptitiously	 pushed	the	tray	bearing	the	tea	service	to	the	side.
“Hmmm?”	 he	grunted,	chewing	on	the	biscuit.	“Oh,	 yes,	of	course.	Edwina
should	be	happy.”

      Kate	eyed	him	suspiciously.	 “Are	you	 certain	you	don’t	want	 some	tea	with
that	biscuit?	I’m	 not	a	great	aficionado	of	brandy,	but	I	would	 imagine	that	tea
would	taste	better	with	shortbread.”

      Actually,	 Anthony	 thought,	the	brandy	did	quite	well	 with	 shortbread,	but	it
certainly	couldn’t	 hurt	to	empty	out	the	teapot	a	bit,	just	in	 case	he	toppled	it
over.	“Capital	idea,”	 he	said,	grabbing	a	teacup	and	thrusting	it	toward	her.
“Tea’s	just	the	thing.	 Can’t	imagine	why	 I	didn’t	 think	of	 it	earlier.”

      “I	 can’t	imagine,	either,”	 she	murmured	acerbically—if	 one	could	murmur	 in
an	acerbic	manner,	and	after	hearing	Kate’s	low	sarcasm,	Anthony	rather
thought	one	could.

      But	he	just	gave	her	a	jovial	smile	 as	he	reached	out	and	took	his	teacup
from	her	outstretched	hand.	“Thank	you,”	 he	said,	checking	to	see	that	she’d
added	milk.	She	had,	which	didn’t	 surprise	him;	she	was	very	good	at
remembering	such	details.

      “Is	 it	still	 hot	enough?”	Kate	asked	politely.

      Anthony	 drained	the	cup.	“Perfect,”	he	replied,	letting	 out	a	satisfied	exhale.
“Might	 I	trouble	 you	for	some	more?”

      “You	 seem	to	be	developing	quite	a	taste	for	tea,”	she	said	dryly.

      Anthony	 eyed	the	teapot,	wondering	how	much	was	left	and	whether	he’d	be
able	to	finish	it	 off	without	 being	attacked	by	an	urgent	need	to	relieve	himself.
“You	 should	have	some	more,	too,”	he	suggested.	“You	look	a	bit	parched.”

      Her	eyebrows	shot	up.	“Is	that	so?”

296
      Her	eyebrows	shot	up.	“Is	that	so?”

      He	nodded,	then	worried	he	might	have	laid	 it	on	a	little	 too	thick.	“Just	a
bit,	of	course,”	he	said.

      “Of	 course.”

      “Is	 there	enough	tea	left	for	me	to	have	another	cup?”	he	asked,	as
nonchalantly	as	he	could	manage.

      “If	 there	isn’t,	 I’m	 sure	I	could	have	Cook	brew	another	pot.”

      “Oh,	 no,	I’m	 sure	that	won’t	be	necessary,”	he	exclaimed,	probably	a	little
too	loudly.	“I’ll	  just	 take	whatever	is	left.”

      Kate	tipped	the	pot	until	 the	last	dregs	of	tea	swirled	in	his	cup.	She	added	a
dollop	of	milk,	 then	handed	it	back	to	him	in	 silence,	although	her	arched
eyebrows	spoke	volumes.

      As	he	sipped	at	his	tea—his	belly	was	a	little	 too	full	 to	gulp	it	 down	as
quickly	as	the	last	cup—Kate	cleared	her	throat	and	asked,	“Do	you	know
Edwina’s	young	man?”

      “I	 don’t	even	know	 who	he	is.”

      “Oh.	 I’m	 sorry.	I	must	have	forgotten	to	mention	his	 name.	It’s	Mr.	 Bagwell.
I	don’t	know	 his	Christian	name,	but	Edwina	said	he’s	a	second	son,	if	that’s
helpful.	She	met	him	at	your	mother’s	 party.”

      Anthony	 shook	his	head.	“Never	heard	of	him.	He’s	 probably	one	of	the
poor	chaps	my	mother	invited	to	even	out	the	numbers.	My	mother	invited	 a
bloody	lot	of	 women.	She	always	does,	hoping	that	one	of	us	might	actually	fall
in	love,	but	then	she	has	to	find	a	pack	of	unremarkable	men	to	even	up	the
numbers.”

      “Unremarkable?”	 Kate	echoed.

      “So	that	the	women	don’t	 fall	 in	love	with	 them	instead	of	us,”	he	replied,
his	grin	rather	lopsided.

      “She’s	rather	desperate	to	marry	the	lot	of	you	off,	 isn’t	 she?”

297
      “All	 I	know,”	Anthony	said	with	a	shrug,	“is	that	my	mother	invited	so	many
eligible	women	last	time	that	she	had	to	go	down	to	the	vicar’s	and	beg	his
sixteen-year-old	son	to	come	up	for	supper.”

      Kate	winced.	“I	think	I	met	him.”

      “Yes,	he’s	painfully	shy,	poor	fellow.	The	vicar	told	me	he	had	hives	for	a
week	after	ending	up	seated	next	to	Cressida	Cowper	at	supper.”

      “Well,	that	would	give	anyone	hives.”

      Anthony	grinned.	“I	knew	you	had	a	mean	streak	in	you.”

      “I’m	not	being	mean!”	Kate	protested.	But	her	smile	was	sly.	“It	was
nothing	more	than	the	truth.”

      “Don’t	defend	yourself	on	my	account.”	He	finished	the	tea;	it	was	bitterly
strong	from	having	sat	in	the	pot	for	so	long,	but	the	milk	made	it	almost
palatable.	Setting	the	cup	down,	he	added,	“Your	mean	streak	is	one	of	the
things	I	like	best	about	you.”

      “Goodness,”	she	muttered,	“I	should	hate	to	know	what	you	like	least.”

      Anthony	just	waved	a	dismissive	hand	in	the	air.	“But	getting	back	to	your
sister	and	her	Mr.	Bugwell—”

      “Bagwell.”

      “Pity.”

      “Anthony!”

      He	ignored	her.	“I’ve	actually	been	thinking	I	ought	to	provide	Edwina	with
a	dowry.”

      The	irony	of	the	gesture	was	not	lost	on	him.	Back	when	he’d	intended	to
wed	Edwina,	he’d	planned	to	provide	a	dowry	for	Kate.

      He	peeked	over	at	Kate	to	see	her	reaction.

      He	hadn’t,	of	course,	made	the	offer	just	to	gain	her	good	favor,	but	he
wasn’t	so	noble	that	he	couldn’t	admit	to	himself	that	he’d	been	hoping	for	a

298
wasn’t	so	noble	that	he	couldn’t	admit	 to	himself	that	he’d	been	hoping	for	 a
little	more	than	the	stunned	silence	she	was	displaying.

      Then	he	realized	she	was	near	tears.

      “Kate?”	 he	asked,	not	certain	whether	to	be	delighted	or	worried.

      She	wiped	her	nose	rather	inelegantly	with	the	back	of	her	hand.	“That’s	 the
nicest	thing	anyone	has	ever	done	for	me,”	she	sniffled.

      “I	 actually	did	 it	for	Edwina,”	 he	mumbled,	never	comfortable	 with	weepy
females.	But	inside,	she	was	making	him	feel	about	eight	feet	tall.

      “Oh,	 Anthony!”	 she	practically	 wailed.	And	then,	much	to	his	extreme
surprise,	she	jumped	to	her	feet	and	leaped	across	the	table	and	into	his	arms,	the
heavy	hem	of	her	afternoon	dress	sweeping	three	teacups,	two	saucers,	and	a
spoon	onto	the	floor.

      “You	 are	so	sweet,”	she	said,	wiping	at	her	eyes	as	she	landed	rather	solidly
in	his	lap.	“The	nicest	man	in	London.”

      “Well,	 I	 don’t	know	 about	that,”	he	returned,	sliding	his	arm	around	her
waist.	“The	most	dangerous,	perhaps,	or	handsome—”

      “Nicest,”	 she	interrupted	firmly,	 tucking	 her	head	into	the	crook	of	his	neck.
“Definitely	 the	nicest.”

      “If	 you	insist,”	 he	murmured,	not	at	all	unhappy	with	 the	recent	turn	of
events.

      “It’s	 a	good	thing	we	finished	 that	tea,”	Kate	said,	eyeing	the	cups	on	the
floor.	“It	 would	 have	made	a	dreadful	mess.”

      “Oh,	 indeed.”	He	smiled	to	himself	 as	he	pulled	her	closer.	There	was
something	warm	and	comfortable	about	holding	Kate.	Her	 legs	were	dangling
over	the	arm	of	the	chair	and	her	back	was	resting	against	the	curve	of	his	arm.
They	fit	together	nicely,	 he	realized.	She	was	just	the	right	size	for	a	man	of	his
proportions.

      There	were	a	lot	of	things	about	her	that	were	just	right.	 It	was	the	sort	of

299
realization	that	usually	terrified	 him,	but	at	that	moment	he	was	so	damned
happy	just	sitting	here	with	her	in	 his	lap	that	he	simply	refused	to	think	 about
the	future.

      “You	 are	so	good	to	me,”	she	murmured.

      Anthony	 thought	of	all	 the	times	he’d	purposely	stayed	away,	all	the	times
he’d	left	her	to	her	own	devices,	but	he	pushed	away	the	guilt.	If	 he	was	forcing
a	distance	between	them,	it	was	for	her	own	good.	He	didn’t	want	her	to	fall	 in
love	with	him.	 It	would	 make	it	that	much	harder	for	her	when	he	died.

      And	if	 he	fell	 in	love	with	 her…

      He	didn’t	 even	want	to	think	about	how	 much	harder	it	would	be	for	 him.

      “Do	 we	have	any	plans	for	this	evening?”	he	whispered	in	her	ear.

      She	nodded;	the	motion	caused	her	hair	to	tickle	his	cheek.	“A	 ball,”	she
said.	“At	Lady	 Mottram’s.”

      Anthony	 couldn’t	 resist	the	soft	silkiness	of	her	hair,	and	he	threaded	two
fingers	through	it,	letting	 it	slide	across	his	hand	and	wrap	around	his	wrist.	“Do
you	know	what	I	 think?”	 he	murmured.

      He	heard	her	smile	as	she	asked,	“What?”

      “I	 think	I’ve	 never	cared	that	much	for	Lady	 Mottram.	And	 do	you	know
what	else	I	think?”

      Now	 he	heard	her	trying	not	to	giggle.	“What?”

      “I	 think	we	 should	go	upstairs.”

      “You	 do?”	she	asked,	clearly	feigning	ignorance.

      “Oh,	 indeed.	This	very	minute,	as	a	matter	of	fact.”

      She	wiggled	her	bottom,	the	minx,	 ascertaining	for	herself	just	how	 quickly
he	needed	to	go	upstairs.	“I	see,”	she	murmured	gravely.

      He	pinched	her	hip	lightly.	 “I	 rather	thought	you	 felt.”

300
      “Well,	that,	too,”	she	admitted.	“It	was	quite	enlightening.”

      “I’m	sure	it	was,”	he	muttered.	Then,	with	a	very	wicked	smile,	he	nudged
her	chin	until	they	were	nose	to	nose.	“Do	you	know	what	else	I	think?”	he	said
huskily.

      Her	eyes	widened.	“I’m	sure	I	can’t	imagine.”

      “I	think,”	he	said,	one	of	his	hands	creeping	under	her	dress	and	slithering	up
her	leg,	“that	if	we	don’t	go	upstairs	this	instant,	I	might	be	content	to	remain
right	here.”

      “Here?”	she	squeaked.

      His	hand	found	the	edge	of	her	stockings.	“Here,”	he	affirmed.

      “Now?”

      His	fingers	tickled	her	soft	thatch	of	hair,	then	sank	into	the	very	core	of	her
womanhood.	She	was	soft	and	wet	and	felt	like	heaven.	“Oh,	most	definitely
now,”	he	said.

      “Here?”

      He	nibbled	on	her	lips.	“Didn’t	I	already	answer	that	question?”

      And	if	she	had	any	further	questions,	she	didn’t	voice	them	for	the	next	hour.

      Or	maybe	it	was	just	that	he	was	trying	his	damnedest	to	rob	her	of	speech.

      And	if	a	man	could	judge	from	the	little	squeals	and	mewls	that	slipped	from
her	mouth,	he	was	doing	a	ripping	good	job.

301
Chapter	     19


Lady	Mottram’s	 annual	ball	 was	a	crush,	as	always,	but	society	watchers	could
not	fail	to	note	that	Lord	 and	Lady	Bridgerton	 did	not	make	an	appearance.
Lady	Mottram	insists	that	 they	had	promised	to	attend,	and	This	Author	can	only
speculate	as	to	what	kept	the	newlyweds	at	home…

                                                      LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	13	JUNE	1814



Much	  later	that	night,	 Anthony	was	lying	 on	his	side	in	bed,	cradling	his	wife,
who	had	snuggled	her	back	up	to	his	front	and	was	presently	sleeping	soundly.

      Which	 was	fortunate,	he	realized,	because	it	had	started	to	rain.

      He	tried	to	nudge	the	covers	up	over	her	exposed	ear	so	that	she	would	not
hear	the	drops	beating	against	the	windows,	but	she	was	as	fidgety	in	sleep	as
she	was	when	awake,	and	he	could	not	manage	to	pull	the	coverlet	much	above
the	level	of	her	neck	before	she	shook	it	off.

      He	couldn’t	 yet	tell	whether	the	storm	would	 grow	electrical	 in	nature,	but
the	force	of	the	rain	had	increased,	and	the	wind	had	picked	up	until	it	howled
through	the	night,	rattling	 the	tree	branches	against	the	side	of	the	house.

      Kate	was	growing	 a	little	more	restless	at	his	side,	and	he	made	shhhh-ing
sounds	as	he	smoothed	her	hair	with	his	hand.	The	storm	hadn’t	woken	her	up,
but	it	had	definitely	 intruded	upon	her	slumber.	She	had	begun	to	mumble	in	her
sleep,	tossing	and	turning	until	she	was	curled	on	her	opposite	side,	facing	him.

      “What	 happened	to	make	you	hate	the	rain	so?”	he	whispered,	tucking	one
dark	lock	of	hair	 behind	her	ear.	But	he	did	not	judge	her	for	her	terrors;	he	knew
well	the	frustration	 of	unfounded	fears	and	premonitions.	His	certainty	 of	his
own	impending	death,	for	example,	had	haunted	him	since	the	moment	he’d
picked	up	his	father’s	limp	 hand	and	laid	it	gently	on	his	unmoving	 chest.

      It	wasn’t	 something	he	could	explain,	or	even	something	he	could
understand.	It	was	just	something	he	knew.

302
      He’d	 never	feared	death,	though,	not	really.	The	knowledge	of	it	had	been	a
part	of	him	for	 so	long	that	he	merely	accepted	it,	just	as	other	men	accepted	the
other	truths	that	made	up	the	cycle	of	life.	Spring	followed	 winter,	 and	summer
after	that.	For	him,	death	was	much	the	same	way.

      Until	 now.	He’d	 been	trying	to	deny	it,	trying	 to	shut	the	niggling	 notion
from	his	mind,	but	 death	was	beginning	to	show	a	frightening	face.

      His	marriage	to	Kate	had	sent	his	life	 down	an	alternate	path,	no	matter	how
much	he	tried	to	convince	himself	that	he	could	restrict	 their	marriage	to	nothing
but	friendship	and	sex.

      He	cared	about	her.	He	cared	about	her	far	too	much.	He	craved	her
company	when	they	were	apart,	and	he	dreamed	about	her	at	night,	even	as	he
held	her	in	his	arms.

      He	wasn’t	ready	to	call	 it	love,	but	it	 terrified	 him	all	the	same.

      And	whatever	it	 was	that	burned	between	them,	he	didn’t	want	it	to	end.

      Which	 was,	of	course,	the	cruelest	irony	of	all.

      Anthony	 closed	his	eyes	as	he	let	out	a	weary	and	nervous	exhale,
wondering	what	the	hell	he	was	going	to	do	about	the	complication	 that	lay
beside	him	in	the	bed.	But	even	while	his	eyes	were	shut,	he	saw	the	flash	of
lightning	that	lit	 up	the	night,	turning	 the	black	of	the	inside	of	 his	eyelids	into	a
bloody	red-orange.

      Opening	his	eyes,	he	saw	that	they’d	left	the	drapes	partway	open	when
they’d	retired	to	bed	earlier	in	 the	evening.	He’d	have	to	shut	those;	they’d	help
to	keep	the	lightning	from	 illuminating	 the	room.

      But	when	he	shifted	his	weight	 and	tried	to	nudge	his	way	out	from	 under
the	covers,	Kate	grabbed	his	arm,	her	fingers	pressing	frantically	into	his
muscles.

      “Shhhh,	now,	 it’s	all	 right,”	 he	whispered,	“I’m	 only	going	 to	close	the
drapes.”

      But	she	did	not	let	go,	and	the	whimper	 that	escaped	her	lips	when	a	clap	of
thunder	shook	the	night	nearly	broke	his	heart.

303
thunder	shook	the	night	nearly	broke	his	heart.

      A	pale	sliver	 of	moonlight	 filtered	 through	the	window,	just	 enough	to
illuminate	the	tense,	drawn	lines	of	her	face.	Anthony	 peered	down	to	assure
himself	that	she	was	still	sleeping,	then	pried	her	hands	from	his	arm	and	got	up
to	close	the	drapes.	He	suspected	that	the	flashes	of	lightning	would	still	sneak
into	the	room,	though,	so	when	he	was	done	with	the	drapes,	he	lit	a	lone	candle
and	set	it	on	his	nightstand.	It	didn’t	 give	off	 enough	light	to	wake	her	up—at
least	he	hoped	it	wouldn’t—but	 at	the	same	time	it	saved	the	room	from	utter
blackness.

      And	there	was	nothing	quite	 so	startling	as	a	streak	of	lightning	cutting
through	utter	blackness.

      He	crawled	back	into	 bed	and	regarded	Kate.	She	was	still	sleeping,	but	not
peacefully.	She’d	curled	into	 a	semifetal	position	and	her	breathing	was	labored.
The	lightning	didn’t	 seem	to	bother	her	much,	but	every	time	the	room	shook
with	thunder	she	flinched.

      He	took	her	hand	and	smoothed	her	hair,	and	for	several	minutes	he	simply
lay	with	her,	trying	 to	soothe	her	as	she	slept.	But	the	storm	was	increasing	in
intensity,	with	 the	thunder	and	lightning	practically	 coming	on	top	of	 each	other.
Kate	was	growing	more	restless	by	the	second,	and	then,	as	a	particularly	loud
clap	of	thunder	exploded	in	the	air,	her	eyes	flew	open,	her	face	a	mask	of	utter
panic.

      “Kate?”	 Anthony	 whispered.

      She	sat	up,	scrambling	back	until	her	spine	was	pressed	against	the	solid
headboard	of	the	bed.	She	looked	like	a	statue	of	terror,	her	body	stiff	and	frozen
into	place.	Her	eyes	were	still	open,	barely	blinking,	 and	though	she	did	not
move	her	head,	they	flicked	frantically	 back	and	forth,	scanning	the	entire	room,
but	not	seeing	anything.

      “Oh,	 Kate,”	he	whispered.	This	was	far,	far	 worse	than	what	she’d	been
through	that	night	in	the	library	 at	Aubrey	Hall.	 And	 he	could	feel	the	force	of
her	pain	slicing	right	 through	his	heart.

      No	one	should	feel	terror	like	 this.	And	 especially	not	his	wife.

      Moving	 slowly,	 so	as	not	to	startle	her,	he	made	his	way	to	her	side,	then

304
      Moving	 slowly,	 so	as	not	to	startle	her,	he	made	his	way	to	her	side,	then
carefully	laid	 an	arm	over	her	shoulders.	She	was	shaking,	but	she	did	not	push
him	away.

      “Are	 you	even	going	to	remember	any	of	this	in	 the	morning?”	he
whispered.

      She	made	no	response,	but	then,	he	hadn’t	expected	her	to.

      “There,	there,”	 he	said	gently,	trying	to	remember	the	soothing	nonsense
words	his	mother	used	whenever	one	of	her	children	was	upset.	“It’s	all	 right
now.	You’ll	 be	fine.”

      Her	tremors	seemed	to	slow	a	bit,	but	she	was	still	very	clearly	 disturbed,
and	when	the	next	clap	of	thunder	shook	the	room,	her	entire	body	flinched,	and
she	buried	her	face	in	the	crook	of	her	neck.

      “No,”	 she	moaned,	“no,	no.”

      “Kate?”	 Anthony	 blinked	several	times,	then	gazed	at	her	intently.	She
sounded	different,	not	awake	but	more	lucid,	if	 that	was	possible.

      “No,	 no.”

      And	she	sounded	very…

      “No,	 no,	don’t	go.”

      …young.

      “Kate?”	 He	held	her	tightly,	 unsure	of	what	to	do.	Should	he	wake	her?	Her
eyes	might	be	open,	but	she	was	clearly	asleep	and	dreaming.	Part	of	him	longed
to	break	her	of	her	nightmare,	but	once	she	woke,	she’d	still	be	in	the	same	place
—in	bed	in	the	middle	 of	a	horrible	electrical	 storm.	Would	she	even	feel	any
better?

      Or	should	he	let	her	sleep?	Perhaps	if	she	rode	out	the	nightmare	he	might
actually	gain	some	idea	as	to	what	had	caused	her	terror.

      “Kate?”	 he	whispered,	as	if	she	herself	might	actually	give	 him	a	clue	as	to
how	to	proceed.

305
      “No,”	 she	moaned,	growing	more	agitated	by	the	second.	“Nooooo.”

      Anthony	 pressed	his	lips	to	her	temple,	trying	to	soothe	her	with	his
presence.

      “No,	 please….”	She	started	to	sob,	her	body	rackedwith	huge	gasps	of	air	as
her	tears	drenched	his	shoulder.

      “No,	 oh,	no…Mama!”

      Anthony	 stiffened.	He	knew	that	Kate	always	referred	to	 her	stepmother	as
Mary.	Could	she	actually	be	speaking	of	her	true	mother,	the	woman	who	had
given	her	life	and	then	died	so	many	years	ago?

      But	as	he	pondered	that	question,	Kate’s	entire	body	stiffened	and	she	let	out
a	shrill,	high-pitched	 scream.

      The	scream	of	a	very	young	girl.

      In	an	instant,	she	turned	about,	and	then	she	leaped	into	his	arms,	grabbing	at
him,	clutching	 his	shoulders	with	a	terrifying	 desperation.	“No,	Mama,”	 she
wailed,	her	entire	body	heaving	from	 the	exertion	of	her	cries.	“No,	 you	can’t
go!	Oh,	Mama	Mama	Mama	Mama	 Mama	Mama…”

      If	 Anthony	hadn’t	 had	his	back	to	the	headboard,	she	would	have	knocked
him	over,	the	force	of	her	fervor	 was	that	strong.

      “Kate?”	 he	blurted	out,	surprised	by	the	slight	note	of	 panic	in	his	voice.
“Kate?	It’s	 all	right.	 You’re	all	 right.	You’re	 fine.	 Nobody	is	going	anywhere.
Do	you	hear	me?	No	one.”

      But	her	words	had	melted	away,	and	all	that	was	left	 was	the	low	sound	of	a
weeping	that	came	from	deep	in	her	soul.	Anthony	held	her,	and	then	when
she’d	calmed	a	bit,	he	eased	her	down	until	she	was	lying	on	her	side	again,	and
then	he	held	her	some	more,	until	she	drifted	back	into	sleep.

      Which,	 he	noticed	ironically,	 was	right	about	the	time	the	last	of	the	thunder
and	lightning	split	 the	room.
                                                                	

When	Kate	woke	the	following	morning,	she	was	surprised	to	see	her	husband	sitting	up	in	bed,	staring

306
When	Kate	woke	the	following	morning,	she	was	surprised	to	see	her	husband	sitting	up	in	bed,	staring
down	at	her	with	the	oddest	look…a	combination	of	concern,	and	curiosity,	and	maybe	even	the	barest	hint
of	pity.	He	didn’t	say	anything	when	her	eyes	opened,	even	though	she	could	see	that	he	was	watching	her
face	intently.	She	waited,	to	see	what	he	would	do,	and	then	finally	she	just	said,	somewhat	hesitantly,	“You
look	tired.”

       “I	 didn’t	  sleep	well,”	  he	admitted.

       “You	 didn’t?”

       He	shook	 his	head.	 “It	 rained.”

       “It	 did?”

       He	nodded.	 “And	  thundered.”

       She	swallowed	  nervously.	 “And	  lightninged	   as	well,	 I	suppose.”

       “It	 did,”	  he	said,	nodding	  again.	“It	  was	quite	 a	storm.”

       There	was	 something	 very	 profound	  in	the	 way	 he	was	speaking	 in	 short,
concise	sentences,	 something	 that	 raised	the	 hair	on	 the	back	 of	her	 neck.	 “H-
how	fortunate	  that	I	 missed	 it,	then,”	  she	said.	“You	  know	 I	 don’t	 do	 well	 with
strong	storms.”

       “I	 know,”	  he	said	simply.

       But	there	 was	a	wealth	  of	meaning	 behind	 those	 two	 short	words,	  and	Kate
felt	 her	heartbeat	 speed	up	slightly.	  “Anthony,”	    she	asked,	not	 certain	 she
wanted	to	 know	 the	 answer,	“what	  happened	last	 night?”

       “You	 had	 a	nightmare.”

       She	closed	her	 eyes	for	 a	second.	“I	  didn’t	 think	  I	had	 those	any	longer.”

       “I	 didn’t	  realize	 you’d	 ever	 suffered	 from	 nightmares.”

       Kate	let	 out	 a	long	exhale	 and	 sat	up,	pulling	  the	covers	 along	 with	 her	 and
tucking	 them	 under	 arms.	“When	  I	was	 small.	 Whenever	 it	 stormed,	 I’m	  told.	 I
don’t	 know	 for	 a	fact;	 I	 never	remembered	 anything.	  I	 thought	 I’d—”	   She	had	to
stop	for	 a	moment;	 her	 throat	 felt	 like	 it	was	 closing	 up,	 and	her	words	 seemed	 to
choke	her.

307
      He	reached	out	and	took	her	hand.	It	was	a	simple	gesture,	but	somehow	it
touched	her	heart	far	more	than	any	words	would	have	done.	“Kate?”	he	asked
quietly.	“Are	 you	all	 right?”

      She	nodded.	“I	thought	I’d	 stopped,	that’s	all.”

      He	didn’t	 say	anything	for	a	moment,	and	the	room	was	so	quiet	that	Kate
was	sure	she	could	hear	both	of	their	heartbeats.	Finally,	she	heard	the	slight
rush	of	indrawn	breath	across	Anthony’s	lips,	 and	he	asked,	“Did	you	know	that
you	speak	in	your	sleep?”

      She	hadn’t	been	facing	him,	but	at	that	comment,	her	head	jerked	quite
suddenly	to	the	right,	her	eyes	colliding	with	 his.	“I	 do?”

      “You	 did	last	night.”

      Her	fingers	clutched	 the	coverlet.	“What	did	 I	say?”

      He	hesitated,	but	when	his	words	emerged,	they	were	steady	and	even.	“You
called	out	to	your	mother.”

      “Mary?”	  she	whispered.

      He	shook	his	head.	“I	don’t	 think	 so.	I’ve	never	heard	you	call	Mary
anything	but	Mary;	 last	night	you	were	crying	 for	‘Mama.’	 You	 sounded…”	He
paused	and	took	a	slightly	ragged	breath.	“You	sounded	quite	young.”

      Kate	licked	 her	lips,	then	chewed	on	the	bottom	one.	“I	don’t	 know	what	to
tell	you,”	 she	finally	said,	afraid	 to	press	into	the	deepest	recesses	of	her
memory.	“I	 have	no	idea	why	I’d	 be	calling	out	to	my	mother.”

      “I	 think,”	 he	said	gently,	“that	you	 should	ask	Mary.”

      Kate	gave	her	head	a	quick	and	immediate	shake.	“I	didn’t	 even	know	Mary
when	my	mother	died.	Neither	did	 my	father.	She	couldn’t	know	 why	I	 was
calling	out	to	her.”

      “Your	 father	might	 have	told	her	something,”	he	said,	lifting	 her	hand	to	his
lips	and	giving	it	 a	reassuring	kiss.

      Kate	let	her	eyes	drop	to	her	lap.	She	wanted	to	understand	why	she	was	so

308
      Kate	let	her	eyes	drop	to	her	lap.	She	wanted	to	understand	why	she	was	so
afraid	of	the	storms,	but	prying	into	 one’s	deepest	fears	was	almost	as	terrifying
as	the	fear	itself.	What	if	she	discovered	something	she	didn’t	want	to	know?
What	if—

      “I’ll	  go	with	 you,”	Anthony	 said,	breaking	into	her	thoughts.

      And	somehow	that	made	everything	all	 right.

      Kate	looked	to	him	 and	nodded,	tears	in	her	eyes.	“Thank	you,”	she
whispered.	“Thank	you	so	much.”
                                                                	

Later	that	day,	the	two	of	them	walked	up	the	steps	to	Mary’s	small	townhouse.	The	butler	showed	them
into	the	drawing	room,	and	Kate	sat	on	the	familiar	blue	sofa	while	Anthony	walked	over	to	the	window,
leaning	on	the	sill	as	he	peered	out.

      “See	something	interesting?”	she	asked.

      He	shook	his	head,	smiling	sheepishly	as	he	turned	to	face	her.	“I	just	like
looking	out	windows,	 that’s	all.”

      Kate	thought	there	was	something	awfully	 sweet	about	that,	although	she
couldn’t	really	 put	her	finger	on	what.	Every	 day	seemed	to	reveal	some	new
little	quirk	 to	his	character,	some	uniquely	endearing	habit	that	bound	them	ever
closer.	She	liked	knowing	strange	little	things	 about	him,	like	how	 he	always
doubled	up	his	pillow	 before	going	to	sleep,	or	that	he	detested	orange
marmalade	but	adored	the	lemon.

      “You	 look	rather	introspective.”

      Kate	jerked	to	attention.	Anthony	 was	staring	at	her	quizzically.	 “You
drifted	off,”	 he	said	with	 an	amused	expression,	“and	you	had	the	dreamiest
smile	on	your	face.”

      She	shook	her	head,	blushed,	and	mumbled,	“It	was	nothing.”

      His	answering	snort	was	dubious,	and	as	he	walked	over	to	the	sofa,	he	said,
“I’d	 give	a	hundred	pounds	for	those	thoughts.”

      Kate	was	saved	from	having	to	comment	by	Mary’s	 entrance.	“Kate!”	 Mary
exclaimed.	“What	a	lovely	 surprise.	And	Lord	 Bridgerton,	how	 nice	to	see	you
both.”

309
both.”

      “You	 really	should	call	 me	Anthony,”	 he	said	somewhat	gruffly.

      Mary	 smiled	as	he	took	her	hand	in	greeting.	“I	shall	endeavor	to	remember
to	do	so,”	she	said.	She	sat	across	from	Kate,	then	waited	for	Anthony	to	take	his
place	on	the	sofa	before	saying,	“Edwina	is	out,	I’m	 afraid.	Her	Mr.	 Bagwell
came	rather	unexpectedly	down	to	town.	They’ve	gone	for	 a	walk	in	the	park.”

      “We	 should	lend	them	Newton,”	 Anthony	said	affably.	 “A	 more	capable
chaperone	I	cannot	imagine.”

      “We	 actually	came	to	see	you,	Mary,”	Kate	 said.

      Kate’s	voice	 held	an	uncommon	note	of	seriousness,	and	Mary	responded
instantly.	“What	 is	it?”	 she	asked,	her	eyes	flicking	back	and	forth	from	Kate	to
Anthony.	“Is	 everything	all	 right?”

      Kate	nodded,	swallowing	 as	she	searched	for	the	right	words.	Funny	how
she’d	been	rehearsing	what	to	ask	all	morning,	and	now	she	was	speechless.	But
then	she	felt	Anthony’s	hand	on	hers,	the	weight	and	the	warmth	of	it	 strangely
comforting,	and	she	looked	up	and	said	to	Mary,	“I’d	  like	to	ask	you	about	my
mother.”

      Mary	 looked	a	little	 startled,	but	she	said,	“Of	course.	But	you	know	that	I
did	not	know	her	personally.	I	 only	know	 what	your	father	told	 me	of	her.”

      Kate	nodded.	“I	 know.	And	 you	might	not	have	the	answers	to	any	of	my
questions,	but	I	don’t	know	 who	else	to	ask.”

      Mary	 shifted	in	her	seat,	her	hands	clasped	primly	in	her	lap.	But	Kate
noticed	that	her	knuckles	had	gone	white.

      “Very	 well,”	 Mary	 said.	“What	 is	it	you	wish	 to	learn?	You	know	that	I	 will
tell	you	anything	I	 know.”

      Kate	nodded	again	and	swallowed,	her	mouth	having	gone	dry.	“How	 did
she	die,	Mary?”

      Mary	 blinked,	then	sagged	slightly,	perhaps	with	relief.	 “But	 you	know	that
already.	It	was	influenza.	Or	some	sort	of	lung	fever.	 The	doctors	were	never

310
already.	It	was	influenza.	Or	some	sort	of	lung	fever.	 The	doctors	were	never
certain.”

      “I	 know,	but…”	 Kate	looked	 to	Anthony,	 who	gave	her	a	reassuring	nod.
She	took	a	deep	breath	and	plunged	on.	“I’m	still	afraid	 of	storms,	Mary.	I	 want
to	know	why.	 I	don’t	want	 to	be	afraid	any	longer.”

      Mary’s	 lips	parted,	but	she	was	silent	for	many	seconds	as	she	stared	at	her
stepdaughter.	Her	skin	slowly	paled,	taking	on	an	odd,	translucent	hue,	and	her
eyes	grew	haunted.	“I	didn’t	 realize,”	she	whispered.	“I	didn’t	 know	 you	still—”

      “I	 hid	it	 well,”	 Kate	said	softly.

      Mary	 reached	up	and	touched	her	temple,	her	hands	shaking.	“If	I’d	known,
I’d	have…”	 Her	fingers	moved	to	 her	forehead,	smoothing	over	worry	lines	as
she	fought	for	words.	“Well,	 I	 don’t	know	 what	I’d	 have	done.	Told	you,	I
suppose.”

      Kate’s	heart	stopped.	“Told	 me	what?”

      Mary	 let	out	a	long	breath,	both	of	her	hands	at	her	face	now,	pressing
against	the	upper	edge	of	her	eye	sockets.	She	looked	as	if	she	had	a	terrible
headache,	the	weight	of	the	world	pounding	against	her	skull,	from	 the	inside
out.

      “I	 just	want	you	to	know,”	 she	said	in	a	choked	voice,	“that	I	 didn’t	 tell	you
because	I	thought	you	didn’t	remember.	And	if	 you	didn’t	 remember,	well,	it
didn’t	seem	right	to	make	you	remember.”

      She	looked	up,	and	there	were	tears	streaking	her	face.	“But	obviously	you
do,”	she	whispered,	“or	you	wouldn’t	  be	so	afraid.	Oh,	Kate.	I’m	so	sorry.”

      “I	 am	sure	there	is	nothing	for	you	to	be	sorry	about,”	 Anthony	said	softly.

      Mary	 looked	at	him,	her	eyes	momentarily	startled,	as	if	she’d	forgotten	 he
was	in	the	room.	“Oh,	but	there	is,”	 she	said	sadly.	“I	didn’t	 know	that	Kate	was
still	suffering	 from	her	fears.	I	should	have	known.	 It’s	the	sort	of	thing	 a	mother
should	sense.	I	may	not	have	given	her	life,	but	I	have	tried	to	be	a	true	mother
to	her—”

      “You	 have,”	Kate	said	fervently.	 “The	 very	best.”

311
      Mary	 turned	back	to	her,	holding	her	silence	for	a	few	seconds	before
saying,	in	an	oddly	detached	voice,	“You	 were	three	when	your	mother	died.	It
was	your	birthday,	actually.”

      Kate	nodded,	mesmerized.

      “When	 I	married	your	father	 I	made	three	vows.	There	was	the	vow	I	made
to	him,	before	God	and	witnesses,	to	be	his	wife.	But	in	my	 heart	I	made	two
other	vows.	One	was	to	you,	Kate.	I	took	one	look	 at	you,	so	lost	and	forlorn
with	those	huge	brown	eyes—and	they	were	sad,	oh,	they	were	so	sad,	eyes	no
child	should	have—and	I	vowed	that	I	 would	love	 you	as	my	own,	and	raise	you
with	everything	 I	had	within	 me.”

      She	paused	to	wipe	her	eyes,	gratefully	accepting	the	handkerchief	that
Anthony	handed	to	her.	When	she	continued,	her	voice	was	barely	a	whisper.
“The	other	vow	 was	to	your	mother.	I	visited	 her	grave,	you	know.”

      Kate’s	nod	was	accompanied	by	a	wistful	 smile.	“I	 know.	I	 went	with	you	 on
several	occasions.”

      Mary	 shook	her	head.	“No.	I	mean	before	I	married	your	father.	 I	knelt	there,
and	that	was	when	I	made	my	third	vow.	She	had	been	a	good	mother	to	you;
everyone	said	so,	and	any	fool	could	see	that	you	missed	her	with	everything	in
your	heart.	So	I	promised	her	all	the	same	things	I	promised	you,	to	be	a	good
mother,	to	love	and	cherish	you	as	if	you	were	of	my	 own	flesh.”	 She	lifted	her
head,	and	her	eyes	were	utterly	clear	and	direct	when	she	said,	“And	I’d	like	to
think	that	I	brought	 her	some	peace.	I	don’t	think	any	mother	can	die	in	peace
leaving	behind	a	child	so	young.”

      “Oh,	 Mary,”	 Kate	whispered.

      Mary	 looked	at	her	and	smiled	sadly,	then	turned	to	Anthony.	“And	 that,	my
lord,	is	why	I	 am	sorry.	I	should	have	known,	should	have	seen	that	she
suffered.”

      “But	 Mary,”	 Kate	protested,	“I	 didn’t	 want	you	to	see.	I	hid	in	my	room,
under	my	bed,	in	the	closet.	Anything	to	 keep	it	from	you.”

      “But	 why,	sweetling?”

      Kate	sniffed	 back	a	tear.	“I	don’t	know.	 I	didn’t	 want	to	worry	 you,	I

312
      Kate	sniffed	 back	a	tear.	“I	don’t	know.	 I	didn’t	 want	to	worry	 you,	I
suppose.	Or	maybe	I	was	afraid	of	appearing	weak.”

      “You’ve	 always	 tried	to	be	so	strong,”	Mary	 whispered.	“Even	when	you
were	a	tiny	thing.”

      Anthony	 took	Kate’s	hand,	but	he	looked	at	Mary.	 “She	is	strong.	And	so	are
you.”

      Mary	 gazed	at	Kate’s	face	for	a	long	minute,	her	eyes	nostalgic	and	sad,	and
then,	in	a	low,	even	voice,	she	said,	“When	your	mother	died,	it	 was…I	wasn’t
there,	but	when	I	married	your	father,	he	told	the	story	to	 me.	He	knew	that	I
loved	you	already,	and	he	thought	it	might	help	me	to	understand	you	a	bit
better.

      “Your	 mother’s	death	was	very	quick.	 According	to	 your	father,	she	fell	ill
on	a	Thursday	and	died	on	a	Tuesday.	And	it	rained	the	whole	time.	It	was	one
of	those	awful	storms	that	never	ends,	just	beats	the	ground	mercilessly	until	the
rivers	flood	and	the	roads	become	impassable.

      “He	 said	that	he	was	sure	she	would	turnabout	if	only	the	rain	would	stop.	It
was	silly,	he	knew,	but	every	night	 he’d	go	to	bed	praying	for	 the	sun	to	peek	out
from	the	clouds.	Praying	for	 anything	that	might	give	 him	a	little	 hope.”

      “Oh,	 Papa,”	Kate	whispered,	the	words	slipping	unbidden	from	 her	lips.

      “You	 were	confined	to	the	house,	of	course,	which	apparently	rankled	you	to
no	end.”	Mary	looked	 up	and	smiled	at	Kate,	the	sort	of	smile	that	spoke	of	years
of	memories.	“You’ve	 always	loved	 to	be	outdoors.	Your	father	told	me	that
your	mother	used	to	bring	your	cradle	outside	and	rock	you	in	 the	fresh	air.”

      “I	 didn’t	 know	that,”	 Kate	whispered.

      Mary	 nodded,	then	continued	with	her	story.	“You	 didn’t	 realize	your
mother	was	ill	right	 away.	They	kept	you	from	 her,	fearing	contagion.	But
eventually	you	must	have	sensed	that	something	was	wrong.	Children	always	do.

      “The	 night	she	died	the	rain	had	grown	worse,	and	I’m	told	 the	thunder	and
lightning	were	as	terrifying	 as	anyone	had	ever	seen.”	She	paused,	then	tilted	her
head	slightly	to	the	side	as	she	asked,	“Do	you	remember	the	old	gnarled	tree	in
the	back	garden—the	one	you	and	Edwina	always	used	to	scramble	on?”

313
the	back	garden—the	one	you	and	Edwina	always	used	to	scramble	on?”

      “The	 one	that	was	split	in	two?”	 Kate	whispered.

      Mary	 nodded.	“It	happened	that	night.	Your	 father	said	it	was	the	most
terrifying	 sound	he’d	ever	heard.	The	thunder	and	lightning	were	coming	on	top
of	each	other,	and	a	bolt	split	the	tree	at	the	exact	moment	that	the	thunder	shook
the	earth.

      “I	 suppose	you	couldn’t	sleep,”	she	continued.	“I	 remember	that	storm,	even
though	I	lived	in	 the	next	county.	I	don’t	 know	how	 anyone	could	have	slept
through	it.	Your	 father	was	with	your	 mother.	She	was	dying,	and	everyone
knew	it,	and	in	their	grief	 they’d	 forgotten	about	you.	They’d	 been	so	careful	to
keep	you	out,	but	on	that	night,	their	attention	was	elsewhere.

      “Your	 father	told	 me	that	he	was	sitting	by	your	mother’s	side,	trying	 to	hold
her	hand	as	she	passed.	It	wasn’t	a	gentle	death,	I’m	afraid.	Lung	disease	often
isn’t.”	 Mary	looked	 up.	“My	 mother	died	the	same	way.	I	know.	The	end	wasn’t
peaceful.	She	was	gasping	for	breath,	suffocating	before	my	very	eyes.”

      Mary	 swallowed	convulsively,	 then	trained	her	eyes	on	Kate’s.	“I	 can	only
assume,”	she	whispered,	“that	you	witnessed	the	same	thing.”

      Anthony’s	 hand	tightened	on	Kate’s.

      “But	 where	I	was	five	 and	twenty	at	my	mother’s	death,”	Mary	 said,	“you
were	but	three.	It’s	not	the	sort	of	thing	 a	child	should	see.	They	tried	to	make
you	leave,	but	you	would	not	go.	You	 bit	and	clawed	and	screamed	and
screamed	and	screamed,	and	then—”

      Mary	 stopped,	choking	on	her	words.	She	lifted	the	handkerchief	Anthony
had	given	her	to	her	face,	and	several	moments	passed	before	she	was	able	to
continue.

      “Your	 mother	was	near	death,”	she	said,	her	voice	so	low	it	was	nearly	a
whisper.	“And	 just	as	they	found	someone	strong	enough	to	remove	such	a	wild
child,	a	flash	of	lightning	 pierced	the	room.	Your	 father	said—”

      Mary	 stopped	and	swallowed.	“Your	 father	told	me	that	what	happened	next
was	the	most	eerie	and	awful	moment	he’d	ever	experienced.	The	lightning—it
lit	the	room	up	as	bright	as	day.	And	the	flash	wasn’t	 over	in	an	instant,	as	it
should	be;	it	almost	seemed	to	hang	in	the	air.	He	looked	at	you,	and	you	were

314
should	be;	it	almost	seemed	to	hang	in	the	air.	He	looked	at	you,	and	you	were
frozen.	I’ll	 never	forget	the	way	he	described	it.	He	said	it	was	as	if	you	 were	a
little	statue.”

      Anthony	 jerked.

      “What	 is	it?”	 Kate	asked,	turning	to	him.

      He	shook	his	head	disbelievingly.	 “That’s	 how	you	looked	last	night,”	 he
said.	“Exactly	how	 you	looked.	I	thought	 those	very	words.”

      “I…”	  Kate	looked	from	 Anthony	to	 Mary.	But	 she	didn’t	know	what	 to	say.

      Anthony	 gave	her	hand	another	squeeze	as	he	turned	to	Mary	and	urged,
“Please,	go	on.”

      She	nodded	once.	“Your	eyes	were	fixed	on	your	mother,	 and	so	your	father
turned	to	see	what	had	horrified	you	so,	and	that’s	when	he…when	he	saw…”

      Kate	gently	disengaged	her	hand	from	Anthony’s	 grasp	and	got	up	to	sit
beside	Mary,	pulling	 an	ottoman	down	next	to	her	chair.	She	took	one	of	Mary’s
hands	in	both	of	her	own.	“It’s	 all	right,	 Mary,”	 she	murmured.	“You	 can	tell
me.	I	need	to	know.”

      Mary	 nodded.	“It	was	the	moment	of	her	death.	She	sat	upright.	Your	father
said	she	hadn’t	lifted	her	body	from	 the	pillows	for	 days,	and	yet	she	sat	bolt
upright.	He	said	she	was	stiff,	her	head	thrown	back,	and	her	mouth	was	open	as
if	she	were	screaming,	but	she	couldn’t	make	a	sound.	And	then	the	thunder
came,	and	you	must	have	thought	the	sound	came	from	her	mouth,	because	you
screamed	like	nothing	anyone	had	ever	heard	and	came	running	forward,
jumping	onto	the	bed	and	throwing	your	 arms	around	her.

      “They	 tried	to	pry	you	 off,	but	you	 just	wouldn’t	 let	go.	You	kept	 screaming
and	screaming	and	calling	her	name,	and	then	there	was	a	terrible	crash.	Glass
shattering.	A	bolt	of	 lightning	 severed	a	branch	from	a	tree,	and	it	crashed	right
through	the	window.	There	was	glass	everywhere,	and	wind,	and	rain,	and
thunder,	and	more	lightning,	and	through	the	whole	thing	 you	didn’t	 stop
screaming.	Even	after	she	was	dead	and	had	fallen	back	onto	the	pillows,	your
little	arms	were	still	 clutched	around	her	neck,	and	you	screamed	and	sobbed	and
begged	for	her	to	wake	up,	and	not	to	leave.

315
      “And	you	just	wouldn’t	let	go,”	Mary	whispered.	“Finally	they	had	to	wait
until	you	wore	yourself	out	and	fell	asleep.”

      The	room	was	hung	with	silence	for	a	full	minute,	and	then	Kate	finally
whispered,	“I	didn’t	know.	I	didn’t	know	that	I’d	witnessed	that.”

      “Your	father	said	you	wouldn’t	speak	of	it,”	Mary	said.	“Not	that	you	could,
right	away.	You	slept	for	hours	and	hours,	and	then	when	you	woke	up,	it	was
clear	that	you’d	caught	your	mother’s	illness.	Not	with	the	same	gravity;	your
life	was	never	in	danger.	But	you	were	ill,	and	not	in	any	state	to	talk	about	your
mother’s	death.	And	when	you	were	well,	you	wouldn’t	talk	about	it.	Your	father
tried,	but	he	said	that	every	time	he	mentioned	it,	you	shook	your	head	and
clamped	your	hands	over	your	ears.	And	eventually	he	stopped	trying.”

      Mary	gave	Kate	an	intent	gaze.	“He	said	you	seemed	happier	when	he
stopped	trying.	He	did	what	he	thought	was	best.”

      “I	know,”	Kate	whispered.	“And	at	the	time,	it	probably	was	best.	But	now	I
needed	to	know.”	She	turned	to	Anthony,	not	for	reassurance	exactly,	but	for
some	sort	of	validation,	and	she	repeated,	“I	needed	to	know.”

      “How	do	you	feel	now?”	he	asked,	his	words	soft	and	direct.

      She	thought	about	that	for	a	moment.	“I	don’t	know.	Good,	I	think.	A	little
lighter.”	And	then,	without	even	realizing	what	she	was	doing,	she	smiled.	It	was
a	hesitant,	slow	thing,	but	nonetheless	a	smile.	She	turned	to	Anthony	with
astonished	eyes.	“I	feel	as	if	a	huge	weight	has	been	lifted	from	my	shoulders.”

      “Do	you	remember	now?”	Mary	asked.

      Kate	shook	her	head.	“But	I	still	feel	better.	I	can’t	explain	it,	really.	It’s
good	to	know,	even	if	I	can’t	remember.”

      Mary	made	a	choked	sort	of	sound	and	then	she	was	out	of	her	chair	and
next	to	Kate	on	the	ottoman,	embracing	her	with	all	her	might.	And	they	both
were	crying,	the	odd,	energetic	sort	of	sobs	that	were	mixed	with	laughter.	There
were	tears,	but	they	were	happy	tears,	and	when	Kate	finally	pulled	away	and
looked	at	Anthony,	she	saw	that	he,	too,	was	wiping	at	the	corner	of	his	eye.

      He	pulled	his	hand	away,	of	course,	and	assumed	a	dignified	mien,	but	she’d
seen	him.	And	in	that	moment,	she	knew	she	loved	him.	With	every	thought,

316
seen	him.	And	in	that	moment,	she	knew	she	loved	him.	With	 every	thought,
every	emotion,	every	piece	of	her	being,	she	loved	him.

      And	if	 he	never	loved	her	back—well,	 she	didn’t	want	to	think	 about	that.
Not	now,	not	in	 this	profound	moment.

      Probably	not	ever.

317
Chapter	     20


Has	anyone	besides	This	Author	noticed	that	Miss	Edwina	Sheffield	has	been
very	distracted	of	late?	Rumor	has	it	that	 she	has	lost	her	heart,	although	no	one
seems	to	know	the	identity	of	the	lucky	gentleman.

      Judging	from	 Miss	Sheffield’s	behavior	at	parties,	 however,	This	Author
feels	it	is	safe	to	assume	that	the	mystery	gentleman	is	not	someone	currently
residing	here	in	London.	Miss	Sheffield	has	shown	no	marked	interest	in	any	one
gentleman,	and	indeed,	even	sat	out	the	dancing	at	Lady	Mottram’s	ball	Friday
last.

      Could	her	suitor	 be	someone	she	met	in	the	country	last	month?	This	Author
will	have	to	do	a	bit	 of	sleuthing	to	uncover	the	truth.

                                                      LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	13	JUNE	1814



“Do	    you	know	what	I	 think?”	 Kate	asked,	as	she	sat	at	her	vanity	table	later
that	night,	brushing	her	hair.

      Anthony	 was	standing	by	the	window,	one	hand	leaning	against	the	frame	as
he	gazed	out.	“Mmmm?”	 was	his	reply,	mostly	because	he	was	too	distracted	by
his	own	thoughts	to	formulate	a	more	coherent	word.

      “I	 think,”	 she	continued	in	a	cheery	voice,	“that	next	time	 it	storms,	I’m
going	to	be	just	fine.”

      He	turned	slowly	 around.	“Really?”	 he	asked.

      She	nodded.	“I	don’t	 know	why	 I	think	 that.	A	gut	feeling,	 I	suppose.”

      “Gut	 feelings,”	he	said,	in	a	voice	that	sounded	strange	and	flat	even	to	his
own	ears,	“are	often	the	most	accurate.”

      “I	 feel	the	strangest	sense	of	optimism,”	she	said,	waving	her	silver-backed
hairbrush	in	the	air	as	she	spoke.	“All	my	 life,	I’ve	 had	this	awful	 thing	hanging

318
over	my	head.	I	didn’t	tell	you—I	never	told	anyone—but	every	time	it	stormed,
and	I	fell	to	pieces,	I	thought…well,	I	didn’t	just	think,	I	somehow	knew…”

      “What,	Kate?”	he	asked,	dreading	the	answer	without	even	having	a	clue
why.

      “Somehow,”	she	said	thoughtfully,	“as	I	shook	and	sobbed,	I	just	knew	that	I
was	going	to	die.	I	knew	it.	There	was	just	no	way	I	could	feel	that	awful	and
live	to	see	the	next	day.”	Her	head	cocked	slightly	to	the	side,	and	her	face	took
on	a	vaguely	strained	expression,	as	if	she	weren’t	sure	how	to	say	what	she
needed	to	say.

      But	Anthony	understood	all	the	same.	And	it	made	his	blood	run	to	ice.

      “I’m	sure	you’ll	think	it’s	the	silliest	thing	imaginable,”	she	said,	her
shoulders	rising	and	falling	in	a	sheepish	shrug.	“You’re	so	rational,	so
levelheaded	and	practical.	I	don’t	think	you	could	understand	something	like
this.”

      If	she	only	knew.	Anthony	rubbed	at	his	eyes,	feeling	strangely	drunk.	He
staggered	to	a	chair,	hoping	she	wouldn’t	notice	how	off	balance	he	was,	and	sat
down.

      Luckily,	her	attention	had	returned	to	the	various	bottles	and	trinkets	on	her
vanity	table.	Or	maybe	she	was	just	too	embarrassed	to	look	at	him,	thinking
he’d	scoff	at	her	irrational	fears.

      “Whenever	the	storm	passed,”	she	continued,	talking	down	at	her	table,	“I
knew	how	foolish	I’d	been	and	how	ridiculous	the	notion	was.	After	all,	I’d
endured	thunderstorms	before,	and	none	had	ever	killed	me.	But	knowing	that	in
my	rational	mind	never	seemed	to	help.	Do	you	know	what	I	mean?”

      Anthony	tried	to	nod.	He	wasn’t	sure	if	he	actually	did.

      “When	it	rained,”	she	said,	“nothing	really	existed	except	for	the	storm.	And,
of	course,	my	fear.	Then	the	sun	would	come	out,	and	I’d	realize	again	how	silly
I’d	been,	but	the	next	time	it	stormed,	it	was	just	like	before.	And	once	again,	I
knew	I	would	die.	I	just	knew	it.”

      Anthony	felt	sick.	His	body	felt	strange,	not	his	own.	He	couldn’t	have	said
anything	if	he’d	tried.

319
anything	if	he’d	 tried.

      “In	 fact,”	 she	said,	raising	her	head	to	look	at	him,	“the	only	time	 I	felt	I
might	actually	live	 to	see	the	next	day	was	in	the	library	at	Aubrey	Hall.”	  She
stood	and	walked	to	his	side,	resting	her	cheek	on	his	lap	as	she	knelt	before
him.	“With	 you,”	 she	whispered.

      He	lifted	 his	hand	to	stroke	her	hair.	The	motion	was	more	out	of	reflex	 than
anything	else.	He	certainly	wasn’t	conscious	of	his	actions.

      He’d	 had	no	idea	that	Kate	had	any	sense	of	her	own	mortality.	Most	people
didn’t.	It	 was	something	that	had	lent	Anthony	an	odd	sense	of	isolation	through
the	years,	as	if	he	understood	some	basic,	awful	truth	that	eluded	the	rest	of
society.

      And	while	 Kate’s	sense	of	doom	wasn’t	the	same	as	his—hers	was	fleeting,
brought	on	by	a	temporary	burst	of	wind	 and	rain	and	electricity,	whereas	his
was	with	him	always,	and	would	 be	until	the	day	he	died—she,	unlike	him,	 had
beaten	it.

      Kate	had	fought	her	demons	and	she	had	won.

      And	Anthony	 was	so	damned	jealous.

      It	was	not	a	noble	reaction;	he	knew	that.	And,	 caring	for	her	as	he	did,	he
was	thrilled	and	relieved	and	overjoyed	and	every	good	and	pure	emotion
imaginable	that	she	had	beaten	the	terrors	that	came	with	the	storms,	but	he	was
still	jealous.	So	goddamned	jealous.

      Kate	had	won.

      Whereas	he,	who	had	acknowledged	his	demons	but	refused	to	fear	them,
was	now	petrified	with	 terror.	And	 all	because	the	one	thing	he	swore	would
never	happen	had	come	to	pass.

      He	had	fallen	in	 love	with	his	 wife.

      He	had	fallen	in	 love	with	his	 wife,	and	now	the	thought	of	 dying,	of	leaving
her,	of	knowing	that	their	 moments	together	would	form	a	short	poem	and	not	a
long	and	lusty	novel—it	 was	more	than	he	could	bear.

      And	he	didn’t	 know	 where	to	set	the	blame.	He	wanted	to	point	his	finger	at

320
      And	he	didn’t	 know	 where	to	set	the	blame.	He	wanted	to	point	his	finger	at
his	father,	for	dying	 young	and	leaving	him	as	the	bearer	of	this	awful	curse.	He
wanted	to	rail	at	Kate,	for	coming	 into	his	life	 and	making	him	fear	his	own	 end.
Hell,	he	would	have	blamed	a	stranger	on	the	street	if	he’d	thought	there’d	be
any	use	to	it.

      But	the	truth	 was,	there	was	no	one	to	blame,	not	even	himself.	It	would
make	him	feel	so	much	better	if	he	could	point	 his	finger	at	someone—anyone—
and	say,	“This	is	your	fault.”	 It	 was	juvenile,	he	knew,	this	need	to	assign	blame,
but	everyone	had	a	right	to	childish	emotions	from	 time	to	time,	didn’t	 they?

      “I’m	  so	happy,”	Kate	murmured,	her	head	still	resting	on	his	lap.

      And	Anthony	 wanted	to	be	happy,	too.	He	wanted	so	damned	much	for
everything	to	be	uncomplicated,	for	happiness	just	to	be	happiness	and	nothing
more.	He	wanted	to	rejoice	in	her	recent	victories	without	 any	thought	to	his
own	worries.	He	wanted	to	lose	himself	 in	the	moment,	to	forget	about	the
future,	to	hold	her	in	his	arms	and…

      In	one	abrupt,	unpremeditated	movement,	he	hauled	them	both	to	their	feet.

      “Anthony?”	  Kate	queried,	blinking	 in	surprise.

      In	answer,	he	kissed	her.	His	lips	met	hers	in	an	explosion	of	passion	and
need	that	blurred	the	mind	until	he	could	be	ruled	by	body	 alone.	He	didn’t	want
to	think,	he	didn’t	 want	to	be	able	to	think.	 All	 he	wanted	was	this	very	moment.

      And	he	wanted	this	moment	to	last	forever.

      He	swept	his	wife	 into	his	arms	and	stalked	to	the	bed,	depositing	her	on	the
mattress	half	a	second	before	his	body	came	down	to	cover	hers.	She	was
stunning	beneath	him,	soft	and	strong,	and	consumed	by	the	same	fire	that	raged
within	his	 own	body.	She	might	not	understand	what	had	prompted	his	sudden
need,	but	she	felt	it	and	shared	it	all	the	same.

      Kate	had	already	dressed	for	bed,	and	her	nightrobe	fell	open	easily	under
his	experienced	fingers.	He	had	to	touch	her,	to	feel	her,	to	assure	himself	that
she	was	there	beneath	him	and	he	was	there	to	make	love	to	her.	She	was
wearing	a	silky	little	 confection	 of	ice	blue	that	tied	at	the	shoulders	and	hugged
her	curves.	It	was	the	sort	of	gown	designed	to	reduce	men	to	liquid	fire,	and
Anthony	was	no	exception.

321
Anthony	was	no	exception.

      There	was	something	desperately	erotic	about	the	feel	of	her	warm	skin
through	the	silk,	and	his	hands	roamed	over	her	body	relentlessly,	touching,
squeezing,	doing	anything	he	could	to	bind	her	to	him.

      If	 he	could	have	drawn	her	within	him,	 he	would	have	done	it	and	kept	her
there	forever.

      “Anthony,”	  Kate	gasped,	in	that	brief	moment	when	he	removed	his	mouth
from	hers,	“are	you	all	right?”

      “I	 want	you,”	 he	grunted,	bunching	her	gown	up	around	the	tops	of	her	legs.
“I	want	 you	now.”

      Her	eyes	widened	with	shock	and	excitement,	and	he	sat	up,	straddling	her,
his	weight	on	his	knees	so	as	not	to	crush	her.	“You	are	so	beautiful,”	he
whispered.	“So	unbelievably	gorgeous.”

      Kate	glowed	at	his	words,	and	her	hands	went	up	to	his	face,	smoothing	her
fingers	over	his	faintly	 stubbled	cheeks.	He	caught	one	of	her	hands	and	turned
his	face	into	it,	kissing	her	palm	 as	her	other	hand	trailed	down	the	muscled
cords	of	his	neck.

      His	fingers	 found	the	delicate	straps	at	her	shoulders,	tied	into	loose	bow-tie
loops.	It	took	the	barest	of	tugs	to	release	the	knots,	but	once	the	silky	fabric	slid
over	her	breasts,	Anthony	lost	all	semblance	of	patience,	and	he	yanked	at	the
garment	until	it	pooled	at	her	feet,	leaving	 her	completely	and	utterly	naked
under	his	gaze.

      With	 a	ragged	groan	he	tore	at	his	shirt,	buttons	flying	as	he	pulled	it	off,	 and
it	took	mere	seconds	to	divest	himself	of	his	trousers.	And	then,	when	there	was
finally	 nothing	in	the	bed	but	glorious	 skin,	he	covered	her	again,	one	muscular
thigh	nudging	her	legs	apart.

      “I	 can’t	wait,”	 he	said	hoarsely.	“I	 can’t	make	this	good	for	you.”

      Kate	let	out	a	fevered	groan	as	she	grabbed	him	by	the	hips,	steering	him
toward	her	entrance.	“It	is	good	for	 me,”	she	gasped.	“And	I	don’t	 want	you	to
wait.”

322
      And	at	that	point,	 words	ceased.	Anthony	let	out	a	primitive,	 guttural	cry	as
he	plunged	into	her,	burying	himself	 fully	 with	one	long	 and	powerful	stroke.
Kate’s	eyes	flew	wide	open,	and	her	mouth	formed	a	little	 Oh	of	surprise	at	the
shock	of	his	swift	 invasion.	But	she’d	been	ready	for	him—more	 than	ready	for
him.	Something	about	the	relentless	pace	of	his	lovemaking	had	stirred	a	passion
deep	within	her,	until	 she	needed	him	with	a	desperation	that	left	her	breathless.

      They	weren’t	 delicate,	and	they	weren’t	gentle.	They	were	hot,	and	sweaty,
and	needy,	and	they	held	on	to	each	other	as	if	they	could	make	time	last	forever
by	sheer	force	of	will.	 When	they	climaxed,	it	 was	fiery	and	it	was	simultaneous,
both	their	bodies	arching	as	their	cries	of	release	mingled	in	the	night.

      But	when	they	were	done,	curled	in	 each	other’s	arms	as	they	fought	for
control	over	their	labored	breath,	Kate	closed	her	eyes	in	bliss	and	surrendered	to
an	overwhelming	lassitude.

      Anthony	 did	not.

      He	stared	at	her	as	she	drifted	off,	then	watched	her	as	she	slumbered.	He
watched	the	way	her	eyes	sometimes	moved	under	her	sleepy	eyelids.	He
measured	the	pace	of	her	breathing	by	counting	the	gentle	rise	and	fall	of	her
chest.	He	listened	for	each	sigh,	each	mumble.

      There	were	certain	memories	a	man	wanted	to	sear	on	his	brain,	and	this	was
one	of	them.

      But	just	when	 he	was	sure	that	she	was	totally	and	completely	asleep,	she
made	a	funny,	warm	sort	of	noise	as	she	snuggled	more	deeply	into	his	embrace,
and	her	eyelids	fluttered	slowly	 open.

      “You’re	 still	 awake,”	 she	murmured,	her	voice	scratchy	and	mellow	with
sleep.

      He	nodded,	wondering	if	 he	was	holding	her	too	tightly.	 He	didn’t	 want	to
let	go.	He	never	wanted	to	let	go.

      “You	 should	sleep,”	she	said.

      He	nodded	again,	but	he	couldn’t	seem	to	make	his	eyes	close.

      She	yawned.	“This	is	nice.”

323
      She	yawned.	“This	is	nice.”

      He	kissed	her	forehead,	making	an	“Mmmm”	 sound	of	 agreement.

      She	arched	her	neck	and	kissed	him	back,	full	on	the	lips,	then	settled	into
her	pillow.	 “I	hope	we’ll	 be	like	 this	always,”	she	murmured,	yawning	 yet	again
as	sleep	overtook	her.	“Always	and	forever.”

      Anthony	 froze.

      Always.

      She	couldn’t	know	 what	that	word	meant	to	him.	 Five	years?	Six?	Maybe
seven	or	eight.

      Forever.

      That	was	a	word	that	had	no	meaning,	something	he	simply	couldn’t
comprehend.

      Suddenly	he	couldn’t	 breathe.

      The	coverlet	felt	 like	a	brick	 wall	atop	him,	 and	the	air	grew	thick.

      He	had	to	get	out	of	there.	He	had	to	go.	He	had	to—

      He	vaulted	from	 the	bed,	and	then,	stumbling	and	choking,	he	reached	for
his	clothes,	tossed	so	recklessly	to	the	floor,	and	started	thrusting	his	limbs	into
the	appropriate	holes.

      “Anthony?”

      His	head	jerked	up.	Kate	was	pushing	herself	upright	in	 the	bed,	yawning.
Even	in	the	dim	light,	 he	could	see	that	her	eyes	were	confused.	And	hurt.

      “Are	 you	all	right?”	 she	asked.

      He	gave	her	one	curt	nod.

      “Then	 why	are	you	trying	 to	put	your	leg	into	the	armhole	of	 your	shirt?”

      He	looked	down	 and	bit	off	a	curse	he’d	never	before	even	considered

324
      He	looked	down	 and	bit	off	a	curse	he’d	never	before	even	considered
uttering	in	front	 of	a	female.	With	 yet	another	choice	expletive,	he	balled	the
offending	piece	of	linen	 into	a	wrinkled	 mess	and	threw	it	on	the	floor,	pausing
for	barely	a	second	before	yanking	his	trousers	on.

      “Where	 are	you	going?”	Kate	asked	anxiously.

      “I	 have	to	go	out,”	he	grunted.

      “Now?”

      He	didn’t	 answer	because	he	didn’t	know	how	to	answer.

      “Anthony?”	  She	stepped	out	of	bed	and	reached	for	him,	but	a	split	second
before	her	hand	touched	his	cheek	he	flinched,	stumbling	backward	until	his
back	hit	the	bedpost.	He	saw	the	hurt	on	her	face,	the	pain	of	his	rejection,	but	he
knew	that	if	she	touched	him	in	tenderness,	he’d	be	lost.

      “Damn	 it	all,”	 he	bit	off.	 “Where	the	hell	 are	my	shirts?”

      “In	 your	dressing	room,”	 she	said	nervously.	“Where	they	always	are.”

      He	stalked	off	 in	search	of	a	fresh	shirt,	unable	to	bear	the	sound	of	her
voice.	No	matter	what	she	said,	he	kept	hearing	always	and	forever.

      And	it	 was	killing	 him.

      When	he	emerged	from	his	dressing	room,	coat	and	shoes	on	their	proper
places	on	his	body,	Kate	was	on	her	feet,	pacing	the	floor	and	anxiously
fidgeting	with	 the	wide	blue	sash	on	her	dressing	gown.

      “I	 have	to	go,”	he	said	tonelessly.

      She	didn’t	make	a	sound,	which	was	what	he’d	 thought	he	wanted,	but
instead	he	just	found	himself	standing	there,	waiting	for	 her	to	speak,	unable	to
move	until	she	did.

      “When	 will	 you	be	back?”	she	finally	 asked.

      “Tomorrow.”

      “That’s…good.”

325
      He	nodded.	“I	 can’t	be	here,”	he	blurted	out.	“I	 have	to	go.”

      She	swallowed	convulsively.	 “Yes,”	 she	said,	her	voice	achingly	small,
“you’ve	 said	as	much.”

      And	then,	without	 a	backward	glance	and	without	a	clue	as	to	where	he	was
going,	he	left.

      Kate	walked	slowly	 to	the	bed	and	stared	at	it.	Somehow	it	seemed	wrong	to
climb	in	alone,	to	pull	 the	covers	around	her	and	make	a	little	huddle	of	one.	She
thought	she	should	cry,	but	no	tears	pricked	her	eyes.	So	finally	she	moved	to
the	window,	pushed	aside	the	drapes,	and	stared	out,	surprising	herself	with	a
soft	prayer	for	a	storm.

      Anthony	 was	gone,	and	while	she	was	certain	he’d	return	in	body,	she	was
not	so	confident	about	his	spirit.	And	 she	realized	that	she	needed	something—
she	needed	the	storm—to	prove	to	herself	that	she	could	be	strong,	by	herself
and	for	herself.

      She	didn’t	want	 to	be	alone,	but	she	might	not	have	a	choice	in	that	matter.
Anthony	seemed	determined	to	maintain	a	distance.	There	were	demons	within
him—demons	she	feared	he	would	never	choose	to	face	in	her	presence.

      But	if	 she	was	destined	to	be	alone,	even	with	a	husband	at	her	side,	then	by
God	she’d	be	alone	and	strong.

      Weakness,	she	thought	as	she	let	her	forehead	rest	against	the	smooth,	cool
glass	of	her	window,	never	got	anyone	anywhere.
                                                                	

Anthony	had	no	recollection	of	his	off-balance	stumble	through	the	house,	but	somehow	he	found	himself
tripping	down	the	front	steps,	made	slippery	by	the	light	fog	that	hung	in	the	air.	He	crossed	the	street,	not
having	a	clue	where	he	was	going,	only	knowing	that	he	needed	to	be	away.	But	when	he	reached	the
opposite	pavement,	some	devil	within	him	forced	his	eyes	upward	toward	his	bedroom	window.

      He	shouldn’t	 have	seen	her	was	his	rather	inane	thought.	She	should	have
been	in	bed	or	the	drapes	should	have	been	pulled	or	he	should	have	been
halfway	to	his	club	 by	now.

      But	he	did	see	her	and	the	dull	ache	in	his	chest	grew	sharper,	more
viciously	 unrelenting.	His	heart	felt	as	if	 it	had	been	sliced	wide	open—and	he

326
viciously	 unrelenting.	His	heart	felt	as	if	 it	had	been	sliced	wide	open—and	he
had	the	most	unsettling	sensation	that	the	hand	wielding	the	knife	had	been	his
own.

      He	watched	her	for	a	minute—or	 maybe	it	was	an	hour.	He	didn’t	 think	she
saw	him;	nothing	in	her	posture	gave	any	indication	that	she	was	aware	of	his
presence.	She	was	too	far	away	for	him	to	see	her	face,	but	he	rather	thought	her
eyes	were	closed.

      Probably	 hoping	it	doesn’t	storm,	he	thought,	glancing	 up	at	the	murky	sky.
She’d	most	likely	 be	out	of	luck.	The	mist	and	fog	 were	already	coalescing	into
drops	of	moisture	on	his	skin,	and	it	seemed	only	a	quick	transition	 to	out-and-
out	rain.

      He	knew	he	should	leave,	but	some	invisible	cord	 kept	him	rooted	to	the
spot.	Even	after	she’d	left	her	position	at	the	window,	 he	remained	in	place,
staring	up	at	the	house.	The	pull	back	inside	was	nearly	impossible	to	deny.	He
wanted	to	run	back	into	the	house,	fall	to	his	knees	before	her,	and	beg	her
forgiveness.	He	wanted	to	sweep	her	into	his	arms	and	make	love	to	her	until	the
first	streaks	of	dawn	touched	the	sky.	But	he	knew	he	couldn’t	 do	any	of	those
things.

      Or	maybe	it	was	that	he	shouldn’t.	 He	just	didn’t	 know	anymore.

      And	so,	after	standing	frozen	in	 place	for	nearly	an	hour,	after	the	rain	came,
after	the	wind	blew	gusts	of	chilly	 air	 down	the	street,	Anthony	finally	 left.

      He	left,	 not	feeling	the	cold,	not	feeling	 the	rain,	which	had	begun	to	fall
with	surprising	 force.

      He	left,	 not	feeling	anything.

327
Chapter	     21


It	has	been	whispered	that	Lord	and	Lady	Bridgerton	 were	forced	to	marry,	 but
even	if	that	is	true,	This	Author	refuses	to	believe	that	theirs	is	anything	 but	a
love	match.

                                                      LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	15	JUNE	1814



It	 was	strange,	Kate	thought	as	she	looked	at	the	morning	repast	laid	upon	the
side	table	in	the	small	dining	room,	how	 one	could	feel	utterly	famished	and	at
the	same	time	have	no	appetite.	Her	stomach	was	rumbling	and	churning,
demanding	food	now,	and	yet	everything—from	 the	eggs	to	the	scones	to	the
kippers	to	the	roast	pork—looked	awful.

      With	 a	dejected	sigh,	she	reached	for	a	solitary	triangle	of	toast	and	sank	into
her	chair	with	a	cup	of	tea.

      Anthony	 had	not	come	home	last	night.

      Kate	took	a	nibble	of	 the	toast	and	forced	it	down.	She’d	been	hoping	that	he
might	at	least	make	an	appearance	in	time	for	breakfast.	She’d	delayed	the	meal
as	long	as	she	could—it	was	already	nearly	eleven	in	the	morning	and	she
usually	ate	at	nine—but	her	husband	was	still	absent.

      “Lady	 Bridgerton?”

      Kate	looked	up	and	blinked.	 A	footman	was	standing	before	her	bearing	a
small	cream-colored	envelope.

      “This	 arrived	for	 you	a	few	minutes	ago,”	he	said.

      Kate	murmured	her	thanks	and	reached	for	the	envelope,	which	had	been
secured	with	a	neat	dollop	of	pale	pink	sealing	wax.	Bringing	 it	 closer	to	her
eyes,	she	made	out	the	initials	EOB.	One	of	Anthony’s	relations?	The	E	would
be	Eloise,	of	course,	since	all	of	the	Bridgertons	had	been	named	in	alphabetical
order.

328
      Kate	carefully	 broke	the	seal	and	slipped	out	the	contents—a	single	piece	of
paper,	neatly	folded	in	half.


Kate—

      Anthony	is	here.	He	looks	a	wreck.	It	 is,	of	course,	none	of	my	business,	but	I
thought	you	might	like	to	know.
                                                                                                                       Eloise


      Kate	stared	at	the	note	a	few	seconds	longer,	then	shoved	her	chair	back	and
stood.	It	was	time	she	paid	a	call	upon	Bridgerton	House.
                                                                	

Much	to	Kate’s	surprise,	when	she	knocked	at	Bridgerton	House,	the	door	was	swung	open	not	by	the
butler	but	by	Eloise,	who	immediately	said,	“That	was	fast!”

      Kate	looked	around	the	hall,	half	 expecting	another	Bridgerton	sibling	 or
two	to	jump	out	at	her.	“Were	 you	waiting	 for	me?”

      Eloise	nodded.	“And	 you	don’t	 have	to	knock	at	the	door,	you	know.
Bridgerton	House	belongs	to	Anthony,	 after	all.	And	you	 are	his	wife.”

      Kate	smiled	weakly.	 She	didn’t	feel	much	 like	a	wife	 this	morning.

      “I	 hope	you	don’t	think	 me	a	hopeless	meddler,”	Eloise	continued,	linking
her	arm	through	Kate’s	and	guiding	her	down	the	hall,	 “but	Anthony	 does	look
awful,	and	I	had	a	sneaking	suspicion	you	didn’t	 know	he	was	here.”

      “Why	 would	 you	think	that?”	 Kate	couldn’t	 help	asking.

      “Well,”	  Eloise	said,	“he	didn’t	 go	to	any	great	pains	to	tell	any	of	us	that	he
was	here.”

      Kate	eyed	her	sister-in-law	suspiciously.	 “Meaning?”

      Eloise	had	the	grace	to	blush	a	faint	pink.	“Meaning,	 ah,	that	the	only	reason
I	know	he’s	here	is	that	I	was	spying	upon	him.	 I	don’t	 think	my	mother	 even
knows	he’s	in	residence.”

      Kate	felt	 her	eyelids	blink	in	 rapid	succession.	“You’ve	 been	spying	upon
us?”

329
us?”

      “No,	 of	course	not.	But	I	happened	to	be	up	and	about	rather	early	this
morning,	and	I	heard	someone	come	in,	and	so	I	went	to	investigate	and	I	saw
light	coming	 from	under	the	door	in	his	study.”

      “How,	 then,	do	you	know	 he	looks	awful?”

      Eloise	shrugged.	“I	 figured	he’d	have	to	emerge	eventually	to	eat	or	relieve
himself,	so	I	waited	on	the	steps	for	an	hour	or	so—”

      “Or	 so?”	Kate	echoed.

      “Or	 three,”	Eloise	admitted.	“It’s	  really	not	that	long	when	one	is	interested
in	one’s	subject,	and	besides,	I	had	a	book	with	me	to	while	away	the	time.”

      Kate	shook	her	head	in	reluctant	admiration.	“What	 time	did	 he	come	in	last
night?”

      “Around	 four	 or	so.”

      “What	 were	you	doing	up	so	late?”

      Eloise	shrugged	again.	“I	couldn’t	 sleep.	I	often	can’t.	 I’d	 gone	down	to	get
a	book	to	read	from	the	library.	Finally,	 at	around	seven—well,	 I	suppose	it	was
a	bit	before	seven,	so	it	wasn’t	quite	three	hours	I	waited—”

      Kate	began	to	feel	dizzy.

      “—he	 emerged.	He	didn’t	head	in	the	direction	of	 the	breakfast	room,	so	I
can	only	assume	it	was	for	other	reasons.	After	a	minute	or	two,	he	reemerged
and	headed	back	into	his	study.	Where,”	Eloise	finished	with	 a	flourish,	“he	 has
been	ever	since.”

      Kate	stared	at	her	for	a	good	ten	seconds.	“Have	you	ever	considered
offering	your	 services	to	the	War	Department?”

      Eloise	grinned,	a	smile	so	like	 Anthony’s	 Kate	almost	cried.	“As	 a	spy?”	she
asked.

      Kate	nodded.

330
      “I’d	 be	brilliant,	 don’t	 you	think?”

      “Superb.”

      Eloise	gave	Kate	a	spontaneous	hug.	“I’m	so	glad	you	married	my	 brother.
Now	go	and	see	what	is	wrong.”

      Kate	nodded,	straightened	her	shoulders,	and	took	a	step	toward	Anthony’s
study.	Turning	around,	she	pointed	a	finger	at	Eloise	and	said,	“You	 will	 not	be
listening	at	the	door.”

      “I	 wouldn’t	 dream	of	it,”	 Eloise	replied.

      “I	 mean	it,	Eloise!”

      Eloise	sighed.	“It’s	 time	I	 went	up	to	bed,	anyway.	I	could	 use	a	nap	after
staying	up	all	night.”

      Kate	waited	until	 the	younger	girl	 had	disappeared	up	the	stairs,	then	made
her	way	to	Anthony’s	 study	door.	She	put	her	hand	on	the	knob,	whispering,
“Don’t	 be	locked,”	 as	she	gave	it	a	twist.	To	her	extreme	relief,	it	turned,	and	the
door	swung	open.

      “Anthony?”	  she	called	out.	Her	voice	was	soft	and	hesitant,	and	she	found
she	didn’t	like	the	sound	of	it.	 She	wasn’t	used	to	being	soft	and	hesitant.

      There	was	no	reply,	so	Kate	stepped	farther	into	the	room.	The	drapes	were
tightly	closed,	and	the	heavy	velvet	admitted	little	 light.	 Kate	scanned	the	room
until	her	eyes	fell	on	the	figure	 of	her	husband,	slouched	over	his	desk,	sound
asleep.

      Kate	walked	quietly	 across	the	room	to	the	windows	and	pulled	the	drapes
partway	open.	She	didn’t	want	to	blind	 Anthony	 when	he	woke	up,	but	at	the
same	time,	she	wasn’t	going	to	conduct	such	an	important	conversation	in	the
dark.	Then	she	walked	back	over	to	his	desk	and	gently	shook	his	shoulder.

      “Anthony?”	  she	whispered.	“Anthony?”

      His	reply	 was	closer	to	a	snore	than	anything	else.

      Frowning	 impatiently,	 she	shook	a	little	harder.	“Anthony?”	 she	said	softly.

331
      Frowning	 impatiently,	 she	shook	a	little	harder.	“Anthony?”	 she	said	softly.
“Anthon—”

      “Yibbledeedad—!”	  He	came	awake	in	one	sudden	movement,	an	incoherent
rush	of	speech	bursting	forth	as	his	torso	snapped	upright.

      Kate	watched	as	he	blinked	himself	into	 coherency,	then	focused	on	her.
“Kate,”	 he	said,	his	voice	hoarse	and	husky	with	sleep	and	something	else—
maybe	alcohol.	“What	are	you	doing	 here?”

      “What	 are	you	doing	here?”	she	countered.	“The	last	time	I	checked,	we
lived	nearly	a	mile	away.”

      “I	 didn’t	 want	to	disturb	you,”	 he	mumbled.

      Kate	didn’t	 believe	that	for	 one	second,	but	she	decided	not	to	argue	the
point.	Instead,	she	opted	for	the	direct	approach	and	asked,	“Why	did	you	leave
last	night?”

      A	long	 stretch	of	silence	was	followed	by	 a	weary,	tired	sigh,	and	Anthony
finally	 said,	“It’s	 complicated.”

      Kate	fought	the	urge	to	cross	her	arms.	“I’m	 an	intelligent	 woman,”	she	said
in	a	purposefully	even	voice.	“I’m	  generally	able	to	grasp	complex	concepts.”

      Anthony	 didn’t	 look	pleased	by	her	sarcasm.	“I	don’t	want	to	go	into	 this
now.”

      “When	 do	you	want	to	go	into	it?”

      “Go	 home,	Kate,”	he	said	softly.

      “Do	 you	plan	to	come	with	 me?”

      Anthony	 let	out	a	little	 groan	as	he	raked	a	hand	through	his	hair.	Christ,	she
was	like	a	dog	with	a	bone.	His	head	was	pounding,	his	mouth	tasted	like	wool,
all	he	really	wanted	to	do	was	splash	some	water	on	his	face	and	clean	his	teeth,
and	here	his	wife	would	not	stop	interrogating	 him….

      “Anthony?”	  she	persisted.

332
      That	was	enough.	He	stood	so	suddenly	that	his	chair	tipped	back	and
slammed	into	the	floor	with	 a	resounding	crash.	“You	will	 cease	your	questions
this	instant,”	he	bit	off.

      Her	mouth	settled	into	 a	flat,	angry	line.	But	 her	eyes….

      Anthony	 swallowed	against	the	acidic	taste	of	guilt	 that	flooded	his	mouth.

      Because	her	eyes	were	awash	with	pain.

      And	the	anguish	in	his	own	 heart	grew	tenfold.

      He	wasn’t	ready.	Not	 yet.	He	didn’t	 know	what	to	do	with	 her.	He	didn’t
know	what	to	do	with	 himself.	All	 his	 life—or	 at	least	since	his	father	had	died
—he’d	known	 that	certain	things	were	true,	that	certain	things	had	to	be	true.
And	now	Kate	had	gone	and	turned	his	world	upside	down.

      He	hadn’t	wanted	to	love	 her.	Hell,	he	hadn’t	wanted	to	love	 anyone.	It	was
the	one	thing—the	only	thing—that	 could	make	him	fear	his	own	 mortality.	 And
what	about	Kate?	He’d	promised	to	love	and	protect	her.	How	 could	he	do	that,
all	the	while	knowing	 he	would	leave	her?	He	certainly	couldn’t	 tell	 her	of	his
odd	convictions.	Aside	from	 the	fact	that	she’d	probably	think	 he	was	crazy,	all
it	would	do	was	subject	her	to	the	same	pain	and	fear	that	wracked	him.	Better	to
let	her	live	in	blissful	 ignorance.

      Or	was	it	even	better	if	 she	didn’t	love	him	 at	all?

      Anthony	 just	didn’t	 know	the	answer.	And	he	needed	more	time.	And	he
couldn’t	think	 with	 her	standing	there	before	him,	those	pain-filled	eyes	raking
his	face.	And—

      “Go,”	 he	choked	out.	“Just	go.”

      “No,”	 she	said	with	a	quiet	determination	 that	made	him	love	her	all	the
more.	“Not	until	 you	tell	 me	what	is	bothering	you.”

      He	strode	out	from	behind	his	desk	and	took	her	arm.	“I	 can’t	be	with	 you
right	now,”	 he	said	hoarsely,	his	eyes	avoiding	hers.	“Tomorrow.	I’ll	  see	you
tomorrow.	Or	the	next	day.”

      “Anthony—”

333
      “Anthony—”

      “I	 need	time	to	think.”

      “About	 what?”	 she	cried	out.

      “Don’t	 make	this	any	harder	than—”	 “How	 could	it	 possibly	get	any
harder?”	she	demanded.

      “I	 don’t	even	know	 what	you’re	talking	 about.”

      “I	 just	need	a	few	days,”	he	said,	feeling	like	 an	echo.	Just	a	few	days	to
think.	To	figure	 out	what	he	was	going	to	do,	how	he	was	going	to	live	 his	life.

      But	she	twisted	around	until	 she	was	facing	him,	and	then	her	hand	was	on
his	cheek,	touching	him	with	 a	tenderness	that	made	his	heart	ache.	“Anthony,”
she	whispered,	“please…”

      He	couldn’t	 form	a	word,	 couldn’t	make	a	sound.

      Her	hand	slipped	to	the	back	of	his	head,	and	then	she	was	drawing	him
closer…closer…and	he	couldn’t	help	 himself.	He	wanted	her	so	damned	badly,
wanted	to	feel	her	body	pressed	against	his,	to	taste	the	faint	salt	of	her	skin.	He
wanted	to	smell	her,	to	touch	her,	to	hear	the	rasp	of	her	breath	in	his	ear.

      Her	lips	 touched	his,	soft	and	seeking,	and	her	tongue	tickled	the	corner	of
her	mouth.	It	would	 be	so	easy	to	lose	himself	in	her,	to	sink	down	to	the	carpet
and…

      “No!”	  The	word	was	ripped	from	 his	throat,	and	by	God,	he’d	had	no	idea	it
was	there	until	it	burst	forth.

      “No,”	 he	said	again,	pushing	her	away.	“Not	 now.”

      “But—”

      He	didn’t	 deserve	her.	Not	right	now.	Not	 yet.	Not	until	 he	understood	how
he	was	meant	to	live	out	the	rest	of	his	life.	And	 if	it	 meant	he	had	to	deny
himself	the	one	thing	that	might	 bring	him	salvation,	so	be	it.

      “Go,”	 he	ordered,	his	voice	sounding	a	bit	more	harsh	than	he’d	intended.
“Go	now.	I’ll	  see	you	later.”

334
“Go	now.	I’ll	  see	you	later.”

      And	this	 time,	she	did	go.

      She	went,	without	looking	 back.

      And	Anthony,	 who’d	 only	just	 learned	what	it	was	to	love,	learned	what	it
was	to	die	inside.
                                                                	

By	the	following	morning,	Anthony	was	drunk.	By	afternoon,	he	was	hungover.

      His	head	was	pounding,	his	ears	were	ringing,	and	his	brothers,	who	had
been	surprised	to	discover	him	in	such	a	state	at	their	club,	were	talking	far	too
loudly.

      Anthony	 put	his	hands	over	his	ears	and	groaned.	Everyone	was	talking	far
too	loudly.

      “Kate	 boot	you	out	of	the	house?”	Colin	 asked,	grabbing	a	walnut	from	a
large	pewter	dish	in	the	middle	their	table	and	splitting	 it	open	with	 a	viciously
loud	crack.

      Anthony	 lifted	 his	head	just	far	enough	to	glare	at	him.

      Benedict	watched	his	brother	with	 raised	brows	and	the	vaguest	hint	of	a
smirk.	“She	definitely	 booted	him	out,”	 he	said	to	Colin.	“Hand	 me	one	of	those
walnuts,	will	 you?”

      Colin	 tossed	one	across	the	table.	“Do	you	want	the	crackers	as	well?”

      Benedict	shook	his	head	and	grinned	as	he	held	up	a	fat,	leather-bound	book.
“Much	 more	satisfying	to	smash	them.”

      “Don’t,”	  Anthony	 bit	out,	his	hand	shooting	out	to	grab	the	book,	“even
think	about	it.”

      “Ears	a	bit	sensitive	this	afternoon,	 are	they?”

      If	 Anthony	had	had	a	pistol,	he	would	have	shot	them	both,	hang	the	noise.

      “If	 I	 might	offer	 you	a	piece	of	advice?”	Colin	 said,	munching	on	his	walnut.

335
      “If	I	 might	offer	you	a	piece	of	advice?”	Colin	said,	munching	on	his	walnut.

      “You	might	not,”	Anthony	replied.	He	looked	up.	Colin	was	chewing	with
his	mouth	open.	As	this	had	been	strictly	forbidden	while	growing	up	in	their
household,	Anthony	could	only	deduce	that	Colin	was	displaying	such	poor
manners	only	to	make	more	noise.	“Close	your	damned	mouth,”	he	muttered.

      Colin	swallowed,	smacked	his	lips,	and	took	a	sip	of	his	tea	to	wash	it	all
down.	“Whatever	you	did,	apologize	for	it.	I	know	you,	and	I’m	getting	to	know
Kate,	and	knowing	what	I	know—”

      “What	the	hell	is	he	talking	about?”	Anthony	grumbled.

      “I	think,”	Benedict	said,	leaning	back	in	his	chair,	“that	he’s	telling	you
you’re	an	ass.”

      “Just	so!”	Colin	exclaimed.

      Anthony	just	shook	his	head	wearily.	“It’s	more	complicated	than	you
think.”

      “It	always	is,”	Benedict	said,	with	sincerity	so	false	it	almost	managed	to
sound	sincere.

      “When	you	two	idiots	find	women	gullible	enough	to	actually	marry	you,”
Anthony	snapped,	“then	you	may	presume	to	offer	me	advice.	But	until
then…shut	up.”

      Colin	looked	at	Benedict.	“Think	he’s	angry?”

      Benedict	quirked	a	brow.	“That	or	drunk.”

      Colin	shook	his	head.	“No,	not	drunk.	Not	anymore,	at	least.	He’s	clearly
hungover.”

      “Which	would	explain,”	Benedict	said	with	a	philosophical	nod,	“why	he’s
so	angry.”

      Anthony	spread	one	hand	over	his	face	and	pressed	hard	against	his	temples
with	his	thumb	and	middle	finger.	“God	above,”	he	muttered.	“What	would	it
take	to	get	you	two	to	leave	me	alone?”

336
      “Go	 home,	Anthony,”	 Benedict	said,	his	voice	surprisingly	 gentle.

      Anthony	 closed	his	eyes	and	let	out	a	long	breath.	There	was	nothing	he
wanted	to	do	more,	but	he	wasn’t	sure	what	to	say	to	Kate,	and	more
importantly,	he	had	no	idea	how	he’d	feel	once	he	got	there.

      “Yes,”	 Colin	 agreed.	“Just	go	home	and	tell	her	that	you	love	her.	What
could	be	more	simple?”

      And	suddenly	it	 was	simple.	He	had	to	tell	Kate	that	he	loved	her.	Now.	 This
very	day.	He	had	to	make	sure	she	knew,	and	he	vowed	to	spend	every	last
minute	of	his	miserably	short	life	 proving	 it	to	her.

      It	was	too	late	to	change	the	destiny	of	his	heart.	He’d	tried	 not	to	fall	 in
love,	and	he’d	failed.	Since	he	wasn’t	likely	 to	fall	 back	out	of	love,	 he	might	as
well	make	the	best	of	the	situation.	He	was	going	to	be	haunted	by	the
premonition	of	his	 own	death	whether	or	not	Kate	knew	of	his	love	 for	her.
Wouldn’t	 he	be	happier	during	these	last	few	years	if	he	spent	them	loving	her
openly	and	honestly?

      He	was	fairly	 certain	she’d	fallen	in	 love	with	 him	as	well;	surely	she’d	be
glad	to	hear	that	he	felt	the	same	way.	And	when	a	man	loved	a	woman,	truly
loved	her	from	the	depths	of	her	soul	to	the	tips	of	her	toes,	wasn’t	it	 his	God-
given	duty	to	try	 to	make	her	happy?

      He	wouldn’t	 tell	 her	of	his	premonitions,	though.	What	 would	be	the	point?
He	might	suffer	the	knowledge	that	their	 time	together	would	be	cut	short,	but
why	should	she?	Better	she	be	struck	by	sharp	and	sudden	pain	at	his	death	than
suffer	the	anticipation	of	 it	beforehand.

      He	was	going	to	die.	Everyone	died,	he	reminded	himself.	 He	was	just	going
to	have	to	do	it	sooner	rather	than	later.	But	by	God,	he	was	going	to	enjoy	his
last	years	with	every	breath	of	his	being.	It	might	 have	been	more	convenient	not
to	have	fallen	in	love,	but	now	 that	he	had,	he	wasn’t	going	to	hide	from	it.

      It	was	simple.	His	 world	was	Kate.	If	 he	denied	that,	he	might	as	well	stop
breathing	right	now.

      “I	 have	to	go,”	he	blurted	out,	standing	up	so	suddenly	that	his	thighs	hit	the
edge	of	the	table,	sending	walnut	shell	shards	skittering	across	the	tabletop.

337
      “I	 thought	you	might,”	 Colin	 murmured.

      Benedict	just	smiled	 and	said,	“Go.”

      His	brothers,	Anthony	 realized,	were	a	bit	smarter	than	they	let	on.

      “We’ll	  speak	to	you	in	a	week	or	so?”	Colin	asked.

      Anthony	 had	to	grin.	He	and	his	brothers	had	met	at	their	club	every	day	for
the	past	fortnight.	Colin’s	 oh-so-innocent	query	could	only	 imply	 one	thing—
that	it	was	obvious	that	Anthony	 had	completely	lost	his	heart	to	his	wife	 and
planned	to	spend	at	least	the	next	seven	days	proving	it	to	her.	And	that	the
family	he	was	creating	had	grown	as	important	as	the	one	he’d	been	born	into.

      “Two	 weeks,”	Anthony	 replied,	yanking	 on	his	coat.	“Maybe	three.”

      His	brothers	just	grinned.



But	when	Anthony	pushed	through	the	door	of	his	home,	slightly	out	of	breath	from	taking	the	front	steps
three	at	a	time,	he	discovered	that	Kate	was	not	in.

      “Where	 did	she	go?”	he	asked	the	butler.	Stupidly,	he’d	never	once
considered	that	she	might	not	be	at	home.

      “Out	 for	a	ride	in	the	park,”	 the	butler	replied,	“with	  her	sister	and	a	Mr.
Bagwell.”

      “Edwina’s	 suitor,”	 Anthony	 muttered	to	himself.	Damn.	He	 supposed	he
ought	to	be	happy	for	his	sister-in-law,	 but	the	timing	was	bloody	 annoying.
He’d	just	made	a	life-altering	 decision	regarding	his	wife;	 it	would	 have	been
nice	if	she’d	been	home.

      “Her	 creature	went	as	well,”	 the	butler	said	with	 a	shudder.	He’d	never	been
able	to	tolerate	what	he	considered	the	corgi’s	invasion	into	his	home.

      “She	took	Newton,	 eh?”	Anthony	 murmured.

      “I	 imagine	they’ll	 be	back	within	 an	hour	or	two.”

      Anthony	 tapped	his	booted	toe	against	the	marble	floor.	He	didn’t	want	 to
wait	an	hour.	Hell,	he	didn’t	 want	to	wait	 even	a	minute.	“I’ll	  find	them	myself,”

338
wait	an	hour.	Hell,	he	didn’t	 want	to	wait	 even	a	minute.	“I’ll	  find	them	myself,”
he	said	impatiently.	“It	 can’t	be	that	difficult.”

      The	butler	nodded	and	motioned	through	the	open	doorway	to	the	small
carriage	in	which	Anthony	 had	ridden	home.	“Will	  you	be	needing	another
carriage?”

      Anthony	 gave	his	head	a	single	shake.	“I’ll	go	on	horseback.	It’ll	 be
quicker.”

      “Very	 well.”	 The	butler	 bent	into	a	small	bow.	“I’ll	  have	a	mount	brought
’round.”

      Anthony	 watched	the	butler	make	his	slow	and	sedate	way	toward	the	rear	of
the	house	for	about	two	seconds	before	impatience	set	in.	“I’ll	 take	care	of	it
myself,”	 he	barked.

      And	the	next	thing	 he	knew,	he	was	dashing	out	of	the	house.
                                                                	

Anthony	was	in	jaunty	spirits	by	the	time	he	reached	Hyde	Park.	He	was	eager	to	find	his	wife,	to	hold	her
in	his	arms	and	watch	her	face	as	he	told	her	he	loved	her.	He	prayed	that	she	would	offer	words	returning
the	sentiment.	He	thought	she	would;	he’d	seen	her	heart	in	her	eyes	on	more	than	one	occasion.	Perhaps
she	was	just	waiting	for	him	to	say	something	first.	He	couldn’t	blame	her	if	that	was	the	case;	he’d	made	a
rather	big	fuss	about	how	theirs	would	not	be	a	love	match	right	before	their	wedding.

      What	an	idiot	 he’d	been.

      Once	he	entered	the	park,	he	made	the	decision	to	turn	his	mount	and	head
over	to	Rotten	Row.	The	busy	path	seemed	the	most	likely	destination	for	the
threesome;	Kate	certainly	would	have	no	reason	to	encourage	a	more	private
route.

      He	nudged	his	horse	into	as	fast	a	trot	as	he	could	safely	manage	within	the
confines	of	the	park,	trying	 to	ignore	the	calls	and	waves	of	greeting	that	were
directed	his	way	by	other	riders	and	pedestrians.

      Then,	just	when	he	thought	he’d	made	it	through	 without	delay,	he	heard	an
aged,	female,	and	very	imperious	voice	call	out	his	name.

      “Bridgerton!	  I	say,	Bridgerton!	 Stop	at	once.	I’m	speaking	to	you!”

339
      He	groaned	as	he	turned	about.	Lady	Danbury,	the	dragon	of	the	ton.	There
was	simply	no	way	he	could	ignore	her.	He	had	no	idea	how	old	she	was.	Sixty?
Seventy?	Whatever	her	age,	she	was	a	force	of	nature,	and	no	one	ignored	her.

      “Lady	 Danbury,”	 he	said,	trying	not	to	sound	resigned	as	he	reined	in	his
mount.	“How	 nice	to	see	you.”

      “Good	 gad,	boy,”	she	barked,	“you	sound	as	if	you’ve	 just	taken	an	antidote.
Perk	up!”

      Anthony	 smiled	weakly.

      “Where’s	 your	wife?”

      “I’m	  looking	for	 her	right	now,”	 he	replied,	“or	 at	least	I	was.”

      Lady	Danbury	 was	far	too	sharp	to	miss	his	pointed	hint,	so	he	could	only
deduce	that	she	ignored	him	apur-pose	when	she	said,	“I	like	your	wife.”

      “I	 like	her,	too.”

      “Never	 could	understand	why	you	were	so	set	on	courting	her	sister.	Nice
gel,	but	clearly	not	for	 you.”	She	rolled	her	eyes	and	let	out	an	indignant	huff.
“The	world	 would	be	a	much	happier	place	if	people	would	 just	listen	to	me
before	they	up	and	got	married,”	she	added.	“I	could	have	the	entire	Marriage
Mart	matched	up	in	a	week.”

      “I’m	  sure	you	could.”

      Her	eyes	narrowed.	“Are	 you	patronizing	me?”

      “I	 wouldn’t	 dream	of	it,”	 Anthony	 said	with	complete	honesty.

      “Good.	 You	always	seemed	like	the	sensible	sort.	I…”	 Her	mouth	fell	 open.
“What	the	devil	 is	that?”

      Anthony	 followed	 Lady	Danbury’s	 horrified	 gaze	until	his	eyes	fell	on	an
open-topped	carriage	careening	out	of	control	as	it	rounded	a	corner	on	two
wheels.	It	was	still	too	far	 to	see	the	faces	of	the	occupants,	but	then	he	heard	a
shriek,	and	then	the	terrified	bark	of	a	dog.

340
      Anthony’s	 blood	froze	in	 his	veins.

      His	wife	 was	in	that	carriage.

      With	 nary	a	word	to	Lady	Danbury,	 he	kicked	his	horse	into	motion	 and
galloped	full	 speed	ahead.	He	wasn’t	sure	what	he’d	do	once	he	reached	the
carriage.	Maybe	he’d	grab	the	reins	from	the	hapless	driver.	Maybe	he’d	be	able
to	pull	someone	to	safety.	But	he	knew	that	he	could	not	sit	still	 and	watch	while
the	vehicle	crashed	before	his	eyes.

      And	yet	 that	was	exactly	what	happened.

      Anthony	 was	halfway	to	the	drunken	carriage	when	it	veered	off	 the	path
and	ran	up	over	a	large	rock,	upsetting	the	balance	and	sending	it	tumbling	onto
its	side.

      And	Anthony	 could	only	 watch	in	horror	 as	his	wife	died	before	his	eyes.

341
Chapter	     22


Contrary	to	popular	 opinion,	 This	Author	is	aware	that	 she	is	viewed	as
something	of	a	cynic.

      But	that,	Dear	 Reader,	could	not	be	further	from	the	truth.	 This	Author	likes
nothing	better	than	a	happy	ending.	And	if	that	 makes	her	a	romantic	fool,	so	be
it.

                                                      LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	15	JUNE	1814



By	  the	time	Anthony	 reached	the	overturned	carriage,	Edwina	had	managed	to
crawl	from	the	wreckage	and	was	clawing	at	a	mangled	piece	of	wood,	trying	 to
open	a	hole	on	the	other	side	of	the	carriage.	The	sleeve	of	her	dress	was	torn,
and	the	hem	was	ragged	and	dirty,	but	she	seemed	not	to	notice	as	she	tugged
frantically	 at	the	door.	Newton	was	jumping	and	squirming	 at	her	feet,	his	barks
sharp	and	frenzied.

      “What	 happened?”	Anthony	asked,	his	voice	curt	and	panicked	as	he	leapt
from	his	horse.

      “I	 don’t	know,”	 Edwina	 gasped,	wiping	at	the	streaky	tears	that	ran	down
her	face.	“Mr.	Bagwell’s	 not	such	an	experienced	driver,	I	think,	 and	then
Newton	got	loose,	and	then	I	don’t	know	 what	happened.	One	minute	we	were
rolling	 along,	and	the	next—”

      “Where	 is	Bagwell?”

      She	motioned	to	the	other	side	of	the	carriage.	“He	was	thrown.	He	hit	 his
head.	But	he’ll	be	all	right.	 But	Kate…”

      “What	 about	Kate?”	Anthony	 dropped	to	his	knees	as	he	tried	to	peer	into
the	wreckage.	The	entire	carriage	had	overturned,	smashing	the	right	side	of	the
vehicle	as	it	had	rolled.	“Where	 is	she?”

      Edwina	swallowed	 convulsively,	 and	her	voice	barely	rose	above	a	whisper
as	she	said,	“I	think	she’s	trapped	beneath	the	carriage.”

342
as	she	said,	“I	think	she’s	trapped	beneath	the	carriage.”

      In	that	moment	Anthony	 tasted	death.	It	was	bitter	in	his	throat,	metallic	 and
hard.	It	scraped	his	flesh	like	a	knife,	choking	 and	squeezing,	pulling	the	air
from	his	very	lungs.

      Anthony	 yanked	viciously	 at	the	wreckage,	trying	to	open	a	wider	hole.	It
wasn’t	as	bad	as	it	had	looked	during	the	crash,	but	that	did	little	to	calm	his
racing	heart.	“Kate!”	 he	yelled,	trying	 to	sound	calm	and	unworried.	“Kate,	 can
you	hear	me?”

      The	only	sound	he	heard	in	reply,	however,	was	the	frantic	 whinny	of	 the
horses.	Damn.	He’d	have	to	get	them	unharnessed	and	loose	before	they
panicked	and	started	trying	to	drag	the	debris.	“Edwina?”	 Anthony	called
sharply,	looking	over	his	 shoulder.

      She	hurried	over,	wringing	 her	hands.	“Yes?”

      “Do	 you	know	how	 to	unharness	the	horses?”

      She	nodded.	“I’m	 not	very	fast,	but	I	 can	do	it.”

      Anthony	 flicked	 his	head	toward	the	onlookers	who	were	hurrying	over.
“See	if	you	can	find	 someone	to	help	you.”

      She	nodded	again	and	quickly	got	to	work.

      “Kate?”	 Anthony	 yelled	again.	He	couldn’t	 see	anyone;	a	dislodged	bench
was	blocking	the	opening.	“Can	you	hear	me?”

      Still	 no	response.

      “Try	 the	other	side,”	came	Edwina’s	 frantic	voice.	“The	 opening	isn’t	 as
crushed.”

      Anthony	 jumped	to	his	feet	and	ran	around	the	back	of	the	carriage	to	the
other	side.	The	door	had	already	come	off	its	hinges,	leaving	a	hole	just	large
enough	for	him	to	stuff	 his	upper	body	into.	“Kate?”	 he	called	out,	trying	 not	to
notice	the	sharp	sound	of	panic	in	his	voice.	Every	breath	from	his	lips	 seemed
overloud,	reverberating	in	the	tight	 space,	reminding	him	that	he	wasn’t	hearing
the	same	sounds	from	Kate.

343
      And	then,	as	he	carefully	moved	a	seat	cushion	that	had	turned	sideways,	he
saw	her.	She	was	terrifyingly	still,	 but	her	head	didn’t	appear	to	be	stuck	in	an
unnatural	position,	and	he	didn’t	see	any	blood.

      That	had	to	be	a	good	sign.	He	didn’t	know	 much	of	medicine,	but	he	held
on	to	that	thought	like	a	miracle.

      “You	 can’t	die,	Kate,”	 he	said	as	his	terrified	fingers	yanked	away	at	the
wreckage,	desperate	to	open	the	hole	until	it	was	wide	enough	to	pull	her
through.	“Do	 you	hear	me?	You	can’t	die!”

      A	jagged	piece	of	wood	 sliced	open	the	back	of	his	hand,	but	Anthony	didn’t
notice	the	blood	running	over	his	skin	 as	he	pulled	on	another	broken	beam.
“You	 had	better	be	breathing,”	he	warned,	his	voice	shaking	and	precariously
close	to	a	sob.	“This	wasn’t	supposed	to	be	you.	It	was	never	supposed	to	be
you.	It	isn’t	 your	time.	Do	 you	understand	me?”

      He	tore	away	another	broken	piece	of	wood	and	reached	through	the	newly
widened	hole	to	grasp	her	hand.	His	fingers	found	her	pulse,	which	seemed
steady	enough	to	him,	but	it	was	still	impossible	 to	tell	if	 she	was	bleeding,	or
had	broken	her	back,	or	had	hit	her	head,	or	had…

      His	heart	shuddered.	There	were	so	many	ways	to	die.	If	a	bee	could	bring
down	a	man	in	his	prime,	surely	a	carriage	accident	could	steal	the	life	of	one
small	woman.

      Anthony	 grabbed	the	last	piece	of	wood	that	stood	in	his	way	and	heaved,
but	it	didn’t	 budge.	“Don’t	 do	this	to	me,”	 he	muttered.	“Not	now.	 It	isn’t	 her
time.	Do	you	hear	me?	It	isn’t	 her	time!”	 He	felt	something	wet	on	his	cheeks
and	dimly	realized	that	it	 was	tears.	“It	was	supposed	to	be	me,”	he	said,	choking
on	the	words.	“It	was	always	supposed	to	be	me.”

      And	then,	just	as	he	was	preparing	to	give	that	last	piece	of	wood	another
desperate	yank,	Kate’s	fingers	tightened	like	a	claw	around	his	wrist.	His	 eyes
flew	to	her	face,	just	in	time	 to	see	her	eyes	open	wide	and	clear,	with	nary	a
blink.

      “What	 the	devil,”	 she	asked,	sounding	quite	lucid	and	utterly	awake,	“are
you	talking	about?”

      Relief	 flooded	his	chest	so	quickly	it	 was	almost	painful.	“Are	 you	all

344
      Relief	 flooded	his	chest	so	quickly	it	 was	almost	painful.	“Are	 you	all
right?”	he	asked,	his	voice	wobbling	 on	every	syllable.

      She	grimaced,	then	said,	“I’ll	 be	fine.”

      Anthony	 paused	for	the	barest	of	seconds	as	he	considered	her	choice	of
words.	“But	 are	you	fine	right	now?”

      She	let	out	a	little	cough,	and	he	fancied	he	could	hear	her	wince	with	 pain.
“I	did	 something	to	my	leg,”	 she	admitted.	“But	I	 don’t	think	 I’m	 bleeding.”

      “Are	 you	faint?	Dizzy?	 Weak?”

      She	shook	her	head.	“Just	in	pain.	What	are	you	doing	here?”

      He	smiled	through	his	tears.	“I	 came	to	find	you.”

      “You	 did?”	 she	whispered.

      He	nodded.	“I	 came	to—That	is	to	say,	I	realized…”	 He	swallowed
convulsively.	He’d	 never	dreamed	that	the	day	would	come	when	he’d	say	these
words	to	a	woman,	and	they’d	grown	so	big	in	 his	heart	he	could	barely	squeeze
them	out.	“I	love	 you,	Kate,”	 he	said	chokingly.	“It	 took	me	a	while	 to	figure	it
out,	but	I	do,	and	I	had	to	tell	you.	 Today.”

      Her	lips	 wobbled	into	a	shaky	smile	as	she	motioned	to	the	rest	of	her	body
with	her	chin.	“You’ve	  bloody	good	timing.”

      Amazingly,	 he	found	himself	 grinning	in	 return.	“Almost	 makes	you	glad	I
waited	so	long,	eh?	If	I’d	 told	you	last	week,	I	 wouldn’t	 have	followed	you	 out
to	the	park	today.”

      She	stuck	out	her	tongue,	which,	considering	the	circumstances,	made	him
love	her	even	more.	“Just	get	me	out,”	she	said.

      “Then	 you’ll	 tell	me	you	love	 me?”	he	teased.

      She	smiled,	wistful	 and	warm,	and	nodded.

      It	was,	of	 course,	as	good	as	a	declaration,	and	even	though	he	was	crawling
through	the	wreckage	of	an	overturned	carriage,	even	though	Kate	was	stuck	in

345
the	cursed	carriage,	with	what	might	very	well	 be	a	broken	leg,	he	was	suddenly
consumed	with	an	overwhelming	sense	of	contentment	and	peace.

      And	he	realized	he	hadn’t	felt	 that	way	for	nearly	 twelve	years,	not	since	that
fateful	afternoon	when	he’d	walked	 into	his	parents’	bedroom	and	seen	his	father
laid	out	on	the	bed,	cold	and	still.

      “I’m	  going	to	pull	you	 through	now,”	 he	said,	sliding	his	arms	beneath	her
back.	“It’ll	  hurt	your	leg,	I’m	 afraid,	but	it	 can’t	be	avoided.”

      “My	 leg	already	hurts,”	 she	said,	smiling	bravely.	“I	 just	want	to	get	out.”

      Anthony	 gave	her	a	single,	serious	nod,	then	curved	his	hands	around	her
side	and	began	to	pull.	“How	is	that?”	 he	asked,	his	heart	stopping	every	time	he
saw	her	wince	with	pain.

      “Fine,”	 she	gasped,	but	he	could	tell	she	was	merely	putting	up	a	brave	front.

      “I’m	  going	to	have	to	turn	you,”	 he	said,	eyeing	a	broken	and	jagged	piece
of	wood	that	stuck	down	from	 above.	It	was	going	to	be	difficult	  to	maneuver
her	around	it.	He	couldn’t	 care	less	if	he	tore	her	clothing—hell,	he’d	 buy	her	a
hundred	new	dresses	if	she’d	only	promise	never	again	to	step	into	a	carriage	if
it	was	being	driven	by	anyone	other	than	himself.	But	 he	couldn’t	bear	the
thought	of	scratching	even	an	inch	of	her	skin.	She’d	been	through	enough
already.	She	didn’t	need	more.

      “I	 need	to	pull	you	out	headfirst,”	 he	told	her.	“Do	 you	think	 you	can	wiggle
yourself	around?	Just	enough	so	I	can	grasp	under	your	arms.”

      She	nodded,	gritting	her	teeth	as	she	painstakingly	turned	herself	inch	by
inch,	lifting	 herself	up	on	her	hands	as	she	scooted	her	hips	around	clockwise.

      “There	you	 are,”	Anthony	 said	encouragingly.	“Now	 I’m	 going	to—”

      “Just	do	it,”	 Kate	ground	out.	“You	 don’t	 need	to	explain.”

      “Very	 well,”	 he	replied,	inching	 backward	until	 his	knees	found	purchase	on
the	grass.	On	a	mental	count	of	three,	he	gritted	his	teeth	and	began	to	pull	her
out.

      And	stopped	a	second	later,	as	Kate	let	out	an	earsplitting	scream.	If	he

346
      And	stopped	a	second	later,	as	Kate	let	out	an	earsplitting	scream.	If	he
hadn’t	been	so	convinced	that	he’d	die	within	 the	next	nine	years,	he	would	have
sworn	she’d	just	taken	ten	off	his	life.

      “Are	 you	all	right?”	 he	asked	urgently.

      “I’m	  fine,”	she	insisted.	But	she	was	breathing	hard,	puffing	through	 pursed
lips,	and	her	face	was	tense	with	pain.

      “What	 happened?”	came	a	voice	from	just	outside	the	carriage.	It	was
Edwina,	done	with	the	horses	and	sounding	frantic.	“I	 heard	Kate	scream.”

      “Edwina?”	 Kate	asked,	twisting	 her	neck	as	she	tried	to	see	out.	“Are	you	all
right?”	She	yanked	on	Anthony’s	 sleeve.	“Is	Edwina	all	 right?	Is	she	hurt?	Does
she	need	a	doctor?”

      “Edwina’s	 fine,”	 he	replied.	“You	 need	a	doctor.”

      “And	 Mr.	 Bagwell?”

      “How’s	 Bagwell?”	 Anthony	 asked	Edwina,	his	voice	curt	as	he	concentrated
on	maneuvering	Kate	around	the	debris.

      “A	 bump	on	his	head,	but	he’s	back	on	his	feet.”

      “It’s	 nothing.	 Can	I	help?”	came	a	worried	male	voice.

      Anthony	 had	a	feeling	that	the	accident	had	been	as	much	Newton’s	fault	as
Bagwell’s,	but	 still,	the	young	man	had	been	in	control	of	 the	reins,	and	Anthony
wasn’t	inclined	 to	feel	charitable	toward	him	 just	now.	“I’ll	  let	you	know,”	 he
said	curtly,	before	turning	back	to	Kate	 and	saying,	“Bagwell’s	 fine.”

      “I	 can’t	believe	I	 forgot	to	ask	after	them.”

      “I’m	  sure	your	lapse	will	be	pardoned,	given	the	circumstances,”	Anthony
said,	edging	farther	back	until	he	was	nearly	entirely	out	 of	the	carriage.	Kate
was	now	positioned	at	the	opening,	and	it	would	take	only	 one	more—rather
long	and	almost	certainly	painful—tug	 to	get	her	out.

      “Edwina?	 Edwina?”	Kate	was	calling	 out.	“Are	 you	sure	you’re	not
injured?”

347
      Edwina	jammed	her	face	into	the	opening.	“I’m	  fine,”	 she	said	reassuringly.
“Mr.	 Bagwell	was	thrown	 clear,	and	I	was	able	to—”

      Anthony	 elbowed	her	out	of	the	way.	“Grit	 your	 teeth,	Kate,”	he	ordered.

      “What?	 I—Aaaaaaaargh!”

      With	 one	single	tug,	he	freed	her	completely	from	the	wreckage,	both	of
them	landing	on	the	ground,	both	of	them	breathing	hard.	But	where	Anthony’s
hyperventilation	was	from	 exertion,	Kate’s	was	obviously	 from	intense	pain.

      “Good	 God!”	 Edwina	nearly	yelled.	“Look	  at	her	leg!”

      Anthony	 glanced	over	at	Kate	and	felt	his	stomach	drop	down	clear	to	his
toes.	Her	lower	leg	was	crooked	and	bent,	and	more	than	obviously	broken.	He
swallowed	convulsively,	 trying	 not	to	let	his	concern	show.	Legs	could	be	set,
but	he’d	also	heard	of	men	who’d	lost	limbs	 due	to	infection	and	bad	medical
care.

      “What’s	 wrong	with	 my	leg?”	 Kate	asked.	“It	hurts,	but—Oh,	 my	God!”

      “Best	not	 to	look,”	 Anthony	said,	trying	 to	tip	her	chin	 in	the	other	direction.

      Her	breathing,	which	 was	already	rapid	from	trying	 to	control	the	pain,	grew
erratic	and	panicked.	“Oh,	my	God,”	 she	gasped.	“It	hurts.	Didn’t	 realize	how
much	it	hurt	until	 I	saw—”

      “Don’t	 look,”	 Anthony	 ordered.

      “Oh,	 my	God.	Oh,	my	God.”

      “Kate?”	 Edwina	asked	in	a	concerned	voice,	leaning	in.	“Are	 you	all	 right?”

      “Look	 at	my	leg!”	 Kate	nearly	 shrieked.	“Does	it	look	 all	right?”

      “I	 was	actually	speaking	of	your	face.	You	 look	a	bit	green.”

      But	Kate	couldn’t	 reply.	 She	was	hyperventilating	too	hard.	And	then,	with
Anthony,	Edwina,	 Mr.	Bagwell,	 and	Newton	all	staring	 down	at	her,	her	eyes
rolled	back	in	her	head,	and	she	fainted.

348
                                                                           	

Three	hours	later,	Kate	was	installed	in	her	bed,	certainly	not	comfortable	but	at	least	in	a	bit	less	pain
thanks	to	the	laudanum	Anthony	had	forced	down	her	throat	the	minute	they’d	gotten	home.	Her	leg	had
been	expertly	set	by	the	three	surgeons	Anthony	had	summoned	(not,	as	all	three	surgeons	had	pointed	out,
that	more	than	one	was	needed	to	set	a	bone,	but	Anthony	had	crossed	his	arms	implacably	and	stared	them
all	down	until	they’d	shut	up),	and	a	physician	had	stopped	by	to	leave	several	prescriptions	that	he	swore
would	hasten	the	bone-knitting	process.

       Anthony	    had	 fussed	 over	  her	 like	  a	mother	  hen,	 second-guessing	    every	  move
from	  every	 doctor	   until	  one	 of	 them	  had	 actually	  had	 the	 audacity	   to	 ask	 him
when	 he’d	  received	   his	 license	  from	  the	 Royal	  College	   of	 Physicians.

       Anthony	    had	 not	 been	 amused.

       But	  after	 much	  haranguing,	    Kate’s	  leg	 was	 set	 and	 splinted,	   and	 she	was	  told
to	look	  forward	   to	 at	 least	 a	month	  of	  confinement	    in	 bed.

       “Look	   forward?”	    she	 groaned	  to	 Anthony	    once	 the	 last	 of	 the	 surgeons	  had
gone.	 “How	   can	 I	 look	  forward	   to	 that?”

       “You’ll	     be	able	  to	catch	  up	 on	 your	 reading,”	    he	suggested.

       She	 let	 out	 an	 impatient	   exhale	  through	   her	 nose;	 it	 was	 hard	 to	 breathe
through	  her	 mouth	  while	   clenching	   her	 teeth.	  “I	 wasn’t	   aware	 I	 was	 behind	  on
my	 reading.”

       If	 he’d	  been	 tempted	   to	laugh,	  he	 did	 a	 good	 job	  of	 hiding	  it.	  “Perhaps	  you
could	  take	 up	 needlework,”	    he	 suggested.

       She	 just	 glared	  at	 him.	  As	 if	 the	 prospect	  of	  needlework	   were	  going	  to	 make
her	feel	  better.

       He	 sat	 gingerly	   on	 the	 edge	 of	 her	 bed	 and	 patted	  the	 back	 of	 her	 hand.	  “I’ll
keep	 you	 company,”	    he	 said	 with	  an	 encouraging	   smile.	  “I’d	   already	  decided	   to
cut	 back	 on	 the	 time	  I	spent	  at	my	  club.”

       Kate	  sighed.	  She	 was	 tired	  and	 cranky	  and	 in	 pain,	  and	 she	was	 taking	   it	 out
on	her	 husband,	   which	  really	  wasn’t	   fair.	  She	 turned	  her	 hand	 over	  so	that	 their
palms	 met	  and	 then	 entwined	   her	 fingers	  through	   his.	 “I	  love	 you,	  you	  know,”
she	said	 softly.

       He	 squeezed	  her	 hands	 and	 nodded,	   the	 warmth	  of	 his	 eyes	 on	 hers	 saying

349
      He	squeezed	her	hands	and	nodded,	the	warmth	of	his	eyes	on	hers	saying
more	than	words	ever	could.

      “You	 told	me	not	to,”	 Kate	said.

      “I	 was	an	ass.”

      She	didn’t	argue;	a	quirk	 of	his	lips	told	 her	that	he	noticed	her	lack	of
contradiction.	After	 a	moment	of	silence,	she	said,	“You	were	saying	some	odd
things	in	the	park.”

      Anthony’s	 hand	remained	in	hers,	but	his	body	pulled	back	slightly.	 “I	 don’t
know	what	you	mean,”	he	replied.

      “I	 think	you	 do,”	she	said	softly.

      Anthony	 closed	his	eyes	for	a	moment,	then	stood,	his	fingers	trailing
through	her	grasp	until	finally	 they	were	no	longer	touching	 at	all.	For	so	many
years	he’d	been	careful	to	keep	his	odd	convictions	to	himself.	It	 seemed	best.
Either	people	would	believe	him	 and	then	worry	or	they	wouldn’t	 and	then	think
him	insane.

      Neither	option	 was	particularly	appealing.

      But	now,	 in	the	heat	of	one	terrified	moment,	he’d	 blurted	it	out	to	his	wife.
He	couldn’t	even	remember	exactly	what	he’d	 said.	But	it	had	been	enough	to
make	her	curious.	And	Kate	wasn’t	the	sort	to	let	go	of	 a	curiosity.	He	could
practice	all	the	avoidance	he	wanted,	but	eventually	she’d	get	it	out	of	him.	 A
more	stubborn	woman	had	never	been	born.

      He	walked	to	the	window	 and	leaned	against	the	sill,	gazing	blankly	in	 front
of	him	as	if	he	could	actually	 see	the	streetscape	through	the	heavy	burgundy
drapes	that	had	long	since	been	pulled	shut.	“There	is	something	you	should
know	about	me,”	he	whispered.

      She	didn’t	say	anything,	 but	he	knew	she’d	heard.	Maybe	it	was	the	sound	of
her	changing	her	position	in	bed,	maybe	it	was	the	sheer	electricity	in	the	air.
But	somehow	he	knew.

      He	turned	around.	It	would	 have	been	easier	to	speak	his	words	to	the
curtains,	but	she	deserved	better	from	him.	She	was	sitting	up	in	bed,	her	leg

350
curtains,	but	she	deserved	better	from	him.	She	was	sitting	up	in	bed,	her	leg
propped	up	on	pillows,	her	eyes	wide	and	filled	 with	a	heartbreaking	mix	 of
curiosity	and	concern.

      “I	 don’t	know	 how	to	tell	 you	this	without	 sounding	ridiculous,”	 he	said.

      “Sometimes	the	easiest	way	is	just	to	say	it,”	 she	murmured.	She	patted	an
empty	spot	on	the	bed.	“Do	you	want	to	sit	beside	me?”

      He	shook	his	head.	Proximity	 would	only	 make	it	that	much	more	difficult.
“Something	happened	to	me	when	my	father	died,”	he	said.

      “You	 were	very	close	to	him,	weren’t	 you?”

      He	nodded.	“Closer	than	I’d	 ever	been	to	anyone,	until	I	met	you.”

      Her	eyes	glistened.	“What	happened?”

      “It	 was	very	unexpected,”	he	said.	His	voice	was	flat,	 as	if	he	were
recounting	an	obscure	news	item	and	not	the	single	most	disturbing	event	of	his
life.	“A	 bee,	I	told	you.”

      She	nodded.

      “Who	 would	have	thought	a	bee	could	kill	 a	man?”	Anthony	 said	with	a
caustic	laugh.	“It	would	 have	been	funny	if	it	 weren’t	so	tragic.”

      She	didn’t	say	anything,	 just	looked	at	him	with	 a	sympathy	that	made	his
heart	break.

      “I	 stayed	with	him	 throughout	the	night,”	 he	continued,	turning	slightly	 so
that	he	would	not	have	to	look	into	 her	eyes.	“He	was	dead,	of	course,	but	I
needed	a	little	more	time.	I	just	sat	beside	him	and	watched	his	face.”	Another
short	burst	of	angry	laughter	escaped	his	lips.	“God,	what	a	fool	I	 was.	I	think	I
half	expected	him	to	open	his	eyes	at	any	moment.”

      “I	 don’t	think	 that’s	foolish,”	  Kate	said	softly.	“I’ve	  seen	death,	too.	It’s	hard
to	believe	that	someone	is	gone	when	he	looks	so	normal	and	at	peace.”

      “I	 don’t	know	 when	it	happened,”	Anthony	 said,	“but	by	 morning	I	was
sure.”

351
      “That	 he	was	dead?”	she	asked.

      “No,”	 he	said	roughly,	 “that	I	would	 be,	too.”

      He	waited	for	 her	to	comment,	he	waited	for	her	to	cry,	to	do	anything,	 but
she	just	sat	there	staring	at	him	with	no	perceptible	change	of	expression,	until
finally	 he	had	to	say,	“I’m	 not	as	great	a	man	as	my	father	was.”

      “He	 might	choose	to	disagree,”	she	said	quietly.

      “Well,	 he’s	not	here	to	do	that,	is	he?”	Anthony	 snapped.

      Again,	 she	said	nothing.	Again,	he	felt	like	 a	heel.

      He	cursed	under	his	breath	and	pressed	his	fingers	against	his	temples.	His
head	was	starting	to	throb.	He	was	starting	to	feel	dizzy,	and	he	realized	that	he
couldn’t	remember	the	last	time	he’d	eaten.	“It’s	 my	judgment	 to	make,”	he	said
in	a	low	voice.	“You	 didn’t	 know	 him.”

      He	sagged	against	a	wall	with	a	long,	weary	exhale,	and	said,	“Just	let	me
tell	you.	Don’t	 talk,	don’t	 interrupt,	 don’t	judge.	It’s	 hard	enough	to	get	it	out	as
it	is.	Can	you	do	that	for	me?”

      She	nodded.

      Anthony	 took	a	shaky	breath.	“My	 father	was	the	greatest	man	I’ve	ever
known.	Not	a	day	goes	by	when	I	don’t	 realize	that	I’m	 not	living	 up	to	his
standards.	I	knew	that	he	was	everything	to	which	I	could	aspire.	I	might	 not
ever	match	his	greatness,	but	if	I	could	come	close	I’d	be	satisfied.	That’s	all	 I
ever	wanted.	Just	to	come	close.”

      He	looked	at	Kate.	He	wasn’t	 sure	why.	Maybe	for	 reassurance,	maybe	for
sympathy.	Maybe	just	to	see	her	face.

      “If	 there	was	one	thing	I	knew,”	 he	whispered,	somehow	finding	the	courage
to	keep	his	eyes	focused	on	hers,	“it	was	that	I	would	never	surpass	him.	Not
even	in	years.”

      “What	 are	you	trying	to	tell	 me?”	she	whispered.

      He	shrugged	helplessly.	“I	 know	it	 makes	no	sense.	I	know	I	can	offer	no

352
      He	shrugged	helplessly.	“I	know	it	makes	no	sense.	I	know	I	can	offer	no
rational	explanation.	But	since	that	night	when	I	sat	with	my	father’s	dead	body,
I	knew	I	couldn’t	possibly	live	any	longer	than	he	had.”

      “I	see,”	she	said	quietly.

      “Do	you?”	And	then,	as	if	a	dam	had	burst,	the	words	poured	forth.	It	all
gushed	out	of	him—why	he’d	been	so	dead	set	against	marrying	for	love,	the
jealousy	he’d	felt	when	he’d	realized	that	she’d	managed	to	fight	her	demons
and	win.

      He	watched	as	she	brought	one	of	her	hands	to	her	mouth	and	bit	the	end	of
her	thumb.	He’d	seen	her	do	that	before,	he	realized—whenever	she	was
disturbed	or	deep	in	thought.

      “How	old	was	your	father	when	he	died?”	she	asked.

      “Thirty-eight.”

      “How	old	are	you	now?”

      He	looked	at	her	curiously;	she	knew	his	age.	But	he	said	it	anyway.
“Twenty-nine.”

      “So	by	your	estimation,	we	have	nine	years	left.”

      “At	most.”

      “And	you	truly	believe	this.”

      He	nodded.

      She	pursed	her	lips	and	let	out	a	long	breath	through	her	nose.	Finally,	after
what	felt	like	an	endless	silence,	she	looked	back	up	at	him	with	clear,	direct
eyes,	and	said,	“Well,	you’re	wrong.”

      Oddly	enough,	the	straightforward	tone	of	her	voice	was	rather	reassuring.
Anthony	even	felt	one	corner	of	his	mouth	lift	up	in	the	palest	of	smiles.	“You
think	I’m	unaware	of	how	ludicrous	it	all	sounds?”

      “I	don’t	think	it	sounds	ludicrous	at	all.	It	sounds	like	a	perfectly	normal
reaction,	actually,	especially	considering	how	much	you	adored	your	father.”

353
reaction,	actually,	especially	considering	how	much	 you	adored	your	father.”
She	lifted	her	shoulders	in	a	rather	self-aware	shrug	as	her	head	tipped	to	the
side.	“But	it’s	 still	 wrong.”

      Anthony	 didn’t	 say	anything.

      “Your	 father’s	death	was	an	accident,”	Kate	said.	“An	 accident.	A	terrible,
horrible	twist	 of	fate	that	no	one	could	have	predicted.”

      Anthony	 shrugged	fatalistically.	 “I’ll	  probably	go	the	same	way.”

      “Oh,	 for	the	love	of—”	 Kate	 managed	to	bite	her	tongue	a	split	second
before	she	blasphemed.	“Anthony,	I	could	die	tomorrow	 as	well.	I	 could	have
died	today	when	that	carriage	rolled	on	top	of	me.”

      He	paled.	“Don’t	 ever	remind	me	of	 that.”

      “My	 mother	died	when	she	was	my	age,”	Kate	reminded	him	 harshly.	“Did
you	ever	think	of	that?	By	 your	laws,	I	should	be	dead	by	my	next	birthday.”

      “Don’t	 be—”

      “Silly?”	  she	finished	for	him.

      Silence	reigned	for	a	full	 minute.

      Finally,	 Anthony	 said,	his	voice	barely	above	a	whisper,	“I	don’t	 know	if	 I
can	get	past	this.”

      “You	 don’t	 have	to	get	past	it,”	Kate	said.	She	caught	her	lower	lip,	which
had	begun	to	tremble,	between	her	teeth,	and	then	laid	her	hand	on	an	empty
spot	on	the	bed.	“Could	you	come	over	here	so	I	can	hold	your	hand?”

      Anthony	 responded	instantly;	the	warmth	of	her	touch	flooded	 him,	seeping
through	his	body	until	 it	caressed	his	very	soul.	And	in	that	moment	he	realized
that	this	was	about	more	than	love.	This	woman	made	him	a	better	person.	He’d
been	good	and	strong	and	kind	before,	but	with	her	at	his	side,	he	was	something
more.

      And	together	they	could	 do	anything.

      It	almost	made	him	think	 that	forty	 might	not	be	such	an	impossible	dream.

354
      It	almost	made	him	think	that	forty	might	not	be	such	an	impossible	dream.

      “You	don’t	have	to	get	past	it,”	she	said	again,	her	words	blowing	softly
between	them.	“To	be	honest,	I	don’t	see	how	you	could	get	completely	past	it
until	you	turn	thirty-nine.	But	what	you	can	do”—she	gave	his	hand	a	squeeze,
and	Anthony	somehow	felt	even	stronger	than	he	had	just	moments	before—“is
refuse	to	allow	it	to	rule	your	life.”

      “I	realized	that	this	morning,”	he	whispered,	“when	I	knew	I	had	to	tell	you	I
loved	you.	But	somehow	now—now	I	know	it.”

      She	nodded,	and	he	saw	that	her	eyes	were	filling	with	tears.	“You	have	to
live	each	hour	as	if	it’s	your	last,”	she	said,	“and	each	day	as	if	you	were
immortal.	When	my	father	grew	ill,	he	had	so	many	regrets.	There	were	so	many
things	he	wished	he’d	done,	he	told	me.	He’d	always	assumed	he	had	more	time.
That’s	something	I’ve	always	carried	with	me.	Why	on	earth	do	you	think	I
decided	to	attempt	the	flute	at	such	an	advanced	age?	Everyone	told	me	I	was
too	old,	that	to	be	truly	good	at	it	I	had	to	have	started	as	a	child.	But	that’s	not
the	point,	really.	I	don’t	need	to	be	truly	good.	I	just	need	to	enjoy	it	for	myself.
And	I	need	to	know	I	tried.”

      Anthony	smiled.	She	was	a	terrible	flutist.	Even	Newton	couldn’t	bear	to
listen.

      “But	the	opposite	is	true	as	well,”	Kate	added	softly.	“You	can’t	shun	new
challenges	or	hide	yourself	from	love	just	because	you	think	you	might	not	be
here	to	carry	your	dreams	to	completion.	In	the	end,	you’ll	have	just	as	many
regrets	as	did	my	father.”

      “I	didn’t	want	to	love	you,”	Anthony	whispered.	“It	was	the	one	thing	I
feared	above	all.	I’d	grown	rather	used	to	my	rather	odd	little	outlook	on	life.
Almost	comfortable,	actually.	But	love—”	His	voice	caught;	the	choking	sound
seemed	unmanly,	it	made	him	vulnerable.	But	he	didn’t	care,	because	this	was
Kate.

      And	it	didn’t	matter	if	she	saw	his	deepest	fears,	because	he	knew	she’d	love
him	no	matter	what.	It	was	a	sublimely	freeing	feeling.

      “I’ve	seen	true	love,”	he	continued.	“I	wasn’t	the	cynical	jade	society	made
me	out	to	be.	I	knew	love	existed.	My	mother—my	father—”	He	stopped,
sucking	in	a	ragged	breath.	This	was	the	hardest	thing	he’d	ever	done.	And	yet

355
sucking	in	a	ragged	breath.	This	was	the	hardest	thing	he’d	ever	done.	And	yet
he	knew	the	words	had	to	be	said.	He	knew,	no	matter	how	difficult	 it	was	to	get
them	out,	that	in	the	end,	his	heart	would	soar.

      “I	 was	so	sure	that	it	was	the	one	thing	that	could	make	this…this…I	 don’t
really	know	what	 to	call	it—this	 knowledge	of	 my	own	mortality…”	  He	raked
his	hand	through	his	hair,	fighting	 for	words.	“Love	 was	the	only	thing	 that	was
going	to	make	that	unbearable.	How	could	I	love	someone,	truly	 and	deeply,
knowing	that	it	 was	doomed?”

      “But	 it’s	 not	doomed,”	Kate	said,	squeezing	his	hand.

      “I	 know.	I	 fell	in	 love	with	 you,	and	then	I	knew.	Even	if	 I	am	right,	even	if
I’m	fated	to	 live	only	 as	long	as	my	father	did	before	me,	I’m	not	doomed.”	 He
leaned	forward	and	brushed	a	feather-light	kiss	on	her	lips.	“I	 have	you,”	he
whispered,	“and	I’m	 not	going	to	waste	a	single	moment	we	have	together.”

      Kate’s	lips	 spread	into	a	smile.	“What	does	that	mean?”

      “It	 means	that	love	isn’t	about	being	afraid	that	it	 will	 all	be	snatched	away.
Love’s	about	finding	 the	one	person	who	makes	your	heart	complete,	who
makes	you	a	better	person	than	you	ever	dreamed	you	could	be.	It’s	about
looking	in	 the	eyes	of	your	wife	and	knowing,	 all	the	way	to	your	 bones,	that
she’s	simply	the	best	person	you’ve	ever	known.”

      “Oh,	 Anthony,”	 Kate	whispered,	tears	streaming	down	her	cheeks.	“That’s
how	I	feel	about	you.”

      “When	 I	thought	you’d	 died—”

      “Don’t	 say	it,”	 she	choked	out.	“You	 don’t	have	to	relive	 that.”

      “No,”	 he	said.	“I	 do.	I	have	to	tell	you.	 It	was	the	first	time—even	 after	all
these	years	of	expecting	my	own	death—that	I	truly	knew	 what	it	meant	to	die.
Because	with	you	gone…there	was	nothing	left	for	 me	to	live	for.	 I	don’t	 know
how	my	mother	did	it.”

      “She	had	her	children,”	 Kate	said.	“She	couldn’t	 leave	you.”

      “I	 know,”	 he	whispered,	“but	the	pain	she	must	have	endured…”

      “I	 think	the	human	heart	must	be	stronger	than	we	could	ever	imagine.”

356
      “I	 think	the	human	heart	must	be	stronger	than	we	could	ever	imagine.”

      Anthony	 stared	at	her	for	a	long	moment,	his	eyes	locking	with	hers	until	 he
felt	they	must	be	one	person.	Then,	with	a	shaking	hand,	he	cupped	the	back	of
her	head	and	leaned	down	to	kiss	her.	His	lips	worshiped	hers,	offering	her	every
ounce	of	love	and	devotion	and	reverence	and	prayer	that	he	felt	in	his	soul.

      “I	 love	you,	Kate,”	 he	whispered,	his	lips	brushing	the	words	against	her
mouth.	“I	 love	you	so	much.”

      She	nodded,	unable	to	make	a	sound.

      “And	 right	 now	I	wish…I	 wish…”

      And	then	the	strangest	thing	happened.	Laughter	bubbled	up	inside	of	him.
He	was	overtaken	by	the	pure	joy	of	the	moment,	and	it	was	all	he	could	do	not
to	pick	her	up	and	twirl	 her	grandly	through	the	air.

      “Anthony?”	  she	asked,	sounding	equal	parts	confused	and	amused.

      “Do	 you	know	what	 else	love	means?”	he	murmured,	planting	his	hands	on
either	side	of	her	body	and	letting	his	nose	rest	against	hers.

      She	shook	her	head.	“I	couldn’t	 possibly	even	hazard	a	guess.”

      “It	 means,”	he	grumbled,	“that	I’m	 finding	 this	broken	 leg	of	yours	a
damned	nuisance.”

      “Not	 half	so	much	as	I,	my	lord,”	 she	said,	casting	a	rueful	glance	at	her
splinted	leg.

      Anthony	 frowned.	“No	 vigorous	exercise	for	two	 months,	eh?”

      “At	 least.”

      He	grinned,	and	in	that	moment	he	looked	every	inch	 the	rake	she’d	once
accused	him	of	being.	“Clearly,”	 he	murmured,	“I	 shall	have	to	be	very,	very
gentle.”

      “Tonight?”	 she	croaked.

357
      He	shook	his	head.	“Even	I	haven’t	 the	talent	to	express	myself	with	that
light	a	touch.”

      Kate	giggled.	She	couldn’t	 help	herself.	She	loved	this	man	and	he	loved	her
and	whether	he	knew	it	or	not,	they	were	going	to	grow	 very,	very	old	together.
It	was	enough	to	make	a	girl—even	a	girl	with	 a	broken	leg—positively	 giddy.

      “Are	 you	laughing	at	me?”	 he	queried,	one	of	his	brows	arching	arrogantly
as	he	slid	his	body	into	place	next	to	her.

      “I	 wouldn’t	 dream	of	it.”

      “Good.	 Because	I	have	some	very	important	things	to	tell	you.”

      “Really?”

      He	nodded	gravely.	“I	 may	not	be	able	to	show	you	how	much	I	 love	you
this	eve,	but	I	can	tell	you.”

      “I	 should	never	tire	of	hearing	it,”	 she	murmured.

      “Good.	 Because	when	I’m	done	telling	you,	 I’m	going	 to	tell	you	how	 I’d
like	to	show	you.”

      “Anthony!”	  she	squeaked.

      “I	 think	I’d	 start	with	 your	earlobe,”	he	mused.	“Yes,	definitely	 the	earlobe.
I’d	kiss	it,	 and	then	nibble	it,	and	then…”

      Kate	gasped.	And	then	she	squirmed.	And	then	she	fell	in	love	with	 him	all
over	again.

      And	as	he	whispered	sweet	nothings	in	her	ear,	she	had	the	strangest
sensation,	almost	as	if	she	could	see	her	entire	future	laid	out	before	her.	Each
day	was	richer	and	fuller	than	the	last,	and	every	day	she	was	falling,	falling,
falling…

      Was	it	possible	to	fall	 in	love	with	 the	same	man	over	and	over	again,	every
single	day?

      Kate	sighed	as	she	settled	into	the	pillows,	letting	his	 wicked	words	wash

358
      Kate	sighed	as	she	settled	into	the	pillows,	letting	his	 wicked	words	wash
over	her.

      By	God,	she	was	going	to	try.

359
                                                      Epilogue







Lord	Bridgerton	 celebrated	his	birthday—This	 Author	believes	that	it	was	his
thirty-ninth—at	 home	with	his	family.

      This	Author	 was	not	invited.

      Nonetheless,	details	of	the	fête	have	reached	This	Author’s	always	attentive
ears,	and	it	sounds	to	have	been	a	most	amusing	party.	The	day	began	with	a
short	concert:	Lord	 Bridgerton	 on	the	trumpet	and	Lady	Bridgerton	 on	the	flute.
Mrs.	Bagwell	(Lady	 Bridgerton’s	 sister)	apparently	offered	 to	mediate	on	the
pianoforte,	but	her	offer	 was	refused.

      According	 to	the	dowager	viscountess,	a	more	discordant	concert	has	never
been	performed,	and	we	are	told	that	eventually	young	Miles	Bridgerton	 stood
atop	his	chair	and	begged	his	parents	to	cease.

      We	are	also	told	that	no	one	scolded	the	boy	for	his	rudeness,	but	rather	just
heaved	huge	sighs	of	relief	when	Lord	and	Lady	Bridgerton	 laid	down	their
instruments.

                                            LADY	WHISTLEDOWN’S	SOCIETY	PAPERS,	17	SEPTEMBER	1823



“She	   must	have	a	spy	in	the	family,”	 Anthony	said	to	Kate,	shaking	his	head.

      Kate	laughed	as	she	brushed	her	hair,	readying	herself	for	bed.	“She	didn’t
realize	that	today	is	your	birthday,	not	yesterday.”

      “A	 trifling	 matter,”	 he	grumbled.	“She	must	have	a	spy.	There’s	no	other
explanation.”

360
explanation.”

      “She	did	get	everything	 else	right,”	Kate	couldn’t	 help	noting.	 “I	 tell	you,
I’ve	always	admired	that	woman.”

      “We	 weren’t	that	bad,”	 Anthony	protested.

      “We	 were	dreadful.”	She	set	the	brush	down	and	walked	to	his	side.	“We’re
always	dreadful.	But	at	least	we	try.”

      Anthony	 wound	his	arms	around	his	wife’s	 waist	and	settled	his	chin	on	the
top	of	her	head.	There	was	little	that	brought	him	more	peace	than	simply
holding	her	in	his	arms.	He	didn’t	 know	how	 any	man	survived	without	 a
woman	to	love.

      “It’s	 almost	midnight,”	  Kate	murmured.	“Your	 birthday	 is	almost	over.”

      Anthony	 nodded.	Thirty-nine.	 He’d	never	thought	he’d	see	the	day.

      No,	that	wasn’t	 true.	Since	the	moment	he’d	let	Kate	into	his	heart,	his	fears
had	been	slowly	melting	away.	But	 still,	it	 was	nice	to	be	thirty-nine.	Settling.
He’d	spent	a	goodly	portion	of	 the	day	in	his	study,	staring	up	at	his	father’s
portrait.	And	he’d	 found	himself	 talking.	For	hours	on	end,	he’d	talked	to	his
father.	He	told	him	of	 his	three	children,	of	his	siblings’	 marriages	and	their
children.	He	told	him	 of	his	mother,	and	how	she’d	recently	taken	up	painting
with	oils,	 and	that	she	was	actually	quite	good.	And	he	told	him	of	Kate,	and
how	she’d	freed	his	soul,	and	how	he	loved	her	so	damn	much.

      It	was,	Anthony	 realized,	what	his	father	had	always	wanted	for	him.

      The	clock	on	the	mantel	began	to	chime,	and	neither	Anthony	 nor	Kate
spoke	until	the	twelfth	 bell	rang.

      “That’s	 it,	then,”	 Kate	whispered.

      He	nodded.	“Let’s	 go	to	bed.”

      She	moved	away,	and	he	could	see	that	she	was	smiling.	“That’s	how	you
want	to	celebrate?”

      He	took	her	hand	and	raised	it	to	his	lips.	“I	 can	think	of	 no	better	way.	Can

361
      He	took	her	hand	and	raised	it	to	his	lips.	“I	 can	think	of	 no	better	way.	Can
you?”

      Kate	shook	her	head,	then	giggled	as	she	ran	for	the	bed.	“Did	you	read	what
else	she	wrote	in	her	column?”

      “That	 Whistledown	woman?”

      She	nodded.

      Anthony	 planted	his	hands	on	either	side	of	his	wife	and	leered	down	at	her.
“Was	it	about	us?”

      Kate	shook	her	head.

      “Then	 I	don’t	care.”

      “It	 was	about	Colin.”

      Anthony	 let	out	a	little	 sigh.	“She	does	seem	to	write	about	Colin	a	great
deal.”

      “Maybe	 she	has	a	tendre	for	him,”	Kate	suggested.

      “Lady	 Whistledown?”	 Anthony	 rolled	his	eyes.	“That	 old	biddy?”

      “She	might	 not	be	old.”

      Anthony	 snorted	derisively.	“She’s	 a	wrinkled	old	 crone	and	you	know	it.”

      “I	 don’t	know,”	 Kate	 said,	scooting	out	of	his	grasp	and	crawling	under	the
covers.	“I	think	 she	might	be	young.”

      “And	 I	think,”	 Anthony	 announced,	“that	I	 don’t	much	want	to	talk	 about
Lady	Whistledown	 just	now.”

      Kate	smiled.	“You	 don’t?”

      He	slid	into	 place	next	to	her,	his	fingers	settling	around	the	curve	of	her	hip.
“I	have	much	better	things	to	do.”

      “You	 do?”

362
       “Much.”	  His	 lips	 found	 her	 ear.	“Much,	  much,	 much	 better.”
                                                                     	

And	in	a	small,	elegantly	furnished	chamber,	not	so	very	far	from	Bridgerton	House,	a	woman—no	longer
in	the	first	blush	of	youth,	but	certainly	not	wrinkled	and	old—	sat	at	her	desk	with	a	quill	and	a	pot	of	ink
and	pulled	out	a	piece	of	paper.

       Stretching	 her	 neck	from	 side	 to	side,	 she	set	her	quill	  to	paper	 and	wrote:


Lady	Whistledown’s	   Society	 Papers,	 19	September,	 1823	 Ah,	Gentle	 Reader,	 it
has	come	to	 This	Author’s	  attention…

363
                                             Author’s	     Note







Anthony’s	 reaction	to	his	father’s	untimely	death	is	a	very	common	one,
especially	among	men.	(To	a	much	lesser	degree,	women	whose	mothers	die
young	react	in	a	similar	fashion.)	Men	whose	fathers	die	at	a	very	young	age	are
very	often	gripped	by	a	certainty	that	they,	too,	will	suffer	the	same	fate.	Such
men	usually	know	their	fears	are	irrational,	but	it	is	nearly	impossible	to	get	past
these	fears	until	one	has	reached	(and	passed)	the	age	of	one’s	father’s	death.

      Since	my	readers	are	almost	exclusively	women,	and	Anthony’s	issue	is
such	(to	use	a	very	modern	phrase)	a	“guy	thing,”	I	worried	that	you	might	not
be	able	to	relate	to	his	problem.	As	a	writer	of	romance,	I	constantly	find	myself
walking	a	fine	line	between	making	my	heroes	utterly	and	completely	heroic,
and	making	them	real.	With	Anthony,	I	hope	I	struck	a	balance.	It’s	easy	to
scowl	at	a	book	and	grumble,	“Get	over	it	already!”	but	the	truth	is,	for	most
men,	it’s	not	so	easy	to	“get	over”	the	sudden	and	premature	loss	of	a	beloved
father.

      Sharp-eyed	readers	will	note	that	the	bee	sting	that	killed	Edmund
Bridgerton	was	actually	the	second	sting	he’d	received	in	his	life.	This	is
medically	accurate;	bee	sting	allergies	generally	don’t	manifest	themselves	until
the	second	sting.	Since	Anthony	has	only	been	stung	once	in	his	life,	it’s
impossible	to	know	whether	or	not	he’s	allergic.	As	the	author	of	this	book,
however,	I’d	like	to	think	I	have	a	certain	creative	control	over	the	medical
conditions	of	my	characters,	so	I’ve	decided	that	Anthony	has	no	allergies	of	any
kind,	and	furthermore	will	live	to	the	ripe	old	age	of	92.

                                                                                                My	very	best	wishes,

365
About	  the	Author


New	York	Times-bestselling	author	Julia	Quinn	has	written	twelve	Avon
romance	novels,	and	is	best	known	for	the	Bridgerton	Series:	The	Duke	and	I,
The	Viscount	Who	Loved	Me,	An	Offer	from	a	Gentleman,	Romancing	Mr.
Bridgerton,	and	To	Sir	Phillip,	With	Love.	She	is	a	graduate	of	Harvard	and
Radcliffe	Colleges	and	lives	with	her	family	in	the	Pacific	Northwest.	Please
visit	her	at	www.juliaquinn.com.

366
Avon	   Books	   by
Julia	    Quinn


Brighter	Than	the	Sun

Dancing	At	Midnight

Everything	and	the	Moon

How	to	Marry	a	Marquis

Minx

Splendid

To	Catch	an	Heiress


The	  Bridgerton	        Series


The	Duke	and	I

The	Viscount	Who	Loved	Me

An	Offer	from	A	Gentleman

Romancing	Mr.	Bridgerton

To	Sir	Phillip,	With	Love


When	He	Was	Wicked	(coming	Summer	2004)


Anthologies


The	Further	Observations	of	Lady	Whistledown

(with	Suzanne	Enoch,	Karen	Hawkins,	and	Mia	Ryan)

Where’s	My	Hero

(with	Lisa	Kleypas	and	Kinley	MacGregor

367
This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	Names,	characters,	places,	and	incidents	are	products	of	the	author’s	imagination
or	are	used	fictitiously	and	are	not	to	be	construed	as	real.	Any	resemblance	to	actual	events,	locales,
organizations,	or	persons,	living	or	dead,	is	entirely	coincidental.


THE	VISCOUNT	 WHO	LOVED	 ME.	 Copyright	©	2000	by	Julie	Cotler	Pottinger.	All	 rights	reserved
under	International	and	Pan-American	Copyright	Conventions.	By	payment	of	the	required	fees,	you	have
been	granted	the	non-exclusive,	non-transferable	right	to	access	and	read	the	text	of	this	e-book	on-screen.
No	part	of	this	text	may	be	reproduced,	transmitted,	down-loaded,	decompiled,	reverse	engineered,	or
stored	in	or	introduced	into	any	information	storage	and	retrieval	system,	in	any	form	or	by	any	means,
whether	electronic	or	mechanical,	now	known	or	hereinafter	invented,	without	the	express	written
permission	of	HarperCollins	e-books.


The	Bridgerton	Basics,	Copyright	©	2004	by	Julia	Quinn


Behind	the	Novel:	The	Viscount	Who	Loved	Me,	Copyright	©	2004	by	Julia	Quinn


ePub	edition	March	2004	ISBN	9780061758416


First	Avon	Books	paperback	printing:	December	2000


10	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1

368
About	         the	     Publisher


Australia


HarperCollins	Publishers	(Australia)	Pty.	Ltd.

25	Ryde	Road	(PO	Box	321)

Pymble,	NSW	2073,	Australia

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au


Canada


HarperCollins	Publishers	Ltd.

55	Avenue	Road,	Suite	2900

Toronto,	ON,	M5R,	3L2,	Canada

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca


New	       Zealand


HarperCollins	Publishers	(New	Zealand)	Limited

P.O.	Box	1

Auckland,	New	Zealand

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz


United	           Kingdom


HarperCollins	Publishers	Ltd.

77-85	Fulham	Palace	Road

London,	W6	8JB,	UK

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk


United	           States


HarperCollins	Publishers	Inc.

10	East	53rd	Street

New	York,	NY	10022

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

