3
Dragonsbane



   Barbara	Hambly

4
For	Allan

5
        Contents

            CHAPTER	I
            CHAPTER	II
           CHAPTER	III
           CHAPTER	IV
            CHAPTER	V
           CHAPTER	VI
           CHAPTER	VII
          CHAPTER	VIII
           CHAPTER	IX
            CHAPTER	X
           CHAPTER	XI
           CHAPTER	XII
          CHAPTER	XIII
          CHAPTER	XIV
           CHAPTER	XV
          CHAPTER	XVI
          CHAPTER	XVII
         CHAPTER	XVIII
A	Biography	of	Barbara	Hambly

8
                                     CHAPTER	                    I


BANDITS	OFTEN	LAY	in	wait	in	the	ruins	of	the	old	town	at	the	fourways—
Jenny	Waynest	thought	there	were	three	of	them	this	morning.
       She	was	not	sure	any	more	whether	it	was	magic	which	told	her	this,	or
simply	the	woodcraftiness	and	instinct	for	the	presence	of	danger	that	anyone
developed	who	had	survived	to	adulthood	in	the	Winterlands.	But	as	she	drew
rein	short	of	 the	 first	 broken	walls,	 where	she	knew	 she	would	still	  be
concealed	by	the	combination	 of	 autumn	fog	 and	early	 morning	gloom
beneath	the	thicker	trees	of	the	forest,	she	noted	automatically	that	the	horse
droppings	in	the	sunken	clay	of	the	roadbed	were	fresh,	untouched	by	the
frost	that	edged	the	leaves	around	them.	She	noted,	too,	the	silence	in	the
ruins	ahead;	no	coney’s	foot	rustled	the	yellow	spill	of	broomsedge	cloaking
the	hill	slope	where	the	old	church	had	been,	the	church	sacred	to	the	Twelve
Gods	beloved	of	the	old	 Kings.	She	thought	she	smelled	the	smoke	of	 a
concealed	fire	near	the	remains	of	what	had	been	a	crossroads	inn,	but	honest
men	would	have	gone	there	straight	and	left	a	track	in	the	nets	of	dew	that
covered	the	weeds	all	around.	Jenny’s	white	mare	Moon	Horse	pricked	her
long	ears	at	the	scent	of	other	beasts,	and	Jenny	wind-whispered	to	her	for
silence,	smoothing	the	raggedy	mane	against	the	long	neck.	But	she	had	been
looking	for	all	those	signs	before	she	saw	them.
       She	settled	into	stillness	in	the	protective	cloak	of	fog	and	shadow,	like	a
partridge	blending	with	 the	brown	 of	 the	woods.	She	was	a	 little	 like	 a
partridge	herself,	dark	and	small	and	nearly	invisible	 in	 the	dull,	 random
plaids	of	the	northlands;	a	thin,	compactly	built	woman,	tough	as	the	roots	of
moorland	heather.	After	a	moment	of	silence,	she	wove	her	magic	into	a	rope
of	mist	and	cast	it	along	the	road	toward	the	nameless	ruins	of	the	town.
       It	was	something	she	had	done	even	as	a	child,	before	the	old	wander-
mage	Caerdinn	had	taught	her	the	ways	of	power.	All	her	thirty-seven	years,
she	had	lived	in	the	Winterlands—she	knew	the	smells	of	danger.	The	late-

9
lingering	birds	 of	autumn,	 thrushes	and	blackbirds,	should	have	been	waking
in	the	twisted	 brown	mats	of	 ivy	 that	half-hid	 the	old	inn’s	 walls—they	 were
silent.	After	 a	moment,	she	caught	the	scent	of	 horses,	and	the	ranker,	dirtier
stench	of	men.
       One	  bandit	  would	  be	 in	  the	  stumpy	  ruin	  of	  the	 old	  tower	  that
commanded	the	south	and	eastward	roads,	part	of	 the	defenses	of	the	ruined
town	left	 from	when	the	prosperity	 of	the	King’s	 law	 had	given	it	 anything	to
defend.	They	always	 hid	there.	A	 second,	she	guessed,	was	behind	the	walls
of	the	old	 inn.	After	 a	 moment	she	sensed	the	third,	watching	 the	crossroads
from	a	yellow	 thicket	of	 seedy	tamarack.	Her	magic	brought	the	stink	 of	their
souls	to	 her,	old	 greeds	and	 the	carrion-bone	 memories	 of	 some	cherished
rape	or	murder	 that	had	 given	a	 momentary	glow	 of	 power	 to	 lives	largely
divided	between	 the	giving	 and	receiving	 of	 physical	 pain.	Having	 lived	 all
her	life	in	 the	Winterlands,	she	knew	that	these	men	could	scarcely	help	being
what	they	were;	she	had	to	put	aside	both	her	hatred	of	them,	and	her	pity	 for
them,	before	she	could	braid	the	spells	that	she	laid	upon	their	minds.
       Her	  concentration	  deepened	further.	  She	 stirred	  judiciously	  at	  that
compost	 of	  memories,	 whispering	  to	 their	  blunted	  minds	 of	  the	 bored
sleepiness	of	 men	who	 have	 watched	 too	 long.	 Unless	 every	illusion	  and
Limitation	 was	wrought	 correctly,	they	would	 see	her	when	she	moved.	Then
she	loosened	 her	 halberd	 in	 its	  holster	 upon	 her	 saddle-tree,	 settled	 her
sheepskin	jacket	a	little	 more	 closely	about	her	 shoulders	and,	with	 scarcely
breath	or	movement,	urged	Moon	Horse	forward	toward	the	ruins.
       The	 man	in	the	tower	she	never	saw	at	all,	from	 first	to	last.	Through	 the
browning	 red	 leaves	 of	  a	 screen	of	  hawthorn,	 she	 glimpsed	 two	  horses
tethered	behind	 a	ruined	 wall	 near	 the	inn,	 their	 breath	 making	 plumes	of
white	in	 the	dawn	cold;	 a	moment	later	she	saw	the	bandit	 crouching	behind
the	crumbling	wall,	 a	husky	man	in	greasy	old	leathers.	He	had	been	watching
the	road,	but	started	suddenly	and	cursed;	looking	 down,	he	began	scratching
his	crotch	with	 vigor	and	annoyance	but	no	particular	surprise.	He	 did	not	see
Jenny	as	she	ghosted	past.	The	third	bandit,	sitting	 his	rawboned	black	 horse
between	a	broken	corner	of	 a	wall	 and	a	spinney	of	 raggedy	birches,	simply

10
stared	out	ahead	of	him,	lost	in	the	daydreams	she	had	sent.
       She	was	directly	 in	 front	of	 him	 when	a	boy’s	voice	 shouted	from	down
the	southward	road,	“LOOK	 OUT!”
       Jenny	 whipped	 her	halberd	 clear	of	 its	 rest	as	the	 bandit	 woke	with	  a
start.	He	saw	her	and	roared	a	curse.	Peripherally	Jenny	was	aware	of	hooves
pounding	up	 the	road	 toward	her;	 the	other	 traveler,	she	 thought	with	 grim
annoyance,	whose	well-meant	warning	had	snapped	the	man	from	 his	trance.
As	the	bandit	 bore	down	upon	 her,	she	got	a	glimpse	of	 a	young	 man	riding
out	of	the	mist	full-pelt,	 clearly	 intent	upon	rescue.
       The	 bandit	was	armed	with	 a	short	sword,	but	swung	at	 her	with	the	flat
of	it,	 intending	 to	unhorse	her	without	  damaging	her	too	 badly	to	 rape	later.
She	feinted	 with	 the	halberd	 to	bring	 his	 weapon	up,	 then	 dipped	the	 long
blade	on	 the	pole’s	 end	down	 under	his	 guard.	 Her	legs	 clinched	 to	Moon
Horse’s	sides	to	take	the	shock	as	the	weapon	knifed	through	the	man’s	belly.
The	leather	 was	tough,	 but	there	 was	no	 metal	 underneath.	She	ripped	 the
blade	clear	as	 the	man	 doubled	up	 around	it,	 screaming	 and	clawing;	 both
horses	danced	and	veered	with	 the	smell	 of	the	 hot,	spraying	 blood.	 Before
the	man	hit	the	muddy	bed	of	 the	road,	Jenny	had	wheeled	her	horse	and	was
riding	 to	 the	 aid	 of	 her	 prospective	 knight-errant,	 who	 was	 engaged	in	 a
sloppy,	desperate	battle	with	 the	bandit	 who	 had	been	concealed	behind	the
ruined	outer	wall.
       Her	 rescuer	was	hampered	by	 his	long	 cloak	of	 ruby	 red	velvet,	 which
had	got	 entangled	with	  the	basketwork	 hilt	  of	 his	jeweled	 longsword.	  His
horse	was	evidently	 better	trained	 and	more	used	to	 battle	 than	he	was:	the
maneuverings	of	the	big	liver-bay	gelding	 were	the	only	reason	the	boy	hadn’t
been	killed	outright.	 The	bandit,	who	had	gotten	himself	 mounted	at	the	boy’s
first	 cry	of	 warning,	 had	driven	 them	back	 into	 the	hazel	thickets	 that	grew
along	the	tumbled	 stones	of	the	inn	 wall,	 and,	as	Jenny	kicked	 Moon	 Horse
into	the	fray,	 the	boy’s	 trailing	 cloak	hung	 itself	up	 on	the	low	 branches	and
jerked	 its	 wearer	 ignominiously	  out	  of	 the	 saddle	 with	  the	 horse’s	 next
swerve.
       Using	  her	 right	  hand	 as	 the	 fulcrum	  of	  a	 swing,	 Jenny	 swept	 the

11
halberd’s	blade	at	the	 bandit’s	sword	 arm.	The	man	 veered	his	horse	to	face
her;	she	got	a	glimpse	 of	 piggy,	close-set	eyes	under	 the	rim	 of	a	 dirty	 iron
cap.	 Behind	  her	 she	 could	  hear	 her	 previous	  assailant	 still	  screaming.
Evidently	her	current	opponent	could	as	well,	 for	he	ducked	the	first	slash	and
swiped	at	 Moon	 Horse’s	 face	 to	cause	the	 mare	 to	shy,	 then	 spurred	past
Jenny	and	 away	  up	 the	 road,	 willing	   neither	 to	 face	 a	 weapon	 that	 so
outreached	his	own,	nor	to	stop	for	his	comrade	who	had	done	so.
       There	 was	a	brief	 crashing	in	 the	thickets	 of	 briar	as	the	 man	who	 had
been	concealed	in	the	tower	fled	into	 the	raw	mists,	then	silence,	save	for	 the
dying	bandit’s	hoarse,	bubbling	sobs.
       Jenny	dropped	 lightly	 from	 Moon	 Horse’s	back.	Her	young	 rescuer	was
still	 thrashing	 in	  the	 bushes	like	 a	 stoat	 in	 a	 sack,	 half-strangled	 on	 his
bejeweled	cloak	strap.	She	used	the	hook	on	the	back	of	the	halberd’s	blade	to
twist	the	long	 court-sword	from	 his	hand,	then	stepped	in	to	pull	 the	muffling
folds	of	 velvet	aside.	He	 struck	at	her	with	 his	 hands,	like	a	man	swatting	 at
wasps.	Then	he	seemed	to	see	her	for	the	first	time	and	stopped,	staring	up	at
her	with	wide,	myopic	 gray	eyes.
       After	  a	 long	 moment	 of	 surprised	stillness,	 he	 cleared	his	 throat	 and
unfastened	the	chain	of	gold	and	rubies	that	held	the	cloak	under	his	chin.	“Er
—thank	you,	 my	lady,”	 he	gasped	in	 a	slightly	 winded	 voice,	and	 got	to	his
feet.	Though	Jenny	was	used	to	people	being	 taller	than	she,	this	young	 man
was	even	more	so	than	most.	“I—uh—”	 His	skin	 was	as	fine-textured	and	fair
as	his	 hair,	 which	 was	already,	 despite	his	 youth,	 beginning	 to	 thin	  away
toward	 early	 baldness.	He	couldn’t	  have	 been	more	 than	eighteen,	 with	 a
natural	awkwardness	increased	tenfold	 by	 the	 difficult	  task	of	 thanking	 the
intended	object	of	a	gallant	defense	for	saving	his	life.
       “My	   profoundest	  gratitude,”	   he	 said,	  and	 performed	  a	  supremely
graceful	Dying	 Swan,	the	like	 of	which	 had	not	been	seen	in	the	Winterlands
since	the	nobles	of	the	Kings	 had	departed	in	the	wake	of	the	retreating	royal
armies.	“I	am	Gareth	of	Magloshaldon,	 a	traveler	upon	errantry	in	these	lands,
and	I	wish	to	extend	my	humblest	expressions	of...”
       Jenny	shook	her	head	and	stilled	him	with	 an	upraised	hand.	“Wait	here,”

12
she	said,	and	turned	away.
       Puzzled,	the	boy	followed	 her.
       The	 first	 bandit	 who	had	 attacked	her	still	  lay	in	 the	clay	 muck	 of	 the
roadbed.	The	soaking	blood	had	turned	 it	into	 a	mess	of	heel	gouges,	strewn
with	 severed	entrails;	 the	stink	 was	 appalling.	 The	 man	was	 still	 groaning
weakly.	 Against	 the	matte	 pallor	 of	  the	foggy	 morning,	  the	scarlet	 of	 the
blood	stood	out	shockingly	bright.
       Jenny	 sighed,	 feeling	 suddenly	 cold	 and	 weary	 and	 unclean,	looking
upon	what	 she	had	done	and	knowing	 what	 it	 was	up	to	 her	yet	 to	do.	 She
knelt	 beside	the	dying	 man,	 drawing	 the	 stillness	of	 her	 magic	 around	her
again.	She	was	aware	of	 Gareth’s	approach,	his	 boots	threshing	through	 the
dew-soaked	bindweed	in	a	hurried	 rhythm	 that	broke	when	he	 tripped	on	his
sword.	She	felt	a	tired	stirring	 of	anger	at	him	for	 having	made	this	necessary.
Had	he	not	cried	out,	both	 she	and	this	poor,	vicious,	dying	 brute	would	 each
have	gone	their	ways...
       ...And	 he	would	doubtless	have	killed	 Gareth	after	she	passed.	And	other
travelers	besides.
       She	had	long	 since	given	 up	trying	 to	unpick	 wrong	 from	 right,	present
should	from	 future	 if.	 If	 there	was	a	 pattern	to	 all	things,	 she	had	given	 up
thinking	 that	it	was	simple	 enough	to	lie	 within	 her	comprehension.	Still,	 her
soul	felt	 filthy	  within	 her	 as	she	put	her	hands	to	 the	dying	 man’s	 clammy,
greasy	temples,	tracing	the	proper	runes	while	she	whispered	the	death-spells.
She	felt	the	life	go	out	of	 him	and	tasted	the	bile	of	self-loathing	in	 her	mouth.
       Behind	 her,	Gareth	whispered,	“You—he’s—he’s	dead.”
       She	got	 to	her	feet,	shaking	the	 bloody	dirt	 from	 her	skirts.	“I	  could	not
leave	him	for	 the	weasels	and	foxes,”	she	replied,	 starting	to	walk	 away.	She
could	hear	the	small	 carrion-beasts	already,	gathering	 at	the	top	 of	the	 bank
above	the	 misty	  slot	 of	 the	 road,	 drawn	 to	  the	 blood-smell	 and	 waiting
impatiently	 for	 the	killer	  to	abandon	her	 prey.	Her	 voice	was	 brusque—she
had	always	hated	the	death-spells.	Having	grown	up	in	a	land	without	law,	she
had	killed	 her	first	 man	 when	she	was	fourteen,	 and	six	 since,	not	counting
the	dying	 she	had	helped	from	 life	 as	the	only	 midwife	 and	 healer	from	 the

13
Gray	Mountains	to	the	sea.	It	never	got	easier.
       She	wanted	to	 be	gone	from	 the	place,	but	the	boy	 Gareth	put	a	staying
hand	on	 her	 arm,	 looking	 from	  her	 to	 the	corpse	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 nauseated
fascination.	He	 had	 never	seen	death,	she	 thought.	At	  least,	not	 in	 its	 raw
form.	The	pea	green	velvet	 of	his	 travel-stained	doublet,	the	gold	 stampwork
of	 his	  boots,	 the	 tucked	 embroidery	  of	  his	 ruffled	  lawn	  shirt,	  and	 the
elaborate,	feathered	crestings	of	his	green-tipped	hair	all	proclaimed	him	 for	a
courtier.	All	 things,	even	death,	were	doubtless	done	with	a	certain	amount	of
style	where	he	came	from.
       He	 gulped.	“You’re—you’re	  a	witch!”
       One	corner	of	 her	mouth	moved	slightly;	 she	said,	“So	I	am.”
       He	 stepped	back	from	 her	in	 fear,	then	staggered,	clutching	 at	a	nearby
sapling	for	 support.	She	saw	then	that	among	 the	decorative	slashings	of	 his
doublet	sleeve	was	an	uglier	opening,	the	shirt	visible	through	it	 dark	and	wet.
“I’ll	  be	 fine,”	  he	 protested	faintly,	  as	 she	moved	 to	 support	 him.	 “I	  just
need...”	He	 made	a	fumbling	 effort	 to	 shake	free	of	 her	hand	 and	walk,	 his
myopic	 gray	eyes	peering	 at	the	 ankle-deep	drifts	 of	 moldering	 leaves	 that
lined	the	road.
       “What	 you	 need	is	to	sit	down.”	 She	led	him	away	to	a	broken	boundary
stone	and	forced	him	to	do	so	and	unbuttoned	the	diamond	studs	that	held	the
sleeve	to	the	body	 of	 the	doublet.	 The	wound	 did	not	 look	 deep,	but	it	 was
bleeding	badly.	She	pulled	loose	the	leather	thongs	that	bound	the	wood-black
knots	of	her	hair	 and	used	them	as	a	tourniquet	above	the	wound.	He	winced
and	gasped	and	tried	to	loosen	it	as	she	tore	a	strip	 from	the	hem	of	 her	shift
for	a	bandage,	so	that	she	slapped	at	his	fingers	like	a	child’s.	Then,	a	moment
later,	he	tried	to	get	up	again.	“I	have	to	find...”
       “I’ll	   find	 them,”	Jenny	said	firmly,	  knowing	 what	it	 was	that	he	sought.
She	finished	binding	his	wound	and	walked	 back	to	the	tangle	of	hazel	bushes
where	Gareth	and	the	bandit	 had	struggled.	 The	frosty	 daylight	 glinted	 on	a
sharp	reflection	among	 the	leaves.	The	spectacles	she	found	there	were	bent
and	twisted	out	 of	 shape,	the	bottom	of	 one	round	 lens	decorated	by	a	 star-
fracture.	Flicking	 the	dirt	and	wetness	from	them,	she	carried	them	back.

14
       “Now,”	  she	said,	 as	Gareth	fumbled	 them	on	 with	 hands	shaking	from
weakness	and	shock.	“You	need	that	arm	looked	to.	I	can	take	you...”
       “My	  lady,	 I’ve	 no	time.”	 He	 looked	 up	at	her,	squinting	 a	little	  against
the	increasing	brightness	of	the	sky	behind	 her	head.	“I’m	 on	a	quest,	a	quest
of	terrible	importance.”
       “Important	  enough	to	risk	losing	your	arm	if	 the	wound	turns	rotten?”
       As	 if	 such	things	could	not	 happen	to	him,	did	she	only	 have	the	wits	to
realize	it,	he	went	on	earnestly,	“I’ll	  be	all	 right,	I	 tell	you.	 I	am	seeking	Lord
Aversin	the	Dragonsbane,	Thane	of	Alyn	 Hold	 and	Lord	 of	 Wyr,	the	greatest
knight	  ever	 to	  have	 ridden	  the	  Winterlands.	  Have	 you	  heard	 of	  him
hereabouts?	Tall	 as	 an	 angel,	 handsome	as	 song...	 His	 fame	 has	 spread
through	 the	southlands	 the	 way	 the	 floodwaters	 spread	in	  the	spring,	 the
noblest	of	chevaliers...	I	must	find	 Alyn	Hold,	 before	it	is	too	 late.”
       Jenny	sighed,	 exasperated.	“So	you	must,”	 she	said.	“It	 is	to	 Alyn	 Hold
that	I	am	going	to	take	you.”
       The	squinting	 eyes	got	round	as	the	boy’s	mouth	fell	open.	“To—to	 Alyn
Hold?	Really?	It’s	near	here?”
       “It’s	  the	 nearest	place	where	 we	can	 get	your	 arm	 seen	to,”	 she	said.
“Can	you	ride?”
       Had	 he	been	dying,	 she	thought,	amused,	he	would	 still	 have	sprung	to
his	feet	as	he	did.	“Yes,	of	course;	I—do	you	know	 Lord	Aversin,	then?”
       Jenny	was	silent	 for	a	moment.	Then,	softly,	 she	said,	“Yes.	Yes,	I	know
him.”
       She	whistled	 up	the	horses,	the	tall	white	 Moon	 Horse	and	the	big	liver-
bay	gelding,	 whose	 name,	Gareth	 said,	 was	Battlehammer.	 In	 spite	 of	 his
exhaustion	and	the	pain	of	his	roughly	 bound	wound,	Gareth	made	a	move	to
offer	her	 totally	 unnecessary	assistance	in	mounting.	As	they	 reined	up	over
the	ragged	stone	slopes	to	 avoid	 the	corpse	 in	its	 rank-smelling	 puddles	 of
mud,	Gareth	asked,	“If—if	   you’re	 a	witch,	 my	 lady,	why	 couldn’t	 you	 have
fought	them	 with	 magic	instead	 of	with	 a	 weapon?	Thrown	 fire	 at	them,	or
turned	them	into	frogs,	or	struck	them	blind...”
       She	had	struck	 them	blind,	 in	 a	sense,	she	thought	wryly—at	 least	until

15
he	shouted.
       But	 she	only	said,	“Because	I	cannot.”
       “For	  reasons	of	honor?”	 he	 asked	dubiously.	 “Because	there	are	 some
situations	in	which	honor	cannot	apply...”
       “No.”	  She	glanced	 sidelong	at	 him	 through	the	 astonishing	curtains	 of
her	loosened	hair.	“It	is	just	that	my	magic	is	 not	that	strong.”
       And	 she	nudged	her	horse	into	a	quicker	walk,	passing	into	 the	vaporous
shadows	of	the	forest’s	bare,	over-hanging	boughs.
       Even	 after	 all	 these	years	of	 knowing	 it,	 she	found	 the	admission	 still
stuck	in	her	throat.	 She	had	come	to	terms	with	 her	lack	of	 beauty,	but	never
with	her	lack	 of	genius	in	the	single	 thing	she	had	ever	wanted.	The	most	she
had	ever	been	able	to	do	was	to	pretend	that	she	accepted	it,	as	she	pretended
now.
       Ground	 fog	 curled	 around	the	 feet	 of	 the	horses;	through	 the	clammy
vapors,	tree	 roots	 thrust	 from	  the	roadbanks	 like	 the	 arms	 of	 half-buried
corpses.	The	air	here	felt	dense	and	smelled	of	mold,	and	now	and	then,	from
the	woods	above	them,	came	the	furtive	crackle	of	 dead	leaves,	as	if	the	trees
plotted	among	themselves	in	the	fog.
       “Did	  you—did	 you	 see	him	 slay	the	dragon?”	 Gareth	asked,	after	 they
had	ridden	in	silence	for	 some	minutes.	“Would	 you	tell	 me	about	it?	Aversin
is	the	only	living	  Dragonsbane—the	only	man	who	 has	slain	a	dragon.	There
are	ballads	about	him	 everywhere,	 about	his	 courage	and	his	 noble	deeds...
That’s	my	hobby.	Ballads,	I	mean,	the	ballads	of	Dragonsbanes,	like	Selkythar
the	White	back	 in	the	reign	 of	Ennyta	the	 Good	and	Antara	Warlady	 and	her
brother,	during	 the	 Kinwars.	 They	 say	 her	brother	 slew...”	 By	  the	way	 he
caught	himself	  up	 Jenny	guessed	he	 could	 have	 gone	on	 about	 the	 great
Dragonsbanes	of	the	past	for	 hours,	only	 someone	had	told	 him	 not	to	 bore
people	with	  the	subject.	 “I’ve	  always	 wanted	 to	 see	such	a	 thing—a	 true
Dragonsbane—a	glorious	combat.	His	 renown	 must	cover	him	 like	 a	golden
mantle.”


     And,	 rather	to	her	surprise,	he	broke	into	a	light,	wavery	 tenor:

16
     Riding	 up	the	hillside	 gleaming,
     Like	 flame	in	 the	golden	sunlight	streaming;
     Sword	 of	steel	strong	in	hand,
     Wind-swift	  hooves	spurning	land,
     Tall	 as	an	angel,	stallion-strong,
     Stern	as	a	god,	bright	as	song...


     In	 the	dragon’s	shadow	the	maidens	wept,
     Fair	 as	lilies	in	darkness	kept.
     ‘I	 know	 him	afar,	so	tall	is	he,
     His	 plumes	as	bright	as	the	rage	of	the	sea,’
     Spake	she	to	her	sister,	‘fear	no	ill...’
       Jenny	looked	 away,	feeling	something	 twist	inside	 her	at	the	memory	of
the	Golden	Dragon	of	Wyr.
       She	remembered	as	if	it	were	yesterday	instead	of	ten	years	ago	the	high-
up	flash	of	 gold	 in	the	 wan	northern	sky,	 the	plunge	of	 fire	 and	shadow,	the
boys	and	 girls	 screaming	 on	 the	dancing	 floor	  at	 Great	Toby.	 They	 were
memories	she	knew	should	have	been	tinted	only	 with	horror;	 she	was	aware
that	she	should	 have	felt	 only	 gladness	at	 the	dragon’s	 death.	But	 stronger
than	the	horror,	 the	taste	of	 nameless	grief	and	desolation	 came	back	to	 her
from	 those	times,	 with	  the	 metallic	 stench	 of	 the	dragon’s	 blood	 and	 the
singing	that	seemed	to	shiver	the	searing	air...
       Her	 heart	felt	sick	within	 her.	Coolly,	 she	said,	“For	one	thing,	of	the	two
children	who	were	taken	by	the	dragon,	John	only	 managed	to	get	the	boy	out
alive.	I	 think	the	girl	 had	been	killed	 by	the	fumes	in	 the	dragon’s	lair.	 It	was
hard	to	 tell	 from	 the	state	of	 the	body.	 And	 if	 she	hadn’t	 been	dead,	I	 still
doubt	they’d	 have	been	in	much	condition	 to	make	speeches	about	how	John
looked,	even	if	 he	had	 come	riding	 straight	up	 the	hill—which	  of	 course	he
didn’t.”
       “He	 didn’t?”	 She	could	almost	hear	the	shattering	of	some	image,	nursed
in	the	boy’s	mind.
       “Of	 course	not.	If	 he	had,	he	would	have	been	killed	immediately.”

17
       “Then	 how...”
       “The	 only	 way	he	could	think	 of	to	deal	with	 something	that	big	and	that
heavily	armored.	 He	had	me	brew	 the	most	powerful	  poison	that	I	 knew	 of,
and	he	dipped	his	harpoons	in	that.”
       “Poison?”	   Such	foulness	clearly	 pierced	 him	to	 the	heart.	“Harpoons?
Not	a	sword	at	all?”
       Jenny	 shook	her	 head,	not	 knowing	 whether	to	 feel	 amusement	at	the
boy’s	disappointed	expression,	exasperation	at	the	way	he	spoke	of	 what	had
been	for	her	and	hundreds	of	 others	a	time	of	 sleepless,	nightmare	horror,	or
only	a	 kind	of	 elder-sisterly	 compassion	for	 the	naïveté	that	 would	 consider
taking	a	three-foot	 steel	blade	against	twenty-five	 feet	of	 spiked	and	flaming
death.	“No,”	 she	only	said,	“John	came	at	it	from	 the	overhang	of	the	gully	 in
which	 it	 was	laired—it	  wasn’t	 a	cave,	by	 the	 way;	 there	are	no	 caves	that
large	in	these	hills.	He	slashed	its	wings	first,	 so	that	it	couldn’t	 take	to	the	air
and	fall	on	him	 from	 above.	He	used	poisoned	harpoons	to	slow	it	 down,	but
he	finished	it	off	 with	an	ax.”
       “An	  ax?!”	 Gareth	cried,	utterly	 aghast.	“That’s—that’s	 the	most	horrible
thing	I’ve	 ever	heard!	Where	is	the	glory	in	 that?	Where	is	the	honor?	It’s	like
hamstringing	your	opponent	in	a	duel!	It’s	 cheating!”
       “He	 wasn’t	 fighting	 a	duel,”	Jenny	pointed	out.	“If	 a	dragon	gets	into	the
air,	the	man	fighting	it	 is	lost.”
       “But	  it’s	 dishonorable!”	  the	 boy	 insisted	passionately,	 as	if	 that	 were
some	kind	of	clinching	 argument.
       “It	  might	 have	 been,	had	he	 been	fighting	  a	man	 who	 had	honorably
challenged	him—something	  John	has	never	 been	known	  to	do	 in	 his	 life.
Even	fighting	 bandits,	it	pays	to	strike	from	 behind	when	one	is	outnumbered.
As	the	only	 representative	of	the	King’s	 law	 in	these	lands,	John	generally	is
outnumbered.	A	dragon	is	upward	of	twenty	 feet	long	and	can	kill	 a	man	with
a	single	 blow	 of	 its	 tail.	 You	said	 yourself,”	 she	 added	with	 a	smile,	 “that
there	are	situations	in	which	honor	does	not	apply.”
       “But	    that’s	  different!”	    the	  boy	  said	  miserably	   and	  lapsed	 into
disillusioned	silence.

18
       The	 ground	beneath	the	 horses’	feet	was	rising;	 the	 vague	walls	 of	 the
misty	 tunnel	 through	  which	 they	  rode	 were	 ending.	 Beyond,	 the	 silvery
shapes	of	the	round-backed	hills	 could	be	dimly	 seen.	As	they	 came	clear	of
the	trees,	 the	 winds	 fell	  upon	them,	 clearing	  the	mists	 and	 nipping	  their
clothes	and	faces	like	 ill-trained	  dogs.	Shaking	 the	blowing	 handfuls	 of	 her
hair	out	of	 her	eyes,	Jenny	got	a	look	at	Gareth’s	 face	as	he	gazed	about	him
at	the	moors.	It	 wore	a	look	 of	 shock,	disappointment,	and	puzzlement,	 as	if
he	had	never	 thought	 to	find	  his	hero	 in	 this	 bleak	and	 trackless	world	  of
moss,	water,	and	stone.
       As	 for	Jenny,	this	barren	world	stirred	 her	strangely.	The	moors	stretched
nearly	a	hundred	miles,	north	to	 the	ice-locked	shores	of	the	ocean;	she	knew
every	break	in	the	granite	landscape,	every	black	peat-beck	and	every	hollow
where	the	heather	grew	thick	 in	the	short	 highlands	summers;	she	had	traced
the	tracks	of	hare	and	fox	and	kitmouse	in	three	decades	of	winter	snows.	Old
Caerdinn,	half-mad	through	 poring	over	books	and	legends	of	 the	days	of	the
Kings,	could	 remember	the	time	 when	the	Kings	 had	withdrawn	 their	 troops
and	their	protection	from	 the	Winterlands	to	 fight	the	wars	 for	the	lordship	 of
the	south;	he	had	grown	 angry	 with	 her	when	she	had	spoken	 of	the	beauty
she	found	in	 those	wild,	 silvery	 fastnesses	of	rock	and	wind.	 But	 sometimes
his	bitterness	stirred	in	 Jenny,	when	she	worked	 to	save	the	life	  of	an	ailing
village	child	 whose	illness	 lay	beyond	her	small	 skills	 and	there	was	nothing
in	any	book	she	had	read	that	might	tell	her	how	 to	save	that	life;	or	 when	the
Iceriders	came	raiding	 down	 over	the	 floe-ice	 in	the	 brutal	winters,	 burning
the	barns	that	cost	such	labor	 to	 raise,	and	slaughtering	the	 cattle	that	could
only	be	 bred	up	 from	 such	meager	stock.	However,	 her	 own	lack	 of	 power
had	taught	her	a	curious	appreciation	for	small	 joys	and	hard	beauties	and	for
the	simple,	 changeless	patterns	of	 life	 and	death.	 It	 was	nothing	 she	could
have	explained;	not	to	Caerdinn,	nor	to	this	boy,	nor	to	anyone	else.
       At	 length	she	said	softly,	 “John	would	 never	have	gone	after	the	dragon,
Gareth,	had	he	not	been	forced	to	 it.	But	 as	Thane	of	 Alyn	 Hold,	 as	Lord	of
Wyr,	he	is	the	only	man	in	 the	Winterlands	trained	to	and	living	  by	the	arts	of
war.	It	 is	for	 this	that	he	is	 the	lord.	 He	fought	 the	dragon	as	he	would	 have

19
fought	a	wolf,	 as	a	vermin	which	was	harming	his	people.	He	had	no	choice.”
       “But	  a	dragon	isn’t	vermin!”	  Gareth	protested.	“It	 is	the	most	 honorable
and	greatest	of	 challenges	 to	 the	manhood	 of	 a	 true	knight.	  You	 must	be
wrong!	 He	 couldn’t	 have	 fought	 it	  simply—simply	  out	  of	 duty.	 He	 can’t
have!”
       There	 was	a	desperation	to	believe	 in	his	 voice	that	made	Jenny	glance
over	at	him	curiously.	“No,”	  she	agreed.	“A	dragon	isn’t	vermin.	 And	this	 one
was	truly	 beautiful.”	 Her	voice	 softened	at	the	recollection,	 even	through	the
horror-haze	of	death	and	 fear,	of	its	 angular,	alien	 splendor.	“Not	 golden,	 as
your	song	calls	 it,	 but	a	sort	 of	amber,	grading	 to	brownish	 smoke	along	 its
back	and	ivory	upon	its	 belly.	The	patterns	of	the	scales	on	its	sides	were	like
the	beadwork	on	a	pair	of	slippers,	 like	woven	 irises,	all	shades	of	purple	and
blue.	Its	head	was	like	 a	flower,	too;	 its	eyes	and	maw	were	surrounded	with
scales	like	colored	ribbons,	with	 purple	horns	and	tufts	of	white	 and	black	fur,
and	with	antennae	like	a	crayfish’s	tipped	 with	bobs	of	 gems.	It	was	butcher’s
work	to	slay	it.”
       They	 rounded	the	shoulder	of	a	tor.	Below	 them,	like	 a	break	in	the	cold
granite	landscape,	spread	a	broken	line	 of	 brown	 fields	 where	the	 mists	lay
like	stringers	of	dirty	 wool	 among	the	stubble	of	harvest.	A	little	 further	 along
the	 track	 lay	  a	 hamlet,	 disordered	 and	 trashy	  under	 a	 bluish	  smear	of
woodsmoke,	and	the	stench	of	the	place	 rose	on	the	whipping	 ice-winds:	 the
lye-sting	of	 soap	being	boiled;	 an	almost-visible	 murk	 of	 human	and	animal
waste;	the	rotted,	nauseating	sweetness	of	brewing	beer.	The	barking	of	 dogs
rose	to	them	like	 churchbells	in	 the	air.	In	 the	midst	 of	it	 all	 a	stumpy	tower
stood,	the	tumble-down	remnant	of	some	larger	fortification.
       “No,”	   said	Jenny	softly,	 “the	 dragon	 was	a	 beautiful	 creature,	Gareth.
But	so	was	the	girl	it	carried	 away	to	its	lair	and	killed.	 She	was	fifteen—John
wouldn’t	 let	her	parents	see	the	remains.”
       She	touched	her	 heels	to	Moon	Horse’s	 sides	and	led	the	way	down	 the
damp	clay	of	the	track.
       “Is	  this	 village	 where	you	 live?”	  Gareth	asked,	as	 they	drew	 near	the
walls.

20
       Jenny	 shook	 her	 head,	 drawing	  her	 mind	 back	  from	 the	 bitter	  and
confusing	tangle	 of	 the	memories	of	 the	 slaying	 of	the	 dragon.	“I	  have	my
own	house	about	six	 miles	 from	here,	 on	Frost	Fell—I	  live	 there	alone.	My
magic	is	 not	 great;	 it	 needs	silence	and	 solitude	 for	 its	 study.”	 She	added
wryly,	 “Though	 I	don’t	 have	much	of	 either.	I	 am	midwife	 and	healer	for	 all
of	Lord	Aversin’s	 lands.”
       “Will—will	    we	reach	his	lands	soon?”
       His	 voice	 sounded	unsteady,	and	 Jenny,	regarding	 him	 worriedly,	 saw
how	white	he	looked	and	how,	in	 spite	of	the	cold,	sweat	ran	down	his	hollow
cheeks	with	their	faint	 fuzz	of	gold.	 A	little	 surprised	at	his	question,	she	said,
“These	are	Lord	Aversin’s	lands.”
       He	 raised	his	head	to	 look	 at	her,	shocked.	“These?”	  He	stared	around
him	at	the	muddy	fields,	 the	peasants	shouting	to	one	another	as	they	shocked
up	the	last	of	 the	corn,	 the	ice-scummed	waters	of	 the	moat	 that	girdled	 the
rubble	fill	  and	fieldstone	 patches	of	the	 shabby	wall.	 “Then—that	  is	one	of
Lord	Aversin’s	villages?”
       “That,”	  Jenny	said	matter-of-factly	 as	the	hooves	of	their	horses	rumbled
hollowly	 on	the	wood	of	the	draw-bridge,	 “is	Alyn	 Hold.”
       The	 town	 huddled	within	  the	curtain	 wall—a	 wall	  built	 by	 the	present
lord’s	 grandfather,	old	  James	Standfast,	as	a	 temporary	 measure	and	 now
hoary	 with	  fifty	   winters—was	  squalid	 beyond	  description.	 Through	  the
archway	beneath	the	 squat	gatehouse	untidy	 houses	were	 visible,	 clustered
around	the	wall	 of	 the	Hold	 itself	 as	if	 the	larger	building	  had	seeded	them,
low-built	 of	 stone	and	 rubble	upon	 the	foundations	 of	 older	walls,	 thatched
with	 river	 reed-straw	 and	grubby	 with	 age.	From	 the	 window-turret	  of	 the
gatehouse	old	Peg	the	gatekeeper	stuck	her	head	out,	her	long,	gray-streaked
brown	braids	hanging	down	 like	bights	 of	half-unraveled	 rope,	and	she	called
out	to	Jenny,	“You’re	 in	 luck,”	 in	 the	glottal	 lilt	 of	 the	north-country	 speech.
“Me	lord	 got	in	last	night	from	 ridin’	 the	bounds.	He’ll	 be	about.”
       “She	 wasn’t—was	 she	talking	 about	Lord	 Aversin?”	 Gareth	whispered,
scandalized.
       Jenny’s	 crescent-shaped	eyebrows	quirked	upward.	 “He’s	 the	only	 lord

21
we	have.”
       “Oh.”	   He	blinked,	  making	 another	 mental	readjustment.	 “‘Riding	   the
bounds’?”
       “The	 bounds	of	 his	lands.	 He	patrols	them,	 most	days	of	 the	month,	he
and	militia	 volunteers.”	 Seeing	Gareth’s	face	fall,	 she	added	gently,	 “That	 is
what	it	is	to	be	a	lord.”
       “It	  isn’t,	 you	know,”	 Gareth	 said.	“It	 is	 chivalry,	 and	honor,	and...”	 But
she	had	already	ridden	 past	him,	 out	of	 the	 slaty	darkness	of	 the	gatehouse
passage	and	into	the	heatless	sunlight	of	the	square.
       With	 all	 its	noise	and	gossipy	squalor,	Jenny	had	always	liked	the	village
of	Alyn.	  It	 had	been	the	home	of	 her	childhood;	 the	 stone	cottage	in	 which
she	had	been	born	 and	 in	 which	 her	sister	 and	brother-in-law	  still	 lived—
though	her	 sister’s	 husband	discouraged	 mention	 of	 the	 relationship—still
stood	down	 the	lane,	 against	the	 curtain	 wall.	 They	 might	 regard	her	 with
awe,	these	hard-working	 people	with	  their	small	 lives	 circumscribed	 by	the
work	of	 the	seasons,	but	she	knew	their	lives	only	 a	little	 less	intimately	than
she	knew	her	own.	 There	 was	not	a	house	in	 the	village	  where	she	had	not
delivered	a	 child,	 or	 tended	the	sick,	 or	 fought	 death	in	 one	of	 the	 myriad
forms	that	it	took	in	 the	Winterlands;	she	was	familiar	with	 them,	and	with	 the
long-spun,	intricate	 patterns	 of	their	 griefs	 and	 joys.	As	 the	 horses	sloshed
through	mud	and	 standing	water	to	 the	center	of	 the	square,	she	saw	Gareth
looking	 about	him	 with	 carefully	 concealed	dismay	at	the	 pigs	and	chickens
that	shared	the	fetid	 lanes	so	 amicably	 with	 flocks	 of	 shrieking	 children.	A
gust	of	wind	 blew	the	smoke	of	 the	forge	over	 them,	and	with	 it	a	faint	 wash
of	heat	and	a	 snatch	of	Muffle	  the	smith’s	 bawdy	song;	 in	one	lane	 laundry
flapped,	and	 in	 another,	Deshy	 Werville,	  whose	baby	 Jenny	had	 delivered
three	months	ago,	was	 milking	 one	of	 her	beloved	 cows	half-in,	  half-out	 of
her	cottage	door.	Jenny	 saw	how	 Gareth’s	disapproving	 gaze	lingered	 upon
the	shabby	Temple,	 with	 its	 lumpish,	 crudely	 carved	images	of	 the	 Twelve
Gods,	barely	distinguishable	from	 one	another	in	the	gloom,	and	then	went	to
the	circled	cross	of	Earth	and	Sky	that	was	wrought	into	the	stones	of	so	many
village	chimneys.	His	 back	got	a	little	stiffer	 at	this	evidence	of	paganism,	and

22
his	upper	lip	appeared	to	lengthen	as	he	regarded	the	pigpen	built	out	from	the
Temple’s	side	and	the	pair	of	 yokels	in	 scruffy	leather	and	plaids	 who	leaned
against	the	railings,	gossiping.
       “Course,	 pigs	see	the	weather,”	one	of	them	was	saying,	reaching	with	 a
stick	across	the	 low	 palings	to	 scratch	the	back	 of	the	 enormous	black	 sow
who	reposed	within.	“That’s	 in	 Clivy’s	 On	Farming,	 but	I’ve	 seen	them	do	it.
And	 they’re	 gie	clever,	 cleverer	than	 dogs.	My	  aunt	Mary—you	  remember
Aunt	 Mary?—used	 to	 train	them	 as	piglets	 and	 she	had	one,	 a	white	 one,
who’d	fetch	her	shoes	for	her.”
       “Aye?”	  the	 second	yokel	 said,	scratching	 his	head	as	 Jenny	drew	 rein
near	them,	with	Gareth	fidgeting	impatiently	 at	her	side.
       “Aye.”	  The	 taller	man	 made	kissing	sounds	to	 the	sow,	who	 raised	her
head	in	  response	with	  a	 slurping	 grunt	 of	  deepest	affection.	  “It	  says	in
Polyborus’	Analects	that	 the	Old	 Cults	used	to	worship	 the	pig,	 and	not	as	a
devil,	either,	 as	Father	Hiero	 would	 have	it,	 but	as	the	 Moon	 Goddess.”	He
pushed	his	steel-rimmed	 spectacles	a	little	 higher	 on	the	 bridge	 of	his	 long
nose,	a	curiously	professorial	gesture	for	a	man	ankle-deep	in	pig-muck.
       “That	 a	fact,	now?”	 the	second	yokel	said	with	 interest.	“Now	 you	 come
to	speak	on	it,	this	old	 girl—when	 she	were	young	and	flighty,	 that	is—had	it
figured	to	 a	T	 how	to	 get	the	 pen	gate	open,	and	would	 be	 after...	Oh!”	 He
bowed	hastily,	seeing	Jenny	and	the	fuming	Gareth	sitting	their	horses	quietly.
       The	 taller	 of	 the	two	 men	 turned.	As	 the	brown	 eyes	behind	 the	thick
spectacle	lenses	met	Jenny’s,	they	lost	their	 habitual	guarded	expression	and
melted	abruptly	  into	 an	 impish	 brightness.	 Middle-sized,	  unprepossessing,
shaggy	and	unshaven	in	 his	 scruffy	 dark	 leather	clothing,	  his	old	 wolfskin
doublet	patched	 with	 bits	 of	 metal	 and	scraps	of	 chain	 mail	 to	 protect	his
joints—after	 ten	 years,	she	 wondered,	what	 was	 there	about	 him	 that	 still
filled	her	with	 such	absurd	joy?
       “Jen.”	 He	smiled	and	held	out	his	hands	to	her.
       Taking	 them,	she	slid	 from	the	white	 mare’s	saddle	into	 his	arms,	while
Gareth	looked	on	in	disapproving	impatience	 to	get	on	with	his	quest.	“John,”
she	said,	and	turned	back	to	the	boy.	“Gareth	 of	 Magloshaldon—this	 is	Lord

23
John	Aversin,	the	Dragonsbane	of	Alyn	Hold.”
       For	 one	instant,	Gareth	was	shocked	absolutely	 speechless.	He	sat	for	a
moment,	staring,	 stunned	as	if	 struck	over	 the	head;	then	 he	dismounted	so
hastily	that	he	clutched	 his	hurt	arm	 with	 a	gasp.	It	was	as	if,	 Jenny	thought,
in	 all	 his	  ballad-fed	 fantasies	 of	 meeting	 the	 Dragonsbane,	 it	 had	 never
occurred	to	him	 that	 his	hero	would	 be	 afoot,	not	 to	say	ankle-deep	in	 mud
beside	the	local	pigsty.	In	his	 face	was	plain	evidence	that,	though	he	himself
was	over	six-foot-three,	 and	must	be	taller	 than	anyone	else	he	knew,	he	had
never	connected	this	with	 the	fact	that,	unless	his	hero	was	a	giant,	 he	would
perforce	be	 shorter	also.	 Neither,	 she	supposed,	had	 any	ballad	 mentioned
spectacles.
       Still	 Gareth	had	not	spoken.	Aversin,	interpreting	 his	silence	and	the	look
on	his	face	with	 his	usual	fiendish	 accuracy,	said,	“I’d	 show	 you	my	dragon-
slaying	 scars	to	 prove	 it,	 but	 they’re	 placed	 where	 I	 can’t	 exhibit	 ’em	  in
public.”
       It	 said	 worlds	 for	Gareth’s	 courtly	 breeding—and,	Jenny	 supposed,	the
peculiar	stoicism	of	 courtiers—that,	 even	laboring	under	the	shock	of	 his	life
and	the	pain	 of	 a	wounded	 arm,	he	 swept	into	 a	 very	creditable	 salaam	of
greeting.	When	he	straightened	up	again,	he	adjusted	the	set	of	his	cloak	with
a	kind	of	sorry	hauteur,	pushed	his	bent	spectacles	a	little	more	firmly	 up	onto
the	 bridge	 of	  his	 nose,	 and	 said	 in	  a	 voice	 that	  was	 shaky	 but	 oddly
determined,	“My	 lord	 Dragonsbane,	I	 have	ridden	here	on	 errantry	from	 the
south,	with	  a	 message	for	 you	  from	 the	 King,	  Uriens	 of	  Belmarie.”	  He
seemed	to	gather	strength	from	these	words,	settling	into	the	heraldic	sonority
of	his	ballad-snatch	of	 golden	swords	and	bright	 plumes	in	 spite	of	the	smell
of	the	pigsty	and	the	thin,	cold	rain	that	had	begun	to	patter	down.
       “My	  lord	 Aversin,	 I	 have	 been	sent	to	 bring	 you	south.	 A	 dragon	has
come	and	laid	waste	the	 city	of	 the	gnomes	in	 the	Deep	of	 Ylferdun;	 it	 lairs
there	now,	fifteen	 miles	from	 the	King’s	 city	 of	 Bel.	The	King	 begs	that	you
come	to	slay	it	ere	the	whole	countryside	is	destroyed.”
       The	 boy	drew	 himself	 up,	having	 delivered	himself	 of	 his	quest,	a	look
of	noble	and	martyred	serenity	on	his	face,	very	 like,	Jenny	thought,	someone

24
out	 of	   a	 ballad	  himself.	   Then,	   like	  all	  good	  messengers	  in	  ballads,	   he
collapsed	 and	slid	 to	the	 soupy	mud	 and	 cowpies	 in	a	dead	 faint.



















                                             Scale	and	Structure	of	a	Dragon
                                                (From	John	Aversin’s	notes)


       1)	Mane	structure	and	spikes	at	joints	are	thicker	than	shown.	A	bone	“shield”	extends
               from	the	back	of	the	skull	beneath	the	mane	to	protect	the	nape	of	the	neck.
       2)	Golden	Dragon	of	Wyr	measured	approx.	27’	of	which	12’	was	tail;	there	are	rumors
                                                 of	dragons	longer	than	50’.

25
                                    CHAPTER	                   II


RAIN	DRUMMED	STEADILY,	drearily,	on	the	walls	of	Alyn	Hold’s	broken-down
tower.	The	Hold’s	single	guest	room	was	never	very	bright;	and,	though	it	was
only	mid-afternoon,	Jenny	had	summoned	a	dim	ball	of	bluish	witchfire	to
illuminate	the	table	on	which	she	had	spread	the	contents	of	her	medicine
satchel;	the	rest	of	the	little	cubbyhole	was	curtained	in	shadow.
       In	the	bed,	Gareth	dozed	restlessly.	The	air	was	sweet	with	the	ghosts	of
the	long-dried	fragrances	of	crushed	herbs;	the	witchlight	threw	fine,	close-
grained	shadows	around	the	desiccated	mummies	of	root	and	pod	where	they
lay	in	 the	circles	Jenny	had	traced.	Slowly,	rune	by	rune,	she	worked	the
healing	spells	over	them,	each	with	its	own	Limitation	to	prevent	a	too-quick
healing	that	might	harm	the	body	as	a	whole,	her	fingers	patiently	tracing	the
signs,	her	mind	calling	down	the	qualities	of	the	universe	particular	to	each,
like	separate	threads	of	unheard	music.	It	was	said	that	the	great	mages	could
see	the	power	of	the	runes	they	wrought	glowing	like	cold	fire	in	the	air	above
the	healing	powders	and	sense	the	touch	of	it	like	plasmic	light	drawn	from
the	fingertips.	After	 long	years	of	 solitary	meditation,	Jenny	had	come	to
accept	that,	for	her,	magic	was	a	depth	and	a	stillness	rather	than	the	moving
brilliance	that	it	was	for	 the	great.	It	was	something	she	would	never	quite
become	reconciled	to,	but	at	least	it	kept	her	from	the	resentment	that	would
block	what	powers	she	did	have.	Within	her	narrow	bounds,	she	knew	she
worked	well.
       The	key	to	magic	is	magic,	Caerdinn	had	said.	To	be	a	mage,	you	must
be	a	mage.	There	is	no	time	for	anything	else,	if	you	will	come	to	the	fullness
of	your	power.
       So	she	had	remained	in	the	stone	house	on	Frost	Fell	after	Caerdinn	had
died,	studying	his	books	and	measuring	the	stars,	meditating	in	the	crumbling
circle	of	ancient	standing	stones	that	stood	on	the	hillcrest	above.	Through	the
slow	years	her	powers	had	grown	with	meditation	and	study,	though	never	to

26
what	his	 had	been.	It	 was	a	 life	 that	had	 contented	her.	She	had	looked	 no
further	 than	 the	patient	 striving	  to	 increase	her	 powers,	 while	 she	 healed
others	where	she	could	and	observed	the	turning	of	the	seasons.
       Then	John	had	come.
       The	 spells	circled	to	their	 conclusion.	For	a	time	 silence	hung	on	the	air,
as	if	every	hearth	brick	and	rafter	shadow,	the	fragrance	of	the	applewood	fire
and	the	 guttural	  trickle	  of	 the	 rain,	  had	 been	preserved	 in	 amber	 for	  a
thousand	years.	Jenny	swept	 the	spelled	 powders	together	 into	 a	bowl	  and
raised	her	eyes.	Gareth	was	watching	 her	fearfully	  from	 the	darkness	of	 the
curtained	bed.
       She	got	to	her	feet.	As	she	moved	toward	him,	 he	recoiled,	his	white	face
drawn	with	accusation	and	loathing.	“You	 are	his	mistress!”
       Jenny	stopped,	hearing	the	hatred	in	that	weak	voice.	She	said,	“Yes.	But
it	has	nothing	to	do	with	 you.”
       He	 turned	 his	face	 away,	fretful	  and	still	 half-dreaming.	 “You	  are	just
like	her,”	he	muttered	faintly.	 “Just	like	 Zyerne...”
       She	stepped	forward	again,	not	certain	she	had	heard	clearly.	“Who?”
       “You’ve	  snared	him	with	 your	spells—brought	 him	down	into	 the	mud,”
the	 boy	 whispered	 and	 broke	 off	  with	  a	 feverish	  sob.	 Disregarding	 his
repulsion,	she	came	worriedly	 to	 his	side,	feeling	 his	face	and	hands;	after	 a
moment,	he	ceased	his	feeble	 resistance,	already	sinking	 back	to	 sleep.	His
flesh	felt	 neither	hot	nor	 overly	 chilled;	 his	pulse	was	steady	and	strong.	But
still	 he	tossed	and	murmured,	 “Never—I	  never	 will.	 Spells—you	 have	 laid
spells	 on	 him—made	 him	  love	 you	  with	 your	  witcheries...”	  His	 eyelids
slipped	closed.
       Jenny	  sighed	 and	 straightened	 up,	  looking	  down	  into	 the	  flushed,
troubled	face.	“If	 only	I	 had	laid	spells	on	him,”	 she	murmured.	“Then	I	could
release	us	both—	had	I	the	courage.”
       She	dusted	her	hands	on	her	skirt	 and	descended	the	narrow	darkness	of
the	turret	stair.
       She	found	 John	in	 his	study—what	 would	 have	been	a	fair-sized	 room,
had	it	not	 been	jammed	to	 overflowing	 with	 books.	 For	the	most	 part,	these

27
were	ancient	volumes,	left	 at	the	 Hold	by	 the	departing	armies	 or	scavenged
from	 the	cellars	 of	the	 burned-out	garrison	 towns	 of	the	 south;	rat-chewed,
black	with	 mildew,	unreadable	with	 waterstains,	they	crammed	every	shelf	of
the	labyrinth	 of	 planks	that	 filled	 two	 walls	 and	they	spilled	 off	 to	 litter	 the
long	 oak	table	 and	 heaped	the	 floor	 in	 the	 corners.	 Sheets	of	 notes	were
interleaved	among	their	pages	and	between	their	covers,	copied	out	by	John	in
the	winter	 evenings.	Among	 and	between	them	were	jumbled	 at	random	 the
tools	of	 a	scribe—prickers	 and	 quills,	 knives	 and	inkpots,	 pumice	 stones—
and	stranger	things	 besides:	metal	tubes	 and	tongs,	plumb-bobs	 and	 levels,
burning-glasses	and	pendulums,	magnets,	the	blown	 shells	of	 eggs,	chips	of
rock,	dried	flowers,	 and	a	half-disassembled	clock.	A	vast	spiderweb	of	hoists
and	pulleys	occupied	the	rafters	 in	one	corner,	and	battalions	 of	guttered	and
decaying	candles	angled	 along	the	 edges	of	every	 shelf	 and	sill.	 The	 room
was	a	magpie-nest	of	picked-at	knowledge,	 the	lair	of	 a	tinkerer	to	whom	 the
universe	was	one	vast	toyshop	of	intriguing	side	issues.	Above	the	hearth,	like
a	giant	iron	pinecone,	hung	the	tail-knob	of	 the	dragon	of	Wyr—fifteen	 inches
long	and	nine	through,	covered	with	stumpy,	broken	spikes.
       John	himself	 stood	beside	the	window,	 gazing	through	the	thick	 glass	of
its	much-mended	casement	out	over	the	barren	lands	to	the	north,	where	they
merged	with	 the	bruised	and	tumbled	 sky.	His	 hand	was	pressed	to	his	side,
where	the	rain	throbbed	in	the	ribs	that	the	tail-knob	had	cracked.
       Though	 the	soft	buckskin	of	 her	boots	made	no	sound	on	the	rutted	stone
of	the	floor,	 he	looked	up	 as	she	came	in.	His	eyes	smiled	greeting	into	 hers,
but	she	only	leaned	her	shoulder	against	the	stone	of	the	doorpost	 and	asked,
“Well?”
       He	 glanced	ceilingward	 where	Gareth	 would	 be	lying.	 “What,	 our	little
hero	and	his	dragon?”	A	smile	flicked	 the	corners	of	his	thin,	 sensitive	mouth,
then	vanished	like	the	 swift	 sunlight	of	 a	cloudy	day.	“I’ve	  slain	one	dragon,
Jen,	and	it	 bloody	 near	finished	 me.	 Tempting	 as	the	promise	 is	of	 getting
more	fine	ballads	written	of	 my	deeds,	I	think	I’ll	  pass	this	chance.”
       Relief	 and	the	sudden	recollection	 of	Gareth’s	ballad	 made	Jenny	giggle
as	she	came	into	the	room.	The	whitish	 light	 of	the	windows	 caught	in	 every

28
crease	of	John’s	leather	sleeves	as	he	stepped	forward	to	meet	her	and	bent	to
kiss	her	lips.
       “Our	 hero	never	rode	all	the	way	north	by	 himself,	surely?”
       Jenny	 shook	her	 head.	“He	 told	 me	 he	took	 a	 ship	 from	 the	south	 to
Eldsbouch	and	rode	east	from	there.”
       “He’s	  gie	 lucky	 he	 made	it	  that	 far,”	 John	 remarked,	and	 kissed	her
again,	his	hands	warm	against	her	sides.	“The	pigs	have	been	restless	all	day,
carrying	 bits	of	 straw	 about	in	 their	 mouths—I	 turned	 back	yesterday	even
from	riding	 the	bounds	because	of	the	way	 the	crows	 were	acting	out	 on	the
Whin	 Hills.	 It’s	 two	weeks	early	 for	 them,	but	 it’s	in	 my	 mind	this’ll	  be	the
first	of	 the	winter	 storms.	The	 rocks	at	Eldsbouch	 are	shipeaters.	You	know,
Dotys	says	in	Volume	 Three	of	 his	Histories—or	 is	 it	in	 that	part	 of	Volume
Five	we	found	 at	Ember?—or	is	it	 in	Clivy?—that	  there	used	to	be	a	mole	or
breakwater	across	the	harbor	there,	back	in	the	days	of	 the	Kings.	 It	was	one
of	the	Wonders	of	the	World,	 Dotys—or	 Clivy—says,	 but	nowhere	can	I	 find
any	mention	of	 the	engineering	of	it.	 One	of	 these	days	I’m	minded	to	 take	a
boat	out	there	and	see	what	I	can	find	underwater	at	the	harbor	mouth...”
       Jenny	 shuddered,	knowing	 John	to	be	 perfectly	 capable	of	undertaking
such	an	 investigation.	 She	 had	still	  not	 forgotten	 the	 stone	house	 he	had
blown	up,	 after	reading	 in	some	moldering	 account	 about	the	gnomes	using
blasting	 powder	 to	 tunnel	 in	 their	 Deeps,	nor	 his	 experiments	 with	 water
pipes.
       Sudden	commotion	 sounded	in	 the	dark	of	 the	turret	 stair,	treble	voices
arguing,	“She	is,	 too!”	 and	“Let	 go!”	 A	muted	 scuffle	ensued,	and	a	moment
later	a	 red-haired,	sturdy	 urchin	 of	 four	 or	 so	exploded	 into	 the	room	 in	 a
swirl	 of	 grubby	 sheepskin	 and	plaids,	 followed	  immediately	 by	 a	 slender,
dark-haired	boy	 of	eight.	 Jenny	smiled	 and	held	out	 her	arms	to	 them	both.
They	flung	 themselves	against	her;	small,	filthy	 hands	clutched	delightedly	at
her	hair,	her	skirt,	 and	the	sleeves	of	her	shift,	and	she	felt	 again	the	surge	of
ridiculous	and	illogical	 delight	 at	being	in	their	presence.
       “And	  how	 are	 my	 little	  barbarians?”	 she	asked	in	  her	coolest	 voice,
which	fooled	neither	of	 them.

29
       “Good—we	  been	good,	Mama,”	the	older	boy	 said,	clinging	to	 the	faded
blue	cloth	of	her	skirt.	 “I	been	good—	Adric	 hasn’t.”
       “Have,	  too,”	 retorted	 the	younger	 one,	whom	 John	 had	lifted	  into	 his
arms.	“Papa	had	to	whip	Ian.”
       “Did	  he,	now?”	She	smiled	down	 into	her	older	son’s	eyes,	heavy-lidded
and	tip-tilted	  like	  John’s,	but	 as	summer	 blue	 as	her	 own.	 “He	  doubtless
deserved	it.”
       “With	   a	big	  whip,”	  Adric	  amplified,	 carried	 away	 with	  his	 tale.	 “A
hundred	cuts.”
       “Really?”	   She	looked	 over	 at	 John	with	  matter-of-fact	 inquiry	  in	 her
expression.	“All	 at	one	session,	or	did	you	rest	in	between?”
       “One	 session,”	 John	replied	serenely.	“And	  he	never	begged	for	 mercy
even	once.”
       “Good	  boy.”	 She	 ruffled	 Ian’s	 coarse	 black	 hair,	 and	he	 twisted	 and
giggled	with	 pleasure	at	the	solemn	make-believe.
       The	 boys	had	 long	ago	 accepted	the	fact	that	 Jenny	did	 not	live	 at	 the
Hold,	as	other	boys’	mothers	lived	with	 their	fathers;	the	Lord	 of	the	Hold	and
the	Witch	of	 Frost	Fell	did	 not	have	to	behave	like	 other	adults.	Like	 puppies
who	tolerate	 a	kennelkeeper’s	superintendence,	the	boys	 displayed	a	 dutiful
affection	 toward	  John’s	 stout	 Aunt	  Jane,	 who	 cared	 for	  them	 and,	 she
believed,	kept	 them	 out	 of	 trouble	 while	 John	was	 away	 looking	 after	 the
lands	in	 his	 charge	 and	Jenny	 lived	  apart	in	 her	 own	 house	 on	 the	Fell,
pursuing	the	 solitudes	of	 her	art.	 But	 it	 was	their	 father	they	 recognized	as
their	master,	and	their	mother	as	their	love.
       They	 started	to	tell	her,	in	 an	excited	and	not	very	coherent	duet,	about	a
fox	they	 had	trapped,	when	a	sound	in	 the	doorway	 made	them	turn.	 Gareth
stood	there,	 looking	 pale	 and	 tired,	 but	 dressed	in	 his	 own	 clothes	again,
bandages	making	an	ungainly	lump	 under	the	 sleeve	of	his	spare	shirt.	 He’d
dug	an	unbroken	pair	of	spectacles	from	his	baggage	as	well;	behind	the	thick
lenses,	his	 eyes	were	 filled	  with	 sour	 distaste	and	 bitter	 disillusion	  as	 he
looked	at	her	and	her	sons.	It	was	as	if	the	fact	 that	John	and	she	had	become
lovers—that	  she	 had	 borne	  John’s	 sons—had	  not	  only	  cheapened	his

30
erstwhile	hero	 in	 his	eyes,	but	 had	made	her	responsible	 for	all	 those	other
disappointments	that	he	had	encountered	in	the	Winterlands	as	well.
       The	boys	sensed	at	once	his	disapprobation.	Adric’s	pugnacious	little	 jaw
began	to	 come	 forward	  in	 a	 miniature	 version	  of	 John’s.	 But	 Ian,	 more
sensitive,	only	 signaled	to	 his	brother	 with	 his	 eyes,	and	the	two	 took	 their
silent	leave.	 John	watched	 them	go;	 then	his	 gaze	returned,	 speculative,	to
Gareth.	But	all	he	said	was,	“So	you	lived,	 then?”
       Rather	 shakily,	Gareth	replied,	 “Yes.	Thank	 you—”	 He	turned	 to	Jenny,
with	 a	forced	politeness	 that	no	amount	 of	 animosity	 could	uproot	 from	 his
courtier’s	soul.	“Thank	 you	for	 helping	me.”	 He	took	a	step	into	the	room	and
stopped	again,	staring	blankly	about	him	as	he	saw	the	place	for	the	first	time.
Not	something	 from	a	ballad,	 Jenny	thought,	amused	in	 spite	of	 herself.	But
then,	no	ballad	could	ever	prepare	anyone	for	John.
       “Bit	  crowded,”	John	confessed.	“My	 dad	used	to	keep	the	books	that	had
been	left	  at	 the	 Hold	  in	 the	 storeroom	 with	  the	 corn,	 and	 the	 rats	 had
accounted	for	most	of	’em	before	I’d	 learned	to	read.	I	thought	they’d	 be	safer
here.”
       “Er...”	  Gareth	said,	at	a	loss.	“I—I	suppose...”
       “He	    was	  a	  stiff-necked	   old	   villain,	   my	   dad,”	   John	  went	   on
conversationally,	coming	 to	 stand	beside	the	hearth	and	extend	 his	hands	to
the	fire.	“If	  it	 hadn’t	been	for	 old	Caerdinn,	 who	was	about	the	 Hold	on	 and
off	when	 I	was	a	lad,	 I’d	 never	have	got	past	the	alphabet.	Dad	hadn’t	 much
use	for	written	 things—I	 found	half	 an	act	of	Luciard’s	 Firegiver	 pasted	over
the	cracks	 in	 the	walls	 of	 the	 cupboard	my	 granddad	 used	to	 store	winter
clothes	in.	 I	could	 have	gone	 out	and	thrown	 rocks	 at	his	 grave,	I	 was	that
furious,	 because	of	course	 there’s	none	 of	 the	play	 to	 be	found	 now.	 God
knows	what	they	did	 with	 the	rest	of	it—kindled	  the	kitchen	stoves,	I	 expect.
What	we’ve	managed	to	save	isn’t	much—Volumes	Three	and	Four	of	 Dotys’
Histories;	 most	of	 Polyborus’	 Analects	 and	his	 Jurisprudence;	the	 Elucidus
Lapidarus;	 Clivy’s	 On	 Farming—in	 its	 entirety,	 for	 all	 that’s	worth,	 though
it’s	pretty	useless.	I	don’t	 think	Clivy	  was	much	of	a	farmer,	or	even	bothered
to	talk	 to	farmers.	 He	says	that	you	 can	tell	 the	coming	 of	storms	 by	taking

31
measurements	of	the	 clouds	and	 their	 shadows,	but	the	 grannies	round	 the
villages	say	you	can	tell	 just	watching	 the	bees.	And	when	he	talks	 about	the
mating	habits	of	pigs...”
       “I	  warn	you,	 Gareth,”	 Jenny	said	with	 a	smile,	 “that	 John	is	 a	walking
encyclopedia	of	 old	wives’	 tales,	 granny-rhymes,	snippets	of	 every	classical
writer	 he	can	lay	hands	upon,	 and	trivia	 gleaned	from	 the	far	 corners	of	 the
hollow	earth—encourage	him	at	your	peril.	 He	also	can’t	cook.”
       “I	 can,	though,”	 John	shot	back	at	her	with	a	grin.
       Gareth,	 still	 gazing	 around	him	 in	 mystification	  at	the	 cluttered	 room,
said	nothing,	 but	 his	 narrow	 face	was	 a	study	 of	 mental	gymnastics	 as	he
strove	to	adjust	 the	ballads’	conventionalized	 catalog	of	 perfections	with	 the
reality	of	a	bespectacled	amateur	engineer	who	collected	lore	about	pigs.
       “So,	 then,”	 John	went	 on	in	 a	friendly	  voice,	“tell	  us	of	 this	dragon	 of
yours,	Gareth	of	Magloshaldon,	and	why	 the	King	 sent	a	boy	of	your	years	to
carry	his	message,	when	he’s	got	warriors	and	knights	that	could	do	the	job	as
well.”
       “Er...”	    Gareth	  looked	  completely	   taken	  aback	  for	   a	  moment—
messengers	in	ballads	never	being	 asked	for	their	 credentials.	“That	 is—but
that’s	just	it.	He	hasn’t	 got	warriors	and	knights,	 not	that	can	be	spared.	And	I
came	because	I	knew	where	to	look	for	you,	from	the	ballads.”
       He	 fished	 from	 the	 pouch	 at	his	 belt	 a	gold	 signet	 ring,	 whose	 bezel
flashed	in	 a	 spurt	of	 yellow	  hearthlight—	 Jenny	 glimpsed	a	 crowned	 king
upon	it,	seated	beneath	twelve	stars.	John	looked	in	silence	at	it	for	a	moment,
then	bent	his	head	and	drew	the	ring	to	his	lips	with	archaic	reverence.
       Jenny	watched	his	action	in	 silence.	The	King	was	the	King,	 she	thought.
It	was	 nearly	a	 hundred	years	since	he	 withdrew	 his	troops	 from	 the	north,
leaving	that	 to	the	 barbarians	and	the	chaos	of	 lands	 without	 law.	Yet	 John
still	regarded	himself	as	the	subject	of	the	King.
       It	 was	something	she	herself	had	never	understood—either	John’s	loyalty
to	the	King	whose	laws	 he	still	fought	 to	uphold,	or	Caerdinn’s	 sense	of	bitter
and	personal	betrayal	by	those	same	Kings.	To	 Jenny,	the	King	was	the	ruler
of	 another	  land,	 another	  time—she	  herself	 was	  a	 citizen	  only	  of	  the

32
Winterlands.
       Bright	 and	small,	 the	gold	oval	 of	the	ring	 flashed	as	Gareth	laid	it	upon
the	table,	like	a	witness	to	all	 that	was	said.	“He	gave	that	to	me	when	he	sent
me	to	seek	you,”	he	told	them.	“The	King’s	 champions	all	rode	out	against	the
dragon,	and	none	 of	 them	returned.	 No	 one	in	 the	 Realm	has	 ever	slain	 a
dragon—nor	even	 seen	one	up	 close	to	 know	 how	 to	attack	 it,	 really.	 And
there	is	nothing	to	 tell	 us.	I	know,	 I’ve	 looked,	because	it	was	the	one	useful
thing	that	 I	 could	do.	 I	know	 I’m	  not	a	 knight,	 or	a	champion...”	  His	voice
stammered	a	little	 on	the	 admission,	breaking	 the	armor	 of	his	 formality.	 “I
know	 I’m	 no	 good	 at	sports.	 But	 I’ve	 studied	 all	 the	 ballads	and	 all	 their
variants,	and	no	ballad	really	tells	that	much	about	the	actual	how-to	of	killing
a	dragon.	 We	 need	 a	 Dragonsbane,”	 he	 concluded	 helplessly.	 “We	 need
someone	who	knows	what	he’s	doing.	We	need	your	help.”
       “And	   we	 need	 yours.”	  The	 light	  timbre	  of	  Aversin’s	 smoky	  voice
suddenly	hardened	to	 flint.	  “We’ve	 needed	your	 help	 for	 a	 hundred	years,
while	 this	part	of	 the	Realm,	 from	 the	River	 Wildspae	north,	 was	being	laid
waste	by	  bandits	 and	Iceriders	  and	wolves	  and	 worse	 things,	 things	 we
haven’t	the	 knowledge	 anymore	 to	 deal	with:	  marshdevils	and	 Whisperers
and	the	evils	that	haunt	the	night	woods,	evils	that	steal	the	blood	and	souls	of
the	living.	 Has	your	King	 thought	 of	that?	It’s	 a	bit	late	 in	the	day	for	 him	 to
be	asking	favors	of	us.”
       The	boy	 stared	at	him,	stunned.	“But	the	dragon...”
       “Pox	  blister	 your	 dragon!	 Your	 King	  has	 a	hundred	 knights	 and	 my
people	have	only	me.”	 The	light	 slid	 across	the	lenses	of	his	specs	in	a	flash
of	gold	 as	he	leaned	his	broad	shoulders	against	the	 blackened	stones	of	the
chimney-breast,	the	spikes	 of	 the	dragon’s	 tail-knob	 gleaming	 evilly	 beside
his	head.	“Gnomes	never	have	just	one	entrance	to	their	Deeps.	Couldn’t	your
King’s	 knights	 have	gotten	 the	 surviving	 gnomes	to	 guide	 them	 through	a
secondary	entrance	to	take	the	thing	from	behind?”
       “Uh...”	  Visibly	 nonplussed	by	the	unheroic	practicality	 of	the	suggestion,
Gareth	floundered.	 “I	 don’t	 think	 they	 could	have.	 The	rear	entrance	of	 the
Deep	is	 in	 the	 fortress	of	  Halnath.	 The	Master	 of	 Halnath—Polycarp,	  the

33
King’s	 nephew—rose	in	revolt	 against	the	King	 not	long	 before	the	dragon’s
coming.	The	Citadel	is	under	siege.”
       Silent	 in	the	corner	of	 the	hearth	to	which	she	had	retreated,	Jenny	heard
the	sudden	shift	in	 the	boy’s	voice,	 like	 the	sound	of	 a	weakened	foundation
giving	under	strain.	Looking	 up,	she	saw	his	too-prominent	Adam’s	 apple	bob
as	he	swallowed.
       There	 was	some	wound	there,	she	guessed	to	herself,	some	memory	still
tender	to	the	touch.
       “That’s—that’s	  one	 reason	so	 few	 of	 the	 King’s	 champions	 could	 be
spared.	It	isn’t	only	 the	dragon,	you	see.”	He	leaned	forward	pleadingly.	 “The
whole	Realm	 is	in	 danger	from	 the	 rebels	as	well	 as	the	dragon.	 The	Deep
tunnels	into	 the	face	of	 Nast	Wall,	 the	great	mountain-ridge	 that	 divides	 the
lowlands	of	 Belmarie	from	 the	northeastern	Marches.	The	Citadel	of	 Halnath
stands	on	a	cliff	on	 the	other	side	of	the	mountain	 from	 the	main	gates	of	the
Deep,	with	 the	 town	 and	the	University	  below	 it.	 The	gnomes	 of	Ylferdun
were	our	allies	against	the	rebels,	but	now	most	of	them	have	gone	over	to	the
Halnath	 side.	The	 whole	 Realm	 is	 split.	 You	 must	 come!	 As	 long	 as	 the
dragon	is	in	 Ylferdun	 we	 can’t	 keep	the	roads	from	 the	 mountains	properly
guarded	against	the	rebels,	or	 send	supplies	to	 the	besiegers	of	 the	Citadel.
The	King’s	 champions	went	out...”	 He	swallowed	 again,	his	voice	 tightening
with	 the	memory.	“The	 men	 who	brought	 back	the	 bodies	said	that	most	 of
them	never	even	got	a	chance	to	draw	their	swords.”
       “Gah!”	   Aversin	  looked	 away,	 anger	 and	 pity	  twisting	  his	  sensitive
mouth.	“Any	 fool	 who’d	take	a	sword	after	a	dragon	in	the	first	place...”
       “But	 they	didn’t	 know!	 All	 they	had	to	go	on	were	the	songs!”
       Aversin	 said	nothing	to	 this;	but,	judging	 by	his	 compressed	lips	and	the
flare	of	his	 nostrils,	his	thoughts	were	 not	pleasant	ones.	Gazing	into	the	fire,
Jenny	heard	his	silence,	and	something	like	the	chill	shadow	of	 a	wind-driven
cloud	passed	across	her	heart.
       Half	  against	her	will,	  she	saw	images	form	 in	 the	molten	 amber	of	the
fire’s	 heart.	 She	 recognized	 the	 winter-colored	  sky	  above	 the	 gully,	 the
charred	and	brittle	spears	of	poisoned	grass	fine	as	needle-scratches	against	it,

34
John	standing	poised	on	the	gully’s	 rim,	 the	barbed	steel	rod	of	 a	harpoon	in
one	gloved	hand,	an	ax	gleaming	in	his	belt.	Something	 rippled	in	the	gully,	 a
living	 carpet	of	golden	knives.
       Clearer	than	the	sharp,	small	ghosts	of	the	past	that	she	saw	was	the	shiv-
twist	memory	of	 fear	as	she	saw	him	jump.
       They	 had	been	lovers	then	for	 less	than	a	year,	still	 burningly	 conscious
of	one	 another’s	 bodies.	When	 he	had	 sought	the	 dragon’s	lair,	 more	 than
anything	else	Jenny	had	been	aware	of	the	fragility	 of	 flesh	and	bone	when	it
was	pitted	against	steel	and	fire.
       She	shut	her	eyes;	when	she	opened	them	again,	the	silken	pictures	were
gone	from	  the	 flame.	 She	 pressed	her	 lips	 taut,	 forcing	  herself	 to	 listen
without	 speaking,	knowing	 it	was	and	could	 be	none	of	her	 affair.	She	could
no	more	have	 told	him	 not	 to	 go—not	then,	 not	now—	 than	 he	could	 have
told	her	 to	leave	 the	stone	house	on	 Frost	Fell	 and	 give	up	 her	seeking,	 to
come	to	the	Hold	to	cook	his	meals	and	raise	his	sons.
       John	was	saying,	“Tell	 me	about	this	drake.”
       “You	 mean	you’ll	  come?”	The	forlorn	 eagerness	in	Gareth’s	voice	made
Jenny	want	to	get	up	and	box	his	ears.
       “I	 mean	I	want	to	 hear	about	it.”	The	Dragonsbane	came	around	the	table
and	slouched	into	 one	of	 the	 room’s	 big	 carved	chairs,	sliding	  the	other	 in
Gareth’s	direction	  with	 a	 shove	of	 his	 booted	 foot.	 “How	  long	 ago	did	 it
strike?”
       “It	  came	 by	night,	  two	 weeks	ago.	 I	 took	 ship	three	 days	later,	 from
Claekith	 Harbor	  below	  the	 city	  of	  Bel.	 The	  ship	 is	  waiting	  for	  us	 at
Eldsbouch.”
       “I	  doubt	that.”	 John	scratched	the	side	of	his	long	nose	with	 one	scarred
forefinger.	“If	 your	 mariners	were	smart	they’ll	 have	turned	and	run	for	a	safe
port	two	days	ago.	The	storms	are	coming.	Eldsbouch	will	 be	no	protection	to
them.”
       “But	 they	said	they’d	 stay!”	 Gareth	protested	indignantly.	“I	 paid	them!”
       “Gold	  will	 do	 them	no	good	weighting	 their	 bones	to	the	bottom	 of	 the
cove,”	John	pointed	out.

35
       Gareth	sank	back	into	 his	chair,	shocked	and	cut	to	the	heart	by	this	final
betrayal.	“They	can’t	 have	gone...”
       There	 was	a	 moment’s	 silence,	while	 John	 looked	 down	at	 his	 hands.
Without	lifting	  her	eyes	from	the	heart	of	the	fire,	Jenny	said	softly,	“They	 are
not	there,	 Gareth.	I	 see	the	 sea,	and	it	 is	 black	 with	 storms;	 I	 see	the	 old
harbor	at	Eldsbouch,	the	gray	river	running	through	 the	broken	houses	there;	I
see	the	fisher-folk	 making	 fast	their	 little	  boats	to	the	ruins	 of	 the	old	 piers
and	all	the	stones	shining	under	the	rain.	There	is	no	ship	there,	Gareth.”
       “You’re	  wrong,”	 he	said	hopelessly.	“You	have	to	 be	wrong.”	 He	turned
back	to	John.	“It’ll	 take	us	weeks	to	get	back,	traveling	overland...”
       “Us?”	   John	said	softly,	and	Gareth	 blushed	and	looked	as	frightened	as
if	he	had	uttered	mortal	insult.	After	 a	moment	John	went	on,	“How	 big	is	this
dragon	of	yours?”
       Gareth	swallowed	 again	and	drew	his	breath	in	a	shaky	sigh.	“Huge,”	  he
said	dully.
       “How	  huge?”
       Gareth	 hesitated.	Like	 most	people,	he	 had	no	eye	for	 relative	 size.	“It
must	have	 been	 a	hundred	 feet	 long.	  They	 say	 the	shadow	 of	 its	  wings
covered	the	whole	of	Deeping	Vale.”
       “Who	  says?”	John	 inquired,	 shifting	 his	 weight	 side-ways	in	 the	chair
and	hooking	a	knee	over	 the	fornicating	 sea-lions	that	made	up	the	 left-hand
arm.	“I	 thought	it	came	at	night,	 and	munched	up	anyone	close	enough	to	see
it	by	day.”
       “Well...”	  He	floundered	in	 a	sea	of	third-hand	rumor.
       “Ever	 see	it	on	the	ground?”
       Gareth	blushed	and	shook	his	head.
       “It’s	  gie	hard	to	judge	things	in	 the	air,”	 John	said	kindly,	pushing	up	his
specs	again.	“The	drake	I	 slew	here	looked	 about	a	hundred	feet	 long	in	 the
air,	when	I	first	 saw	it	descending	on	the	village	 of	Great	Toby.	Turned	out	 to
be	twenty-seven	feet	from	 beak	to	tail.”	  Again	his	 quick	grin	 illuminated	 his
usually	expressionless	face.	“It	comes	of	being	a	naturalist.	 The	first	thing	 we
did,	Jenny	and	I,	 when	I	 was	on	my	 feet	again	after	 killing	 it,	 was	to	 go	out

36
there	with	 cleavers	and	see	how	 the	thing	 was	put	 together,	what	there	 was
left	of	it.”
       “It	  could	 be	bigger,	 though,	couldn’t	  it?”	 Gareth	 asked.	He	sounded	a
little	 worried,	 as	if,	 Jenny	thought	 dryly,	 he	considered	a	 twenty-seven	foot
dragon	somewhat	paltry.	 “I	  mean,	in	 the	Greenhythe	 variant	 of	 the	Lay	 of
Selkythar	Dragonsbane	and	the	Worm	 of	 the	Imperteng	Wood,	 they	say	that
the	Worm	was	sixty	feet	long,	with	 wings	that	would	 cover	a	battalion.”
       “Anybody	  measure	it?”
       “Well,	 they	 must	have.	Except—now	that	I	come	to	think	 of	it,	 according
to	that	variant,	when	Selkythar	 had	wounded	it	unto	death	the	dragon	fell	 into
the	River	Wildspae;	and	in	 a	later	Belmarie	 version	it	says	it	 fell	into	 the	sea.
So	I	don’t	see	how	anyone	could	have.”
       “So	  a	 sixty-foot	   dragon	 is	 just	  somebody’s	 measure	 of	  how	 great
Selkythar	was.”	He	leaned	back	in	his	chair,	his	hands	absentmindedly	tracing
over	the	lunatic	carvings—the	mingled	 shapes	of	all	the	creatures	of	the	Book
of	Beasts.	The	 worn	 gilding	 still	  caught	in	 the	chinks	 flickered	 with	  a	dull
sheen	in	the	stray	glints	 of	 the	fire.	 “Twenty-seven	 feet	doesn’t	sound	like	 a
lot,	’til	  it’s	 there	 spitting	 fire	 at	you.	 You	 know	 their	 flesh	will	  decompose
almost	as	soon	as	they	die?	It’s	as	if	their	 own	fire	 consumes	them,	as	it	does
everything	else.”
       “Spitting	  fire?”	 Gareth	frowned.	“All	 the	songs	say	they	breathe	it.”
       Aversin	 shook	his	head.	“They	 sort	of	 spit	it—it’s	 liquid	  fire,	and	nearly
anything	it	 touches’ll	catch.	That’s	 the	trick	in	 fighting	 a	dragon,	you	see—to
stay	close	enough	to	its	body	 that	it	won’t	 spit	 fire	 at	you	for	 fear	of	burning
itself,	and	not	get	rolled	 on	or	cut	to	pieces	with	 its	scales	whilst	you’re	 about
it.	They	 can	raise	 the	scales	along	 their	sides	 like	 a	blowfish	 bristling,	  and
they’re	edged	like	razors.”
       “I	 never	knew	 that,”	Gareth	breathed.	Wonder	and	curiosity	lessened,	for
a	moment,	the	shell	of	his	offended	dignity	 and	pride.
       “Well,	  the	pity	of	 it	is,	probably	 the	King’s	 champions	didn’t	 either.	God
knows,	I	didn’t	 when	 I	went	after	 the	dragon	in	the	gorge.	There	was	nothing
about	it	in	any	book	 I	could	 find—Dotys	 and	Clivy	 and	them.	Only	 a	few	old

37
granny-rhymes	that	mention	 dragons—or	 drakes	or	worms,	 they’re	 called—
and	they	weren’t	much	help.	Things	like:


     “Cock	 by	its	 feet,	horse	by	its	hame,
     Snake	by	its	head,	drake	by	its	name.


       “Or	  what	Polyborus	had	in	 his	Analects	 about	certain	villages	 believing
that	if	  you	 plant	 loveseed—those	 creeper-things	with	  the	 purple	 trumpet-
flowers	 on	them—around	 your	 house,	dragons	won’t	  come	near.	Jen	and	 I
used	bits	of	that	 kind	of	 lore—Jen	brewed	a	poison	 from	 the	loveseed	to	put
on	my	harpoons,	because	it	was	obvious	on	the	face	of	it	that	no	fiddling	 little
sword	was	 going	to	 cut	 through	 those	scales.	And	 the	poison	 did	 slow	 the
thing	down.	But	I	 don’t	know	 near	as	much	about	them	as	I’d	like.”
       “No.”	  Jenny	turned	 her	eyes	at	 last	from	 the	fire’s	 throbbing	 core	 and,
resting	her	cheek	upon	her	hand	where	it	lay	on	her	up-drawn	knees,	regarded
the	two	men	on	 either	side	of	 the	book-cluttered	table.	 She	spoke	softly,	half
to	herself.	“We	 know	not	 where	they	come	from,	 nor	 where	they	breed;	why
of	all	the	beasts	of	the	earth	they	have	six	limbs	instead	of	four...”
       “‘Maggots	  from	 meat,’”	 quoted	John,	“‘weevils	  from	rye,	 dragons	from
stars	in	an	 empty	sky.’	 That’s	 in	 Terens’	Of	 Ghosts.	Or	 Caerdinn’s	‘Save	 a
dragon,	slave	 a	 dragon.’	 Or	 why	  they	 say	you	  should	 never	look	  into	 a
dragon’s	eyes—and	I’ll	  tell	 you,	 Gar,	 I	 was	gie	 careful	 not	to	 do	 that.	We
don’t	even	 know	simple	 things,	 like	 why	 magic	and	illusion	  won’t	 work	 on
them;	why	Jen	couldn’t	 call	the	dragon’s	 image	in	that	jewel	 of	hers,	or	use	a
cloaking-spell	against	his	notice—nothing.”
       “Nothing,”	   Jenny	 said	 softly,	 “save	 how	 they	 died,	 slain	 by	  men	as
ignorant	of	them	as	we.”
       John	must	have	heard	the	strange	sorrow	that	underlay	her	voice,	for	 she
felt	 his	glance,	worried	 and	 questioning.	But	 she	turned	 her	eyes	away,	not
knowing	the	answer	to	what	he	asked.
       After	  a	 moment,	John	 sighed	and	 said	to	 Gareth,	 “It’s	  all	 knowledge
that’s	 been	 lost	 over	  the	 years,	 like	  Luciard’s	  Firegiver	  and	  how	 they
managed	to	 build	  a	 breakwater	 across	the	 harbor	 mouth	 at	 Eldsbouch—

38
knowledge	that’s	been	lost	and	may	never	be	recovered.”
       He	 got	 to	 his	 feet	and	 began	to	 pace	restlessly,	the	 flat,	 whitish	 gray
reflections	from	 the	window	winking	 on	spike	and	mail-scrap	and	the	brass	of
dagger-hilt	 and	 buckle.	  “We’re	  living	  in	  a	 decaying	 world,	  Gar;	  things
slipping	 away	day	by	 day.	Even	 you,	down	 south	in	 Bel—you’re	  losing	the
Realm	a	piece	at	a	time,	with	 the	Winterlands	tearing	off	 in	one	direction	 and
the	rebels	pulling	 away	the	 Marches	in	 another.	You’re	losing	 what	you	 had
and	don’t	even	know	it,	and	all	 that	while	knowledge	is	 leaking	out	the	seams,
like	meal	from	 a	ripped	bag,	because	there	isn’t	time	or	leisure	to	save	it.”
       “I	  would	  never	 have	slain	 the	 dragon,	 Gar—slay	 it,	  when	 we	know
nothing	 about	it?	 And	 it	 was	 beautiful	 in	 itself,	  maybe	the	 most	 beautiful
thing	I’ve	 ever	laid	 eyes	on,	every	 color	of	 it	 perfect	as	sunset,	like	a	 barley
field	in	certain	 lights	you	get	on	summer	evenings.”
       “But	  you	 must—you	 have	 to	 slay	ours!”	  There	was	 sudden	agony	 in
Gareth’s	voice.
       “Fighting	  it	 and	 slaying	 it	 are	two	 different	 things.”	 John	 turned	back
from	 the	window,	 his	 head	tipped	 slightly	  to	one	 side,	regarding	 the	boy’s
anxious	 face.	 “And	  I	  haven’t	 yet	  said	 I’d	  undertake	 the	 one,	 let	 alone
accomplish	the	other.”
       “But	  you	 have	to.”	 The	 boy’s	 voice	 was	a	forlorn	  whisper	 of	 despair.
“You’re	 our	only	hope.”
       “Am	  I?”	 the	Dragonsbane	asked	gently.	“I’m	  the	only	 hope	of	 all	these
villagers,	 through	 the	 coming	  winter,	 against	 wolves	 and	 bandits.	 It	 was
because	I	was	their	 only	 hope	that	I	 slew	the	 most	perfect	creature	 I’d	 ever
seen,	slew	it	dirtily,	filthily,	  chopping	it	 to	pieces	with	an	ax—it	 was	because	I
was	their	only	hope	that	I	fought	 it	at	all	and	near	had	my	flesh	shredded	from
my	bones	by	it.	I’m	 only	a	man,	Gareth.”
       “No!”	   the	boy	insisted	 desperately.	“You’re	 the	Dragonsbane—the	only
Dragonsbane!”	He	 rose	to	 his	feet,	 some	inner	 struggle	plain	 upon	 his	thin
features,	his	 breathing	 fast	  as	if	  forcing	  himself	 to	  some	exertion.	  “The
King...”	 He	 swallowed	 hard.	“The	  King	 told	 me	to	 make	whatever	 terms	I
could,	to	 bring	 you	south.	If	 you	 come...”	 With	 an	effort	 he	made	his	 voice

39
steady.	“If	 you	come,	we	 will	 send	troops	again	to	 protect	the	northlands,	 to
defend	them	against	the	Iceriders;	we	 will	 send	books,	and	scholars,	to	bring
knowledge	to	 the	people	again.	 I	swear	 it.”	 He	took	 up	 the	King’s	 seal	and
held	it	 out	in	his	 trembling	 palm,	and	the	cold	 daylight	 flashed	palely	 across
its	face.	“In	the	King’s	 name	I	swear	it.”
       But	 Jenny,	watching	the	boy’s	white	face	as	he	spoke,	saw	that	he	did	not
meet	John’s	eyes.


As	night	 came	on	the	 rain	increased,	the	 wind	 throwing	 it	 like	 sea-breakers
against	the	walls	 of	the	Hold.	 John’s	Aunt	 Jane	brought	 up	a	cold	 supper	of
meat,	cheese,	and	beer,	which	Gareth	picked	at	with	 the	air	 of	one	doing	 his
duty.	Jenny,	sitting	 cross-legged	in	 the	corner	 of	 the	hearth,	unwrapped	 her
harp	and	experimented	with	its	 tuning	pegs	while	 the	men	spoke	of	the	roads
that	led	south,	and	of	the	slaying	of	the	Golden	Dragon	of	Wyr.
       “That’s	 another	thing	 that	wasn’t	like	 the	songs,”	Gareth	said,	resting	his
bony	elbows	 amid	 the	careless	scatter	of	 John’s	notes	on	 the	table.	 “In	 the
songs	the	dragons	are	all	gay-colored,	gaudy.	But	this	one	is	black,	dead-black
all	over	save	for	the	silver	lamps	of	its	 eyes.”
       “Black,”	   repeated	John	quietly,	and	looked	 over	 at	Jenny.	“You	 had	an
old	list,	didn’t	 you,	love?”
       She	nodded,	her	 hands	resting	in	 the	delicate	maneuverings	of	 the	harp
pegs.	“Caerdinn	had	me	 memorize	many	old	 lists,”	 she	explained	to	 Gareth.
“Some	of	them	he	told	 me	the	meaning	of—this	 one	he	never	did.	Perhaps	he
didn’t	 know	 himself.	 It	 was	 names,	and	colors...”	 She	 closed	her	 eyes	and
repeated	the	list,	her	voice	falling	 into	 the	old	man’s	singsong	chant,	the	echo
of	dozens	of	 voices,	back	 through	the	 length	of	 years.	“Teltrevir	  heliotrope;
Centhwevir	  is	 blue	  knotted	 with	   gold;	 Astirith	   is	  primrose	 and	  black;
Morkeleb	 alone,	 black	 as	night...	 The	 list	 goes	 on—there	 were	dozens	 of
names,	if	names	they	are.”	She	shrugged	and	linked	her	fingers	over	the	curve
of	the	harp’s	back.	 “But	 John	tells	me	 that	the	old	dragon	 that	was	supposed
to	haunt	the	shores	of	the	lake	of	Wevir	in	 the	east	was	said	to	have	been	blue
as	the	waters,	marked	all	over	his	back	 with	patterns	of	 gold	so	that	he	could

40
lie	beneath	the	surface	of	the	lake	in	summer	and	steal	sheep	from	the	banks.”
       “Yes!”	  Gareth	 almost	bounced	 out	of	 his	 chair	 with	 enthusiasm	as	 he
recognized	the	familiar	  tale.	“And	  the	Worm	 of	 Wevir	 was	slain	 by	 Antara
Warlady	and	her	brother	 Darthis	Dragonsbane	in	 the	last	part	of	 the	reign	 of
Yvain	the	 Well-Beloved,	 who	 was...”	He	 caught	himself	 up	 again,	suddenly
embarrassed.	“It’s	a	popular	tale,”	he	concluded,	red-faced.
       Jenny	hid	 her	smile	at	the	abrupt	checking	of	his	ebullience.	“There	 were
notes	for	 the	harp	as	well—not	  tunes,	really.	 He	whistled	 them	 to	me,	 over
and	over,	until	I	got	them	right.”
       She	put	 her	harp	to	 her	shoulder,	a	small	 instrument	that	 had	also	been
Caerdinn’s,	though	he	had	not	played	it;	the	wood	 was	darkened	almost	black
with	 age.	By	  daylight	 it	 appeared	perfectly	  unadorned,	but	 when	 firelight
glanced	across	it,	as	it	did	now,	 the	circles	of	the	 air	and	sea	were	sometimes
visible,	traced	upon	 it	in	 faded	gold.	 Carefully,	 she	picked	out	those	strange,
sweet	knots	of	sound,	sometimes	two	 or	three	notes	only,	sometimes	a	string
of	them	like	 a	truncated	air.	They	were	individual	 in	 the	turns	of	their	 timing,
hauntingly	half-familiar,	  like	 things	 remembered	from	childhood;	 and	as	she
played	 she	 repeated	the	 names:	 Teltrevir	  heliotrope,	 Centhwevir	  is	  blue
knotted	with	 gold...	 It	 was	part	of	 the	lost	 knowledge,	 like	 that	from	 John’s
scatterbrained,	jackdaw	quest	 in	 the	small	 portion	 of	 his	time	 not	 taken	up
with	  the	  brutal	  demands	 of	  the	  Winterlands.	  Notes	  and	 words	  were
meaningless	now,	like	a	line	 from	 a	lost	ballad,	 or	a	few	 torn	pages	from	the
tragedy	of	 an	exiled	 god,	pasted	to	 keep	wind	 from	 a	crack—the	 echoes	of
songs	that	would	not	be	heard	again.
       From	 them	 her	hands	moved	 on,	random	 as	her	passing	thoughts.	 She
sketched	vagrant	airs,	or	snatches	of	jigs	 and	reels,	slowed	and	touched	with
the	shadow	of	an	inevitable	 grief	that	waited	 in	the	hidden	 darkness	of	future
time.	Through	them	she	moved	to	the	ancient	tunes	that	held	the	timeless	pull
of	the	ocean	in	their	 cadences;	sorrows	that	drew	the	heart	from	 the	body,	or
joys	 that	called	 the	 soul	 like	 the	 distant	 glitter	 of	 Stardust	 banners	in	 the
summer	night.	In	 time	 John	took	from	 its	 place	in	a	 hole	by	the	 hearth	a	tin
penny	whistle,	such	as	children	played	in	the	streets,	and	joined	its	thin,	bright

41
music	 to	 hers,	 dancing	 around	 the	 shadowed	 beauty	 of	  the	 harp	 like	  a
thousand-year-old	child.
       Music	  answered	music,	 joining	 into	 a	 spell	circle	 that	 banished,	for	 a
time,	 the	strange	 tangle	of	 fear	 and	 grief	 and	 dragonfire	 in	 Jenny’s	heart.
Whatever	would	 come	 to	pass,	this	 was	what	 they	 were	and	 had	now.	She
tossed	back	the	cloudy	 streams	of	 her	 hair	and	 caught	the	bright	  flicker	 of
Aversin’s	eyes	behind	 his	thick	 spectacles,	the	pennywhistle	 luring	 the	 harp
out	of	  its	 sadness	and	into	 dance	 airs	 wild	 as	 hay-harvest	winds.	  As	 the
evening	deepened,	the	Hold	folk	  drifted	up	 to	the	study	 to	join	 them,	 sitting
where	they	could	 on	the	floor	 or	 the	hearth	or	in	 the	deep	embrasures	of	the
windows:	 John’s	Aunt	 Jane	and	Cousin	Dilly	  and	others	of	 the	vast	tribe	 of
his	female	relatives	who	lived	 at	the	Hold;	 Ian	and	Adric;	 the	fat,	jovial	 smith
Muffle;	 all	 part	of	 the	pattern	of	the	 life	 of	the	Winterlands	 that	was	so	dull-
seeming	at	first,	  but	 was	in	 truth	 close-woven	 and	complex	 as	 its	 random
plaids.	And	among	them	Gareth	sat,	ill	 at	ease	as	a	bright	southern	parrot	in	a
rookery.	 He	 kept	 looking	 about	 him	  with	 puzzled	 distaste	 in	 the	 leaping
restlessness	of	the	 red	 firelight	  that	 threw	 into	  momentary	 brightness	the
moldery	rummage	of	decaying	books,	of	rocks	and	chemical	experiments,	and
that	glowed	 in	 the	children’s	  eyes	and	made	amber	 mirrors	 of	 the	dogs’—
wondering,	Jenny	thought,	how	a	quest	as	glorious	as	his	could	possibly	 have
ended	in	such	a	place.
       And	 every	 now	and	 then,	she	noticed,	his	 eyes	returned	to	John.	There
was	in	 them	 not	 only	 anxiety,	 but	a	 kind	 of	 nervous	 dread,	as	if	  he	were
haunted	by	a	gnawing	guilt	for	 something	he	had	done,	or	something	he	knew
he	must	yet	do.


“Will	 you	 go?”	Jenny	asked	softly,	much	later	 in	the	night,	 lying	 in	the	warm
nest	of	bearskins	and	 patchwork	with	  her	dark	hair	 scattered	like	 sea-wrack
over	John’s	breast	and	arm.
       “If	  I	 slay	his	 dragon	for	 him,	the	 King	 will	 have	to	 listen	to	 me,”	 John
said	reasonably.	“If	I	 come	at	his	calling,	 I	must	be	his	 subject,	and	if	I	 am—
we	are—his	subjects,	as	King	 he	owes	us	the	protection	 of	his	 troops.	If	 I’m

42
not	his	subject...”	 He	paused,	as	he	thought	over	 what	his	 next	words	would
mean	about	the	Law	of	the	Realm	for	which	 he	had	so	long	fought.	He	sighed
and	let	the	thought	go.
       For	 a	time	the	silence	was	broken	only	by	the	groan	of	 wind	in	 the	tower
overhead	and	the	drumming	 of	 the	rain	 on	 the	walls.	 But	 even	had	she	not
been	able	to	see,	catlike,	 in	the	 dark,	Jenny	knew	 John	did	 not	sleep.	There
was	a	tension	in	 all	 his	 muscles,	and	the	uneasy	knowledge	 of	 how	narrow
had	been	 the	 margin	 between	living	  and	 dying,	  when	 he	had	 fought	 the
Golden	Dragon	of	 Wyr.	 Her	hand	under	 his	back	could	 still	 feel	 the	rucked,
hard	ridges	of	scar.
       “Jenny,”	 he	said	at	last,	“my	father	 told	me	that	his	dad	used	to	be	able	to
raise	four	and	 five	 hundred	of	militia	  when	the	 Iceriders	came.	They	 fought
pitched	battles	 on	the	 edge	of	 the	 northern	ocean	and	 marched	in	 force	 to
break	the	 strongholds	 of	 the	 bandit-kings	 that	 used	to	 cover	 the	eastward
roads.	When	that	band	of	 brigands	attacked	Far	West	Riding	 the	year	 before
last,	do	you	remember	how	 many	men	we	could	 come	up	with,	 the	mayor	of
Riding,	the	 mayor	of	 Toby,	and	myself	 among	us?	Less	than	a	hundred,	and
twelve	of	those	we	lost	in	that	fight.”
       As	 he	moved	his	head,	the	banked	glow	of	the	hearth	on	the	other	side	of
the	small	sanctum	of	 their	bedchamber	caught	a	thread	of	 carnelian	from	 the
shoulder-length	mop	of	 his	hair.	“Jen,	we	can’t	 go	on	like	 this.	You	 know	we
can’t.	We’re	weakening	all	 the	time.	The	lands	of	 the	King’s	 law,	the	law	that
keeps	the	stronger	from	enslaving	the	weaker,	are	shrinking	away.	Every	time
a	farm	is	wiped	 out	by	 wolves	or	brigands	 or	Iceriders,	it’s	 one	less	shield	in
the	wall.	Every	 time	some	family	 ups	and	goes	south	to	indenture	themselves
as	serfs	there,	always	provided	 they	make	 it	that	 far,	it	 weakens	those	of	 us
that	are	left.	 And	 the	 law	 itself	 is	waning,	 as	fewer	 and	fewer	 people	even
know	why	 there	 is	law.	 Do	 you	 realize	that	 because	I’ve	read	 a	handful	 of
volumes	of	 Dotys	 and	whatever	 pages	of	 Polyborus’	 Jurisprudence	I	 could
find	 stuck	in	 the	cracks	of	 the	tower	 I’m	 accounted	a	 scholar?	We	need	the
help	of	 the	 King,	 Jen,	 if	 we’re	 not	 to	 be	feeding	 on	 one	another	within	  a
generation.	I	can	buy	them	that	help.”

43
       “With	  what?”	 asked	Jenny	softly.	“The	 flesh	 off	your	 bones?	If	 you	are
killed	by	 the	dragon,	what	of	your	people	then?”
       Beneath	 her	 cheek	she	felt	  his	 shoulder	move.	 “I	  could	 be	 killed	 by
wolves	or	 bandits	next	 week—come	to	 that,	I	 could	fall	  off	 old	Osprey	 and
break	my	 neck.”	 And	 when	she	 chuckled,	unexpectedly	 amused	at	that,	 he
added	in	an	aggrieved	voice,	“It’s	exactly	 what	my	father	did.”
       “Your	  father	knew	 no	better	 than	to	 ride	drunk.”	  She	smiled	 a	little	 in
spite	of	herself.	“I	 wonder	what	he	would	have	made	of	our	young	hero?”
       John	laughed	in	 the	darkness.	“Gaw,	he’d	have	eaten	him	for	 breakfast.”
Seventeen	years,	ten	of	 which	  had	been	 spent	knowing	 Jenny,	 had	finally
given	him	 a	tolerance	of	the	man	he	had	grown	 up	hating.	 Then	he	drew	her
closer	and	kissed	her	hair.	When	he	spoke	again,	his	voice	was	quiet.	 “I	 have
to	do	it,	Jen.	I	won’t	 be	gone	long.”
       A	 particularly	 fierce	 gust	of	wind	 shivered	in	 the	tower’s	 ancient	bones,
and	Jenny	 drew	  the	 worn	 softness	 of	  quilts	 and	 furs	  up	 over	 her	 bare
shoulders.	A	 month,	perhaps,	she	calculated;	 maybe	 a	little	 more.	 It	 would
give	her	 a	 chance	to	catch	 up	 on	her	 neglected	meditations,	 to	 pursue	the
studies	that	she	too	often	put	aside	these	days,	to	come	to	the	Hold	to	be	with
him	and	their	sons.
       To	be	a	mage	you	must	be	a	mage,	Caerdinn	had	said.	Magic	 is	the	only
key	to	magic.	 She	knew	 that	 she	was	not	 the	mage	that	 he	had	been,	 even
when	she	had	known	him	 first,	when	 he	was	in	his	eighties	and	she	a	skinny,
wretched,	ugly	  girl	 of	  fourteen.	 She	sometimes	 wondered	whether	 it	  was
because	he	had	been	so	old,	at	the	end	of	his	strength,	when	he	came	to	teach
her,	the	last	 of	his	 pupils,	 or	because	she	was	simply	 not	 very	 good.	Lying
awake	in	the	darkness,	listening	to	the	wind	 or	to	 the	terrible	greatness	of	the
moor	silence	which	was	worse,	she	sometimes	admitted	the	truth	to	 herself—
that	what	she	gave	to	John,	what	 she	found	herself	 more	and	more	giving	 to
those	two	little	  boys	snuggled	 together	like	 puppies	upstairs,	she	took	 from
the	strength	of	her	power.
       All	  that	she	had,	to	divide	between	her	magic	 and	her	love,	was	time.	In
a	few	 years	she	 would	 be	forty.	  For	ten	 years	she	had	 scattered	her	 time,

44
sowing	it	 broadcast	like	a	 farmer	in	 summer	sunshine,	instead	of	hoarding	 it
and	pouring	it	back	into	 meditation	and	magic.	She	moved	her	head	on	John’s
shoulder,	and	the	warmth	of	their	 long	friendship	 was	in	 the	tightening	of	 his
arm	 around	 her.	 Had	 she	 forgone	 this,	 she	 wondered,	 would	  she	be	 as
powerful	 as	Caerdinn	had	once	been?	As	powerful	 as	she	sometimes	felt	she
could	be,	when	she	meditated	among	the	stones	on	her	lonely	hill?
       She	would	 have	that	time,	 with	her	mind	 undistracted,	time	 to	work	 and
strive	and	study.	The	snow	would	be	deep	by	the	time	John	returned.
       If	 he	returned.
       The	shadow	of	 the	dragon	of	Wyr	seemed	to	cover	her	again,	blotting	the
sky	as	it	 swooped	 down	like	 a	 hawk	 over	the	 autumn	dance	floor	 at	 Great
Toby.	The	sickening	jam	 of	her	 heart	in	her	throat	 came	back	to	her,	as	John
ran	forward	under	that	descending	shadow,	trying	to	reach	the	terrified	 gaggle
of	children	 cowering	in	 the	center	of	the	 floor.	The	metallic	 stink	 of	spat	fire
seemed	to	burn	again	in	her	nostrils,	the	screams	echoing	in	her	ears...
       Twenty-seven	feet,	John	had	said.	What	it	meant	was	that	from	the	top	of
the	dragon’s	shoulder	to	 the	ground	was	the	 height	of	 a	man’s	shoulder,	and
half	again	 that	to	the	 top	of	 its	tall	 haunches,	backed	by	 all	that	 weight	 and
strength	and	speed.
       And	 for	 no	good	reason	she	could	think	 of,	 she	remembered	the	sudden
shift	of	the	boy	Gareth’s	eyes.
       After	 a	long	time	 of	silence	she	said,	“John?”
       “Aye,	 love?”
       “I	 want	 to	go	with	you,	when	you	 ride	south.”
       She	 felt	 the	hardening	of	 the	 muscles	of	 his	body.	It	 was	 nearly	a	 full
minute	before	he	 answered	her,	and	she	could	hear	in	 his	voice	 the	struggle
between	what	he	 wanted	and	 what	he	 thought	might	 be	 best.	“You’ve	  said
yourself	it’ll	  be	a	bad	winter,	love.	 I’m	 thinking	 one	or	the	other	of	us	should
be	here.”
       He	 was	right,	and	she	knew	it.	 Even	the	coats	of	her	cats	were	thick	 this
fall.	A	 month	ago	she	had	been	troubled	to	see	how	the	birds	were	departing,
early	and	swiftly,	 anxious	 to	be	gone.	The	signs	pointed	 to	famine	 and	sleet,

45
and	on	the	 heels	of	 those	would	 come	barbarian	 raids	from	 across	the	 ice-
locked	northern	sea.
       And	 yet,	she	thought...	and	yet...	Was	this	the	weakness	of	a	woman	who
does	not	want	to	be	parted	from	the	man	she	loves,	or	 was	it	something	else?
Caerdinn	would	have	said	that	love	clouded	the	instincts	of	a	mage.
       “I	 think	 I	should	go	with	 you.”
       “You	 think	 I	 can’t	handle	the	dragon	myself?”	 His	 voice	was	filled	  with
mock	indignation.
       “Yes,”	  Jenny	said	bluntly,	 and	felt	 the	ribs	 vibrate	 under	her	hand	with
his	laughter.	“I	  don’t	know	 under	 what	circumstances	you’ll	  be	meeting	it,”
she	went	on.	“And	there’s	more	than	that.”
       His	 voice	 was	thoughtful	  in	the	 darkness,	but	not	 surprised.	“It	  strikes
you	that	way	too,	does	it?”
       That	 was	something	people	tended	not	 to	notice	about	 John.	Behind	his
facade	of	amiable	 barbarism,	behind	his	 frivolous	 fascination	 with	 hog-lore,
granny-rhymes,	 and	how	 clocks	 were	 made	 lurked	 an	 agile	 mind	 and	 an
almost	feminine	 sensitivity	 to	 nuances	of	situations	and	 relationships.	There
was	not	much	that	he	missed.
       “Our	 hero	 has	spoken	of	rebellion	 and	treachery	in	the	 south,”	she	said.
“If	 the	dragon	has	come,	it	 will	 ruin	 the	harvest,	and	rising	 bread-prices	will
make	the	situation	 worse.	I	 think	 you’ll	  need	someone	there	whom	you	 can
trust.”
       “I’ve	   been	thinking	 it,	 too,”	  he	replied	 softly.	 “Now,	 what	 makes	you
think	I	won’t	 be	able	to	trust	our	Gar?	I	doubt	he’d	betray	me	out	of	 pique	that
the	goods	aren’t	as	advertised.”
       Jenny	rolled	 up	onto	her	elbows,	her	dark	hair	 hanging	in	a	torrent	down
over	his	breast.	“No,”	  she	said	slowly,	 and	tried	 to	put	 her	finger	 on	what	it
was	that	troubled	her	about	that	thin,	 earnest	boy	she	had	rescued	in	the	ruins
of	the	old	town.	 At	length,	she	said,	“My	 instincts	tell	 me	he	can	be	trusted,	at
heart.	But	he’s	lying	 about	something,	I	 don’t	know	 what.	I	 think	I	 should	go
with	you	to	the	south.”
       John	 smiled	 and	drew	 her	 down	 to	 him	 again.	“The	  last	time	 I	 went

46
against	your	instincts,	 I	was	that	 sorry,”	he	said.	“Myself,	  I’m	 torn,	 for	 I	can
smell	there’s	going	 to	 be	danger	here	later	 in	the	 winter.	 But	I	 think	 you’re
right.	 I	don’t	 understand	why	 the	 King	 would	 have	 given	his	 word	 and	his
seal	into	the	keeping	 of	 the	likes	of	 our	 young	hero,	who	 by	 the	sound	of	 it
has	never	 done	more	 than	 collect	 ballads	 in	 all	 his	 life,	 and	 not	 to	 some
proven	warrior.	But	if	 the	King’s	 pledged	his	word	to	aid	us,	then	I’d	 be	a	fool
not	to	take	the	chance	to	pledge	mine.	Just	the	fact	that	there’s	only	the	two	of
us,	Jen,	shows	how	close	to	the	edge	of	 darkness	all	this	 land	lies.	Besides,”
he	added,	sudden	worry	in	his	voice,	“you’ve	 got	to	come.”
       Her	 thoughts	preoccupied	by	her	nameless	forebodings,	Jenny	turned	her
head	quickly.	“What	is	 it?	Why?”
       “We’ll	  need	someone	to	do	the	cooking.”
       With	 a	cat-swift	 move	she	was	on	top	of	 him,	smothering	 his	face	under
a	pillow,	 but	she	was	laughing	too	much	 to	hold	 him.	They	 tussled,	giggling,
their	struggles	 blending	into	 lovemaking.	 Later,	 as	they	drifted	 in	 the	warm
aftermath,	Jenny	murmured,	“You	make	me	laugh	at	the	strangest	times.”
       He	 kissed	her	then	and	slept,	but	 Jenny	sank	no	further	 than	the	uneasy
borderlands	of	half-dreams.	She	found	 herself	standing	once	again	on	 the	lip
of	the	gully,	 the	heat	from	below	beating	at	her	face,	the	poisons	scouring	her
lungs.	In	the	drifting	 vapors	below,	the	great	shape	was	still	writhing,	 heaving
its	shredded	wings	or	 clawing	ineffectually	  with	 the	stumps	of	its	 forelegs	at
the	small	figure	braced	like	 an	exhausted	woodcutter	over	its	neck,	a	dripping
ax	 in	  his	  blistered	  hands.	 She	  saw	 John	  moving	  mechanically,	  half-
asphyxiated	with	  the	 fumes	 and	swaying	 from	  the	 loss	of	  the	blood	  that
gleamed	stickily	 on	his	armor.	 The	small	stream	in	 the	gully	 was	clotted	and
red	with	  the	 dragon’s	 blood;	 gobbets	of	  flesh	 choked	it;	  the	 stones	were
blackened	with	 the	dragon’s	fire.	 The	 dragon	kept	 raising	its	 dripping	 head,
trying	to	 snap	at	John;	even	in	her	dream,	Jenny	felt	the	air	weighted	with	 the
strange	sensation	of	 singing,	vibrant	  with	 a	music	 beyond	the	 grasp	of	 her
ears	and	mind.
       The	 singing	grew	stronger	 as	she	slid	deeper	into	sleep.	She	saw	against
the	darkness	of	 a	 velvet	 sky	 the	burning	 white	  disc	of	 the	 full	  moon,	her

47
private	 omen	of	 power,	 and	 before	 it	 the	 silver-silk	  flash	 of	 membranous
wings.
       She	woke	 in	 the	deep	of	 the	night.	 Rain	thundered	against	the	 walls	of
the	Hold,	a	torrent	 roaring	in	 darkness.	Beside	her	John	slept,	and	she	saw	in
the	darkness	what	she	had	 noticed	that	 morning	 in	 daylight:	 that	for	 all	 his
thirty-four	 years,	he	had	a	thread	or	two	of	silver	in	his	unruly	 brown	hair.
       A	 thought	crossed	her	mind.	She	put	 it	aside	firmly,	 and	just	 as	firmly	 it
reintruded	itself.	 It	 was	not	a	daylight	 thought,	 but	the	 nagging	whisper	 that
comes	only	in	 the	dark	 hours,	after	troubled	 sleep.	Don’t	 be	a	fool,	 she	told
herself;	the	times	you	have	done	it,	you	have	always	wished	you	hadn’t.
       But	 the	thought,	the	temptation,	would	not	 go	away.
       At	 length	she	rose,	careful	not	to	wake	the	man	who	slept	at	her	side.	She
wrapped	 herself	  in	   John’s	 worn,	   quilted	  robe	  and	  padded	 from	   the
bedchamber,	the	worn	floor	like	smooth	ice	beneath	her	small,	bare	feet.
       The	 study	was	even	darker	than	the	bedchamber	had	been,	the	fire	there
nothing	more	 than	a	glowing	 line	 of	rose-colored	 heat	above	a	snowbank	of
ash.	Her	shadow	passed	like	the	hand	of	a	ghost	over	the	slumbering	shape	of
the	harp	and	made	the	 sliver	of	 reflected	 red	wink	 along	 the	pennywhistle’s
edge.	At	the	far	side	of	the	study,	she	raised	a	heavy	curtain	and	passed	into	a
tiny	 room	that	 was	little	 more	 than	a	niche	 in	the	 Hold’s	 thick	 wall.	 Barely
wider	 than	its	 window,	 in	 daylight	 it	 was	coolly	 bright,	 but	 now	 the	heavy
bull’s-eye	 glass	was	black	 as	 ink,	 and	the	 witchlight	  she	called	 into	 being
above	her	head	glittered	coldly	on	the	rain	streaming	down	outside.
       The	phosphorescent	glow	that	illuminated	 the	room	outlined	 the	shape	of
a	narrow	table	and	three	small	shelves.	They	held	things	that	 had	belonged	to
the	cold-eyed	ice-witch	 who	had	been	John’s	mother,	or	to	Caerdinn—simple
things,	a	few	 bowls,	 an	oddly	 shaped	root,	 a	few	 crystals	like	 fragments	 of
broken	stars	sent	for	mending.	Pulling	 her	robe	more	closely	about	her,	Jenny
took	from	  its	place	 a	plain	 pottery	 bowl,	 so	old	 that	 whatever	 designs	had
once	been	painted	upon	its	outer	surface	had	long	since	been	rubbed	away	by
the	touch	of	 mages’	hands.	She	dipped	it	 into	 the	stone	vessel	of	 water	 that
stood	in	a	corner	and	set	it	upon	the	table,	drawing	up	before	it	 a	tall,	spindle-

48
legged	chair.
       For	 a	 time	 she	only	 sat,	 gazing	down	 into	 the	 water.	Slips	 of	 foxfire
danced	on	its	black	surface;	as	she	slowed	her	breathing,	she	became	aware	of
every	sound	from	the	roaring	of	 the	rain	gusts	against	the	tower’s	walls	 to	the
smallest	drip	 of	the	 eaves.	The	worn	 tabletop	was	like	  cold	glass	under	 her
fingertips;	her	breath	was	cold	against	her	own	lips.	 For	a	time	she	was	aware
of	the	small	 flaws	 and	bubbles	in	the	 glaze	of	the	bowl’s	 inner	 surface;	then
she	sank	deeper,	watching	the	colors	that	 seemed	to	swirl	within	  the	endless
depths.	She	seemed	to	move	down	toward	an	absolute	darkness,	and	the	water
was	like	ink,	opaque,	ungiving.
       Gray	 mists	rolled	 in	the	depths,	then	cleared	as	if	wind	 had	driven	them,
and	she	 saw	 darkness	in	  a	 vast	place,	 pricked	  by	 the	 starlike	 points	  of
candleflame.	An	 open	 space	of	 black	 stone	lay	 before	 her,	smooth	 as	oily
water;	around	it	was	a	forest,	not	of	trees,	but	of	columns	of	stone.	Some	were
thin	 as	silk,	  others	thicker	  than	the	 most	 ancient	 of	 oaks,	and	 over	 them
swayed	the	shadows	of	the	dancers	on	the	open	floor.	Though	the	picture	was
silent,	she	could	 feel	 the	rhythm	 to	 which	 they	danced—	 gnomes,	she	saw,
their	long	arms	brushing	the	floor	 as	they	bent,	the	vast,	cloudy	manes	of	their
pale	hair	 catching	 rims	 of	 firelight	  like	 sunset	seen	through	 heavy	 smoke.
They	 danced	 around	 a	 misshapen	 stone	 altar,	 the	 slow	  dances	that	 are
forbidden	to	the	eyes	of	the	children	of	men.
       The	 dream	changed.	She	beheld	a	desolation	of	charred	and	broken	ruins
beneath	the	  dark	  flank	  of	  a	 tree-covered	 mountain.	  Night	   sky	 arched
overhead,	wind-cleared	and	heart-piercingly	 beautiful.	The	waxing	 moon	was
like	 a	glowing	  coin;	 its	 light	 touching	 with	 cold,	 white	  fingers	 the	broken
pavement	of	 the	 empty	 square	 below	 the	 hillside	  upon	 which	 she	 stood,
edging	the	 raw	 bones	that	 moldered	 in	 puddles	 of	 faintly	  smoking	 slime.
Something	flashed	 in	 the	velvet	 shadow	 of	 the	mountain,	 and	she	 saw	the
dragon.	Starlight	 gleamed	like	 oil	 on	the	lean,	sable	sides;	the	 span	of	those
enormous	wings	stretched	for	a	moment	like	a	skeleton’s	arms	to	embrace	the
moon’s	stern	face.	Music	seemed	to	drift	 upon	the	night,	a	string	of	 notes	like
a	 truncated	 air,	 and	 for	  an	 instant	  her	 heart	 leaped	 toward	  that	 silent,

49
dangerous	beauty,	lonely	and	graceful	in	the	secret	magic	of	its	gliding	flight.
       Then	 she	saw	another	scene	by	the	low	light	of	a	dying	 fire.	She	thought
she	was	in	the	same	place,	on	a	rise	overlooking	 the	desolation	of	 the	ruined
town	before	the	 gates	of	the	Deep.	It	 was	the	cold	 hour	of	 the	tide’s	 ebbing,
some	hours	before	dawn.	John	lay	 near	the	fire,	 dark	blood	leaking	 from	 the
clawed	rents	in	his	 armor.	His	face	 was	a	mass	of	blisters	beneath	a	mask	of
gore	and	 grime;	 he	 was	alone,	 and	 the	fire	  was	dying.	  Its	 light	 caught	 a
spangle	of	 red	from	 the	 twisted	 links	 of	 his	torn	 mail	 shirt	 and	 glimmered
stickily	 on	the	 upturned	palm	of	 one	blistered	 hand.	The	fire	 died,	and	for	 a
moment	only	starlight	 glittered	on	the	pooling	blood	 and	outlined	the	shape	of
his	nose	and	lips	against	the	darkness.
       She	 was	underground	 once	more,	 in	 the	place	 where	the	 gnomes	had
danced.	It	was	empty	 now,	but	the	hollow	  silences	beneath	the	earth	seemed
filled	  with	 the	 inchoate	 murmur	  of	 formless	 sound,	 as	if	  the	 stone	 altar
whispered	to	itself	in	the	darkness.
       Then	 she	saw	only	the	small	flaws	in	the	glaze	of	 the	bowl,	and	the	dark,
oily	surface	of	 the	water.	The	witch-light	  had	long	ago	failed	above	her	head,
which	ached	as	it	often	 did	when	 she	had	overstretched	her	power.	Her	body
felt	chilled	 through	 to	 the	bones,	but	she	was	for	 a	time	 too	 weary	to	 move
from	where	 she	sat.	She	stared	before	her	into	 the	darkness,	listening	 to	the
steady	drum	of	 the	rain,	hurting	 in	 her	soul	and	wishing	 with	 all	 that	was	in
her	that	she	had	not	done	what	she	had	done.
       All	  divination	  was	 chancy,	she	 told	 herself,	 and	 water	 was	the	 most
notorious	liar	 of	 all.	 There	was	no	 reason	to	believe	that	 what	she	had	seen
would	come	to	pass.
       So	she	repeated	to	herself,	over	and	over,	but	it	 did	no	good.	 In	time	she
lowered	her	face	to	her	hands	and	wept.

50
                                  CHAPTER	                    III


THEY	SET	FORTH	two	days	later	and	rode	south	through	a	maelstrom	of	wind
and	water.
       In	the	days	of	the	Kings,	the	Great	North	Road	had	stretched	from	Bel
itself	northward	like	a	gray	stone	serpent,	through	the	valley	of	the	Wildspae
River	and	across	the	farm	and	forest	lands	of	Wyr,	linking	the	southern	capital
with	the	northern	frontier	and	guarding	the	great	silver	mines	of	Tralchet.	But
the	mines	had	flagged,	and	 the	Kings	 had	begun	to	 squabble	with	their
brothers	and	cousins	over	the	lordship	of	the	south.	The	troops	who	guarded
the	Winterlands’	forts	had	been	withdrawn—	temporarily,	they	said,	to	shore
up	the	forces	of	one	contender	against	another.	They	had	never	returned.	Now
the	gray	stone	serpent	was	disintegrating	slowly,	like	a	shed	skin;	its	stones
were	torn	up	to	 strengthen	house	walls	against	bandits	and	barbarians,	its
ditches	choked	with	decades	of	detritus,	and	its	very	foundations	forced	apart
by	the	encroaching	tree	roots	of	 the	forest	of	 Wyr.	 The	Winterlands	had
destroyed	it,	as	they	destroyed	all	things.
       Traveling	south	along	 what	remained	of	 the	road	was	 slow,	for	 the
autumn	storms	swelled	the	icy	becks	of	the	moors	to	white-toothed	torrents
and	reduced	the	ground	in	the	tree-tangled	hollows	to	sodden,	nameless	mires.
Under	the	flail	of	the	wind,	Gareth	could	no	longer	argue	that	the	ship	upon
which	he	had	come	north	would	still	be	waiting	at	Eldsbouch	to	waft	them
south	in	relative	comfort	and	speed,	but	Jenny	suspected	he	still	felt	in	his
heart	that	it	should	have	been,	and,	illogically,	blamed	her	that	it	was	not.
       They	rode	for	the	most	part	in	silence.	Sometimes	when	they	halted,	as
they	frequently	did	for	 John	to	scout	the	tumbled	rocks	or	dense	knots	of
woodland	ahead,	Jenny	looked	across	at	Gareth	and	saw	him	gazing	around
him	in	a	kind	of	hurt	bewilderment	at	the	desolation	through	which	they	rode:
at	the	barren	downs	with	their	weed-grown	lines	of	broken	walls;	at	the	old
boundary	stones,	lumpish	and	melted-looking	as	spring	snowmen;	and	at	the

51
stinking	bogs	or	the	high,	 bare	tors	with	 their	few	 twisted	trees,	giant	balls	of
mistletoe	snagged	weirdly	in	their	 naked	branches	against	a	dreary	sky.	It	was
a	land	that	no	longer	remembered	law	 or	the	prosperity	of	 ordered	living	 that
comes	with	  law,	  and	 sometimes	she	 could	  see	him	  struggling	  with	  the
understanding	of	what	John	was	offering	to	buy	at	the	stake	of	his	life.
       But	 usually	 it	 was	 plain	 that	 Gareth	simply	 found	 the	 halts	annoying.
“We’re	never	going	 to	get	there	at	this	rate,”	 he	complained	as	John	appeared
from	the	smoke-colored	 tangle	of	 dead	heather	that	cloaked	the	lower	 flanks
of	a	promontory	  that	hid	 the	road.	A	 watchtower	 had	once	crowned	 it,	 now
reduced	to	 a	chewed-looking	  circle	 of	 rubble	 on	the	 hill’s	  crest.	John	 had
bellied	up	the	slope	to	investigate	 it	and	the	road	ahead	and	now	was	shaking
mud	and	wet	out	of	 his	plaid.	“It’s	  been	twenty	days	since	the	dragon	came,”
Gareth	added	resentfully.	“Anything	 can	have	happened.”
       “It	  can	 have	 happened	the	 day	 after	 you	 took	 ship,	 my	 hero,”	  John
pointed	out,	swinging	 up	to	the	saddle	of	his	spare	riding	horse,	Cow.	“And	 if
we	don’t	look	 sharp	and	scout	ahead,	we	are	never	going	to	get	there.”
       But	 the	sullen	glance	the	boy	 shot	at	John’s	back	as	he	reined	away	told
Jenny	more	 clearly	 than	 words	 that,	 though	 he	could	  not	argue	 with	 this
statement,	he	did	not	believe	it,	either.
       That	 evening	they	 camped	in	 the	ragged	birches	 of	the	 broken	country
where	the	downs	 gave	place	to	the	 hoary	densities	of	 the	Wyrwoods.	 When
camp	was	set,	and	the	horses	and	mules	picketed,	Jenny	moved	quietly	along
the	edge	of	 the	clearing,	 the	open	 ground	above	 the	high	 bank	of	 a	 stream
whose	noisy	rushing	blended	with	 the	sea-sound	of	the	wind	in	 the	trees.	She
touched	the	bark	 of	 the	trees	and	 the	soggy	 mast	of	 acorns,	hazelnuts,	and
decaying	leaves	underfoot,	tracing	them	with	the	signs	that	only	 a	mage	could
see—signs	that	 would	  conceal	 the	 camp	from	  those	 who	 might	  pass	by
outside.	Looking	 back	toward	 the	fluttering	 yellow	 light	 of	 the	new	 fire,	she
saw	Gareth	hunkered	 down	 beside	it,	 shivering	 in	 his	damp	 cloak,	 looking
wretched	and	very	forlorn.
       Her	 square,	full	 lips	 pressed	together.	Since	he	had	learned	she	was	his
erstwhile	hero’s	mistress,	he	had	 barely	spoken	to	her.	His	 resentment	at	her

52
inclusion	in	 the	expedition	was	still	 obvious,	as	was	his	unspoken	assumption
that	she	had	included	herself	 out	of	 a	combination	 of	 meddling	 and	a	desire
not	to	 let	her	 lover	out	 of	 her	sight.	 But	Gareth	 was	alone	in	 an	alien	 land,
having	clearly	never	been	away	from	 the	comforts	of	his	home	before,	lonely,
disillusioned,	and	filled	 with	 a	gnawing	fear	of	what	he	would	return	 to	find.
       Jenny	sighed	and	crossed	the	clearing	to	where	he	sat.
       The	 boy	looked	 up	at	her	suspiciously	 as	she	dug	into	her	jacket	pocket
and	drew	out	 a	long	 sliver	 of	smoky	 crystal	 on	the	chain	 that	Caerdinn	 had
used	to	hang	around	his	neck.	“I	can’t	see	the	dragon	in	this,”	she	said,	“but	 if
you’ll	 tell	me	the	name	of	your	 father	and	something	about	your	home	in	Bel,
at	least	I	should	be	able	to	call	their	images	and	tell	you	if	they’re	 all	right.”
       Gareth	 turned	 his	 face	 away	 from	  her.	“No,”	   he	said.	 Then,	 after	 a
moment,	he	added	grudgingly,	“Thank	you	all	 the	same.”
       Jenny	 folded	 her	 arms	and	 regarded	him	 for	 a	 moment	 in	 the	jumpy
orange	firelight.	 He	huddled	a	little	 deeper	into	his	stained	crimson	cloak	 and
would	not	meet	her	eyes.
       “Is	  it	 because	you	 think	 I	 can’t?”	 she	asked	 at	last.	 “Or	 because	you
won’t	take	the	aid	of	a	witch?”
       He	 didn’t	 answer	that,	 though	his	full	  lower	 lip	 pinched	up	a	 bit	in	 the
middle.	With	 a	sigh	 of	exasperation,	Jenny	walked	 away	from	 him	 to	where
John	stood	near	the	oilskin-covered	mound	 of	the	packs,	looking	 out	into	 the
darkening	woods.
       He	 glanced	back	as	she	came	near,	the	stray	gleams	of	firelight	throwing
glints	 of	 dirty	 orange	on	 the	 metal	of	 his	 patched	doublet.	 “D’you	  want	 a
bandage	for	your	nose?”	he	inquired,	as	if	she’d	tried	to	pet	a	ferret	and	gotten
nipped	for	her	trouble.	She	laughed	ruefully.
       “He	 didn’t	  have	any	objections	 to	me	before,”	 she	said,	more	 hurt	than
she	had	realized	by	the	boy’s	enmity.
       John	put	 an	arm	around	her	 and	hugged	her	close.	“He	 feels	cheated,	is
all,”	 he	said	 easily.	“And	  since	God	 forbid	 he	should	 have	cheated	himself
with	his	 expectations,	it	must	have	been	one	of	us	that	did	 it,	mustn’t	 it?”	 He
leaned	down	 to	 kiss	her,	 his	 hand	firm	  against	the	 bare	nape	 of	 her	neck

53
beneath	the	coiled	ridge	of	her	braided	hair.	Beyond	 them,	among	the	ghostly
birches,	the	thin	underbrush	rustled	 harshly;	a	moment	later	 a	softer,	steadier
rushing	 whispered	in	  the	bare	 branches	overhead.	 Jenny	smelled	 the	 rain
almost	before	she	was	conscious	of	its	light	fingers	upon	her	face.
       Behind	 them,	she	heard	Gareth	cursing.	He	squelched	across	the	clearing
to	join	 them	a	moment	later,	wiping	 raindroplets	 from	his	 spectacles,	his	hair
in	lank	strings	against	his	temples.
       “We	 seem	to	have	outsmarted	ourselves,”	he	said	glumly.	“Picked	 a	nice
place	to	camp—only	 there’s	no	shelter.	There’s	a	cave	down	under	the	cut	 of
the	streambank...”
       “Above	 the	highest	rise	of	the	water?”	 inquired	John,	a	mischievous	glint
in	his	eye.
       Gareth	 said	 defensively,	“Yes.	 At	 least—it	  isn’t	 so	very	 far	 down	 the
bank.”
       “Big	  enough	to	 put	the	horses	in,	 always	supposing	we	 could	get	 them
down	there?”
       The	boy	 bristled.	“I	 could	go	see.”
       “No,”	  said	Jenny.	Gareth	opened	his	 mouth	to	 protest	this	arbitrariness,
but	she	cut	him	off	 with,	 “I’ve	  laid	spells	of	 ward	and	guard	about	this	 camp
—I	don’t	 think	they	should	be	crossed.	It’s	almost	full-dark	 now...”
       “But	 we’ll	  get	wet!”
       “You’ve	  been	wet	 for	 days,	my	 hero,”	 John	 pointed	 out	with	 cheerful
brutality.	“Here	 at	least	we	 know	we’re	 safe	from	 the	side	the	stream’s	on—
unless,	of	course,	it	rises	over	its	bank.”	He	glanced	down	at	Jenny,	still	in	 the
circle	of	his	arm;	 she	was	conscious,	too,	of	Gareth’s	sulky	gaze.	“What	about
the	spell-ward,	love?”
       She	shook	her	head.	“I	don’t	 know,”	 she	said.	“Sometimes	the	spells	will
hold	 against	the	 Whisperers,	 sometimes	 they	 don’t.	 I	  don’t	 know	  why—
whether	 it’s	 because	 of	 something	  about	 the	 Whisperers,	 or	 because	 of
something	 about	 the	 spells.”	 Or	 because,	she	 added	 to	 herself,	 her	 own
powers	weren’t	strong	enough	to	hold	even	a	true	spell	against	them.
       “Whisperers?”	 Gareth	demanded	incredulously.

54
       “A	 kind	 of	blood-devil,”	  said	John,	with	an	edge	of	irritation	 in	his	voice.
“It	doesn’t	 matter	at	the	moment,	my	hero.	Just	stay	inside	the	camp.”
       “Can’t	 I	 even	go	look	for	shelter?	I	won’t	 go	far.”
       “If	  you	 leave	 the	camp,	 you’ll	  never	find	 your	 way	 back	 to	 it,”	 John
snapped.	“You’re	so	bloody	anxious	not	to	lose	time	on	this	trip,	 you	wouldn’t
want	to	have	us	spend	the	next	three	days	looking	for	 your	body,	would	 you?
Come	on,	Jen—if	you’re	 not	after	making	supper,	I’ll	 do	it...”
       “I’ll	   do	it,	I’ll	  do	it,”	 Jenny	agreed,	with	a	haste	that	wasn’t	 entirely	jest.
As	she	and	John	walked	 back	to	the	 smoky,	sheltered	campfire,	 she	glanced
back	at	Gareth,	still	 standing	on	the	edge	of	 the	faintly	 gleaming	spell-circle.
His	vanity	 stinging	 from	 John’s	last	 words,	the	boy	 picked	 up	an	acorn	 and
hurled	 it	 angrily	  out	 into	 the	 wet	 darkness.	 The	 darkness	whispered	 and
rustled,	and	then	fell	still	 again	under	the	ceaseless	pattern	of	the	rain.


They	left	the	folded	 lands	of	rock	hills	 and	leaping	streams	for	good	after	that
and	entered	the	ruinous	gloom	of	the	great	Forest	of	Wyr.	 Here	crowded	oaks
and	hawthorn	pressed	close	upon	the	road,	catching	the	faces	of	the	travelers
with	warty,	 overhanging	boughs	and	dirty	moss	and	their	horses’	hooves	with
scabrous	roots	and	 soggy	 drifts	 of	 dead	leaves.	 The	black	 lattices	 of	 bare
branches	above	them	admitted	only	 a	fraction	of	 the	pallid	 daylight,	 but	rain
still	 leaked	through,	pattering	 in	 an	endless,	dreary	murmur	in	 the	dead	fern
and	hazel	 thickets.	 The	 ground	 was	 worse	here,	 sodden	and	 unsteady,	or
flooded	 in	 meres	of	 silver	  water	 in	 which	 the	 trees	stood,	 knee-deep	and
rotting;	 and	Aversin	 remarked	that	the	 marshes	of	the	 south	were	spreading
again.	In	many	places	the	road	was	covered,	or	blocked	with	 fallen	 trees,	and
the	labor	 of	 clearing	 it	 or	beating	 a	path	 through	the	 thickets	 around	these
obstacles	left	  them	 all	 cold	  and	exhausted.	 Even	 for	 Jenny,	 used	 to	 the
hardships	of	the	Winterlands,	 this	 was	tiring,	 and	the	more	 so	because	there
was	no	 respite;	she	 lay	 down	 weary	 at	night	 and	 rose	weary	 in	 the	 bleak
grayness	before	dawn	 to	 travel	 on	 once	again.	 What	 it	 was	to	 Gareth	 she
could	well	  imagine.	As	 he	grew	 more	 weary,	his	 temper	shortened,	and	he
complained	bitterly	 at	every	halt.

55
       “What’s	  he	looking	 for	 now?”	 he	demanded	one	afternoon,	 when	John
ordered	their	fifth	 halt	in	three	hours	and,	armed	with	 his	heavy	horn	hunting-
bow,	 dismounted	  and	  vanished	 into	  the	  choking	  tangle	  of	  hazel	 and
blackthorn	beside	the	road.
       It	  had	 been	raining	  most	 of	 the	 forenoon,	 and	 the	tall	  boy	 drooped
miserably	on	 the	back	 of	 The	Stupid	 Roan,	 one	of	 the	spare	horses	they’d
brought	from	 the	Hold.	 The	other	spare,	Jenny’s	mount,	 John	had	christened
The	Stupider	Roan,	a	name	that	was	 unfortunately	apt.	 Jenny	suspected	that,
in	 his	 wearier	 moments,	 Gareth	 even	 blamed	 her	 for	 the	 generally	 poor
quality	of	 the	Hold’s	 horseflesh.	The	rain	had	ceased	now,	but	cold	wind	 still
probed	through	the	very	 weave	of	their	 garments;	every	now	 and	then	a	gust
shook	the	branches	above	them	and	splattered	them	with	leftover	 rain	and	an
occasional	sodden	oak	leaf	that	drifted	down	like	a	dead	bat.
       “He’s	  looking	   for	 danger.”	  Jenny	 herself	 was	 listening,	  her	 nerves
queerly	 on	 edge,	searching	 the	 silence	 that	 hung	 like	 an	 indrawn	  breath
among	the	dark,	close-crowded	trees.
       “He	 didn’t	  find	 any	last	time,	 did	 he?”	Gareth	tucked	 his	gloved	 hands
under	his	  cloak	 for	 warmth	  and	 shivered.	Then	 he	 looked	  ostentatiously
upward,	scanning	what	sky	was	visible,	 calculating	 the	time	of	 day,	and	from
there	going	on	to	remember	how	many	days	they	had	been	on	the	road.	Under
his	sarcasm	she	could	hear	fear.	“Or	the	time	before	that,	either.”
       “And	  lucky	 for	 us	that	 he	didn’t,”	  she	replied.	 “I	 think	 you	 have	little
understanding	of	the	dangers	in	the	Winterlands...”
       Gareth	 gasped,	 and	his	 gaze	 fixed.	 Turning	  her	 head	quickly,	  Jenny
followed	 his	eyes	to	the	dark	shape	of	Aversin,	 his	plaids	 making	him	 nearly
invisible	 in	the	gloom	 among	the	trees.	With	a	single	 slow	movement	 he	had
raised	his	bow,	the	arrow	nocked	but	not	yet	pulled.
       She	 tracked	 the	 trajectory	 of	 the	 arrow’s	  flight	  to	 the	 source	of	 the
danger.
       Just	 visible	  through	 the	 trees,	 a	skinny	  little	  old	 man	 was	 stooping
arthritically	 to	scrape	the	dry	insides	from	a	rotting	 log	for	 kindling.	 His	wife,
an	equally	 lean,	 equally	 rag-clad	 old	 woman	 whose	 thin	 white	  hair	 hung

56
lankly	 about	her	narrow	 shoulders,	was	holding	 a	reed	basket	to	 receive	the
crumbling	chips.	Gareth	let	out	a	cry	of	 horror.	“NO!”
       Aversin	 moved	 his	 head.	The	old	 woman,	 alerted	 also,	looked	 up	and
gave	a	thin	wail,	dropping	 her	basket	to	shield	her	face	futilely	 with	 her	arms.
The	dry,	woody	 punk	spilled	 onto	the	marshy	ground	 about	her	feet.	The	old
man	caught	her	by	the	arm	and	the	two	of	them	began	to	flee	dodderingly	into
the	deeper	forest,	sobbing	and	covering	their	heads	with	 their	arms,	as	if	they
supposed	that	the	 broad-tipped	 iron	 war	 arrow	 would	 be	 stopped	by	 such
slack	old	flesh.
       Aversin	 lowered	 his	bow	and	let	 his	targets	stumble	unshot	into	 the	wet
wilderness	of	trees.
       Gareth	gasped,	“He	was	going	to	kill	 them!	 Those	poor	old	people...”
       Jenny	nodded,	as	John	came	back	to	the	road.	“I	 know.”	 She	understood
why;	but,	as	when	she	had	killed	the	dying	robber	in	 the	ruins	of	the	old	town,
she	still	felt	unclean.
       “Is	 that	all	 you	can	say?”	Gareth	raged,	horrified.	 “You	know?	He	 would
have	shot	them	in	cold	blood...”
       “They	  were	 Meewinks,	 Gar,”	 John	 said	 quietly.	 “Shooting’s	  the	only
thing	you	can	do	with	Meewinks.”
       “I	   don’t	 care	 what	  you	 call	  them!”	  he	 cried.	 “They	  were	  old	 and
harmless!	All	they	 were	doing	was	gathering	kindling!”
       A	 small,	 straight	 line	 appeared	between	John’s	 reddish	 brows,	and	 he
rubbed	his	eyes.	Gareth,	Jenny	thought,	was	not	the	only	one	upon	whom	this
trip	was	telling.
       “I	  don’t	 know	what	 you	call	 them	in	 your	 part	of	 the	country,”	 Aversin
said	tiredly.	“Their	 people	used	to	farm	all	the	valley	of	 the	Wildspae.	They...”
       “John.”	  Jenny	touched	 his	 arm.	 She	had	followed	  this	 exchange	only
marginally;	her	senses	and	her	power	were	diffused	through	the	damp	woods,
and	in	the	fading	light	 she	scented	danger.	It	seemed	to	prickle	along	her	skin
—a	 soft	 plashing	  movement	 in	  the	 flooded	 glades	 to	 the	  north,	 a	 thin
chittering	that	silenced	the	small	restive	noises	of	fox	 and	weasel.	“We	should
be	moving.	The	light’s	 already	going.	I	don’t	 remember	this	part	of	the	woods

57
well	but	I	 know	it’s	some	distance	from	any	kind	 of	camping	place.”
       “What	 is	it?”	 His	voice,	 like	hers,	dropped	to	a	whisper.
       She	shook	her	head.	“Maybe	nothing.	 But	I	think	 we	should	go.”
       “Why?”	   Gareth	bleated.	 “What’s	 wrong?	 For	 three	 days	you’ve	  been
running	away	from	your	 own	shadows...”
       “That’s	 right,”	  John	agreed,	and	there	was	a	dangerous	edge	to	his	quiet
voice.	“You	 ever	think	what	 might	happen	to	you	 if	your	 own	shadow	caught
you?	Now	ride—	 and	ride	silent.”
       It	 was	 nearly	full	 night	 when	 they	made	camp,	for,	 like	 Jenny,	Aversin
was	nervous,	and	it	 took	some	time	 for	him	 to	 find	a	 camping	place	that	his
woodsmanship	judged	to	be	even	relatively	 safe.	One	of	them	Jenny	rejected,
not	liking	 the	 way	the	dark	 trees	crowded	around	it;	 another	John	passed	by
because	the	spring	could	not	be	seen	from	where	the	fire	would	be.	Jenny	was
hungry	 and	tired,	 but	 the	 instincts	 of	 the	Winterlands	  warned	her	 to	 keep
moving	until	 they	 found	a	place	that	could	 be	defended,	though	against	what
she	could	not	tell.
       When	 Aversin	 ruled	 against	 a	third	  place,	an	 almost-circular	 clearing
with	 a	small,	 fern-choked	 spring	 gurgling	  through	 one	side	 of	 it,	 Gareth’s
hunger-frayed	 temper	 snapped.	 “What’s	   wrong	 with	   it?”	  he	 demanded,
dismounting	 and	huddling	 on	 the	lee-side	 of	The	 Stupid	 Roan	for	 warmth.
“You	can	take	 a	drink	 without	 getting	out	of	 sight	 of	the	fire,	 and	it’s	 bigger
than	the	other	place	was.”
       Annoyance	 glinted	like	 the	blink	 of	drawn	 steel	in	John’s	voice.	“I	 don’t
like	it.”
       “Well,	 why	 in	the	name	of	Sarmendes	not?”
       Aversin	  looked	 around	 him	 at	 the	 clearing	 and	shook	 his	 head.	 The
clouds	had	parted	overhead	enough	to	admit	watery	moonlight	 to	glint	 on	his
specs,	on	the	water	droplets	in	his	hair	when	he	pushed	back	his	hood,	and	on
the	end	of	his	long	nose.	“I	just	don’t.	 I	can’t	say	why.”
       “Well,	 if	 you	can’t	 say	why,	what	would	you	like?”
       “What	  I’d	  like,”	  the	Dragonsbane	 retorted	 with	 his	 usual	 devastating
accuracy,	“is	not	 to	have	some	snirp	of	 a	silk-lined	 brat	 telling	 me	a	place	is

58
safe	because	he	wants	his	supper.”
       Because	that	 was	 obviously	 Gareth’s	 first	 concern,	 the	boy	 exploded,
“That	isn’t	 the	reason!	I	 think	 you’ve	 lived	 like	a	wolf	  for	so	long	 you	don’t
trust	 anything!	  I’m	  not	 going	  to	 trek	 through	  the	 woods	 all	 night	  long
because...”
       “Fine,”	  said	Aversin	grimly.	 “You	can	just	bloody	 well	stay	here,	then.”
       “That’s	 right!	 Go	ahead,	abandon	me!	Are	you	going	to	take	a	shot	at	me
if	I	try	 to	come	after	you	and	you	hear	the	bushes	rustle?”
       “I	 might.”
       “John!”	  Jenny’s	cool,	 slightly	 gravelly	 voice	 cut	across	his	 next	words.
“How	 much	 longer	 can	we	 travel	 without	 lights	 of	 some	kind?	 Clouds	 are
moving	up.	It	 won’t	 rain,	but	 you	won’t	 be	able	to	see	a	foot	ahead	of	you	 in
two	hours.”
       “You	 could,”	 he	pointed	 out.	 He	felt	 it,	 too,	she	thought—that	 growing
sensation	that	had	 begun	back	 along	the	 road;	the	 uneasy	feeling	 of	 being
watched.
       “I	  could,”	  she	agreed	quietly.	 “But	  I	 don’t	 have	 your	 woodsmanship.
And	I	know	 this	part	of	 the	road—there	isn’t	 a	better	place	ahead.	I	don’t	like
this	place	 either,	but	 I’m	  not	sure	that	 staying	 here	wouldn’t	  be	safer	 than
showing	up	our	 position	by	 traveling	with	 lights,	 even	a	very	dim	 magelight.
And	even	that	might	not	show	up	signs	of	danger.”
       John	looked	 about	him	at	the	dark	 woods,	now	barely	visible	 in	 the	cold
gloom.	 Wind	 stirred	 at	 the	 bare	boughs	 interlaced	 above	their	 heads,	and
somewhere	before	them	in	 the	clearing	 Jenny	could	 hear	the	whisper	 of	the
ferns	and	the	rushing	 voice	 of	the	 rain-fed	stream.	No	 sound	of	 danger,	she
thought.	Why	 then	did	 she	subconsciously	watch	with	 her	 peripheral	vision;
why	this	readiness	to	flee?
       Aversin	 said	quietly,	“It’s	 too	good.”
       Gareth	snapped,	“First	you	 don’t	like	 it	and	then	you	say	it’s	too	good...”
       “They’ll	   know	  all	 the	 camping	 places	 anyway,”	 Jenny	 replied	 softly
across	his	words.
       Furious,	 Gareth	sputtered,	“Who’ll	 know?”

59
       “The	 Meewinks,	 you	stupid	oic,”	 snapped	John	back	at	him.
       Gareth	flung	 up	his	hands.	“Oh,	 fine!	 You	mean	you	don’t	 want	to	camp
here	because	you’re	afraid	of	being	attacked	by	a	little	old	man	and	a	little	 old
lady?”
       “And	  about	 fifty	  of	 their	 friends,	yes,”	 John	 retorted.	“And	  one	 more
word	 out	of	 you,	 my	 hero,	 and	you’re	 going	 to	 find	 yourself	  slammed	up
against	a	tree.”
       Thoroughly	  roused	now,	Gareth	retorted,	“Good!	 Prove	 how	clever	 you
are	by	thrashing	someone	who	 disagrees	with	you!	 If	 you’re	 afraid	 of	 being
attacked	by	a	troop	of	forty	four-foot-tall	  septuagenarians...”
       He	 never	even	saw	Aversin	move.	 The	Dragonsbane	might	not	 have	the
appearance	of	a	 hero,	Jenny	 thought,	 but	he	 nevertheless	had	the	 physical
reflexes	of	 one.	 Gareth	 gasped	as	he	 was	literally	  lifted	  off	 his	 feet	 by	 a
double-handful	 of	  cloak	 and	 doublet,	 and	 Jenny	 strode	forward	  to	 catch
John’s	 spike-studded	forearm.	  With	  softness	as	 definite	  as	 an	 assassin’s
footfall,	 she	said,	“Be	quiet!	And	drop	 him.”
       “Got	 a	cliff	 handy?”	But	 she	felt	the	momentum	of	his	rage	slack.	After	 a
pause	he	pushed—almost	threw—Gareth	from	him.	“Right.”	 Behind	 his	anger
he	sounded	embarrassed.	“Thanks	to	 our	hero,	 it’s	 well	 too	dark	 now	 to	be
moving	on.	Jen,	can	you	do	anything	with	this	 place?	Spell	it?”
       Jenny	thought	 for	a	few	 moments,	trying	 to	analyze	what	it	 was	that	she
feared.	“Not	 against	the	Meewinks,	no,”	 she	replied	at	last.	She	added	acidly,
“They’ll	 have	tracked	you	gentlemen	by	your	voices.”
       “It	 wasn’t	 me	who...”
       “I	 didn’t	 ask	who	it	 was.”	She	took	the	reins	of	 the	horses	and	mules	and
led	them	on	into	 the	clearing,	anxious	now	to	 get	a	camp	set	and	circled	with
the	spells	 of	 ward	before	 they	 were	seen	from	  the	outside.	 Gareth,	a	 little
shamefaced	at	his	 outburst,	 followed	  sulkily,	  looking	 at	 the	 layout	 of	 the
clearing.
       In	  the	 voice	  of	 one	 who	  sought	 to	 mollify	   by	 pretending	  that	 the
disagreement	never	happened,	he	asked,	“Does	this	hollow	 look	 all	 right	 for
the	fire?”

60
       Irritation	  still	 crackled	 in	Aversin’s	 voice.	 “No	 fire.	 We’re	in	 for	 a	cold
camp	tonight—and	you’ll	 take	the	first	 watch,	my	hero.”
       Gareth	gasped	in	protest	at	this	 arbitrary	switch.	 Since	leaving	 the	Hold,
Gareth	had	always	taken	the	last	watch,	the	dawn	watch,	because	at	the	end	of
a	day’s	riding	 he	wanted	nothing	more	than	to	 lie	down	 and	sleep;	Jenny	had
always	taken	second;	and	John,	 used	to	the	habits	 of	wolves	 who	 hunted	in
the	early	part	of	 the	night,	took	 the	first.	The	 boy	began,	“But	 I...”	 and	Jenny
swung	around	to	look	at	them	in	the	somber	gloom.
       “One	 more	word	 out	of	 either	of	 you	and	I	 will	 lay	 a	spell	of	dumbness
upon	you	both.”
       John	subsided	at	once.	Gareth	started	to	speak	again,	then	thought	better
of	it.	 Jenny	pulled	the	picket	 rope	out	of	 the	mule	Clivy’s	  pack	and	looped	it
around	a	sapling.	Half	 to	herself,	she	added,	“Though	 God	knows	 it	couldn’t
make	you	any	dumber.”
       Throughout	 their	 meager	dinner	of	dried	 beef,	cold	cornmeal	 mush,	and
apples,	Gareth	 remained	ostentatiously	  silent.	 Jenny	scarcely	 noticed,	 and
John,	seeing	her	 preoccupied,	said	 little	  to	her,	 not	 wanting	 to	 disturb	 her
concentration.	She	was	not	sure	how	much	he	felt	of	 the	danger	she	sensed	in
the	woods	all	 around	them—	 she	didn’t	 know	 how	 much	of	 it	 was	only	 the
product	of	 her	 own	 weariness.	But	 she	wove	 all	 her	 concentration,	all	  her
abilities,	into	 the	spell-circle	that	she	put	around	the	camp	that	night:	spells	of
ward	 that	would	  make	 their	 campsite	 unnoticeable	 from	 the	 outside,	 that
would	 thwart	the	 eye	of	 any	who	 were	 not	actually	 within	  the	circle.	 They
would	not	 be	much	help	 against	the	Meewinks,	 who	 would	 know	where	 the
clearing	was,	but	 they	might	 provide	 a	delay	 that	would	 buy	 time.	 To	these
she	added	other	spells	against	other	dangers,	spells	that	Caerdinn	had	 taught
her	against	the	blood-devils	 and	Whisperers	that	haunted	the	 Woods	of	Wyr,
spells	whose	 efficacy	  she	 privately	  doubted	because	 she	knew	  that	 they
sometimes	failed,	 but	the	 best	spells	that	 she—or	anyone	to	 whom	 she	had
spoken—knew.
       She	had	 long	suspected	that	the	 Lines	of	 magic	 were	thinning	 and	that
every	generation	attenuated	the	teaching	of	magic	that	had	been	passed	down

61
from	the	old	 times,	the	times	before	the	Realm	of	 Belmarie	had	united	 all	the
West	under	itself	and	the	glittering	worship	 of	the	Twelve	Gods.	Caerdinn	had
been	one	of	the	 mightiest	of	 the	Line	 of	 Herne,	but,	 when	she	had	first	 met
him	at	 fourteen,	he	 was	already	very	 old,	 feeble,	and	 a	little	 crazy.	 He	had
taught	her,	trained	her	in	 the	secrets	of	the	Line	 passed	from	master	to	 pupil
over	a	dozen	 generations.	But	 since	his	 death	she	had	found	 two	 instances
where	his	 knowledge	 had	been	incorrect	 and	 had	heard	of	 spells	 from	 her
Line-kindred,	  the	 pupils’	 pupils	  of	 Caerdinn’s	 master	 Spaeth	Skywarden,
which	 Caerdinn	 had	 either	 not	 bothered	 to	 teach	 her,	or	 had	 not	 known
himself.	The	 spells	of	 guard	against	the	Whisperers	that	 had	more	and	more
come	to	haunt	the	Wyrwoods	were	 ineffective	 and	sporadic,	and	she	knew	of
no	spell	that	would	 drive	 them	or	the	 blood-devils	 out	of	an	area	to	 render	it
safe	for	humans	again.	Such	things	might	reside	somewhere	in	a	book,	written
down	by	the	mage	who	discovered	them,	but	neither	Jenny,	nor	any	mage	she
had	met,	had	known	of	them.
       She	slept	that	 night	uneasily,	exhausted	in	body	 and	troubled	by	 strange
shapes	that	seemed	to	slide	in	and	out	through	 the	cracks	in	her	dreams.	She
seemed	to	be	able	 to	 hear	the	whistling	  chitter	 of	 the	 blood-devils	 as	they
flitted	 from	 tree	 to	tree	 in	 the	marshy	 woods	 across	the	stream	and	 below
them	the	soft	murmurs	of	the	Whisperers	in	the	darkness	beyond	the	barrier	of
spells.	Twice	she	pulled	herself	 painfully	 from	 the	sucking	darkness	of	sleep,
fearing	 some	danger,	but	 both	 times	 she	only	  saw	Gareth	 sitting	  propped
against	a	pile	of	packsaddles,	nodding	in	the	misty	blackness.
       The	third	 time	she	woke	up,	Gareth	was	gone.
       It	 had	been	a	dream	 that	woke	her;	 a	dream	of	 a	woman	standing	 half-
hidden	among	the	trees.	She	was	veiled,	like	 all	 the	women	of	 the	south;	the
lace	of	that	veil	 was	like	a	cloak	 of	flowers	 scattered	over	her	dark	curls.	Her
soft	laughter	was	 like	silver	 bells,	 but	there	was	a	 husky	note	in	 it,	 as	if	she
never	laughed	save	with	  pleasure	at	something	 gained.	She	held	 out	small,
slender	hands,	and	whispered	Gareth’s	name.
       Leaves	and	dirt	 were	scuffed	where	he	had	crossed	the	flickering	lines	of
the	protective	circles.

62
       Jenny	sat	up,	shaking	back	the	coarse	mane	of	her	hair,	and	touched	John
awake.	She	called	the	witchlight	 into	 being,	and	it	 illuminated	 the	still,	 silent
camp	and	glowed	in	 the	eyes	of	the	wakened	horses.	The	voice	of	 the	spring
was	loud	in	the	hush.
       Like	  John,	she	had	slept	in	 her	clothes.	Reaching	over	 to	the	bundle	 of
her	sheepskin	jacket,	her	plaids,	her	boots	and	her	belt	that	 lay	heaped	at	one
side	of	their	blankets,	 she	pulled	from	its	 pouch	the	small	scrying-crystal	 and
angled	it	 to	the	witchlight	  while	 John	began,	without	 a	 word,	to	 pull	 on	his
boots	and	wolfskin-lined	 doublet.
       Of	  the	 four	  elements,	scrying	  earth—crystal—was	  easiest	and	 most
accurate,	though	the	 crystal	itself	  had	to	 be	enchanted	beforehand.	Scrying
fire	needed	no	special	preparation,	but	what	it	 showed	was	what	it	would,	 not
always	what	was	 sought;	water	would	 show	 both	future	 and	past,	but	 was	a
notorious	liar.	Only	 the	very	greatest	of	mages	could	scry	the	wind.
       The	  heart	 of	 Caerdinn’s	 crystal	  was	 dark.	 She	 stilled	  her	 fears	 for
Gareth’s	safety,	calming	her	mind	as	she	summoned	the	images;	they	gleamed
on	the	 facets,	as	if	 reflected	 from	 somewhere	else.	 She	saw	a	 stone	room,
extremely	small,	with	 the	architecture	of	some	place	half-dug	into	 the	ground;
the	only	furnishing	 was	a	 bed	and	a	sort	of	table	 formed	by	 a	block	of	 stone
projecting	from	 the	wall	 itself.	A	 wet	cloak	 was	thrown	over	the	table,	with	 a
puddle	 of	 half-dried	  water	 about	 it—swamp	  weeds	clung	 to	  it	 like	  dark
worms.	A	much-bejeweled	 longsword	was	propped	nearby,	and	on	top	 of	the
table	and	cloak	 lay	a	 pair	of	 spectacles.	The	round	lenses	caught	a	 spark	of
greasy	yellow	lamplight	 as	the	door	of	the	room	opened.
       Someone	 in	 the	 corridor	  held	 a	 lamp	  high.	 Its	 light	  showed	 small,
stooped	forms	crowding	 in	 the	broad	 hall	beyond.	 Old	 and	young,	men	 and
women,	there	must	have	been	forty	 of	 them,	with	 white,	 sloped,	warty	 faces
and	round,	fishlike	 eyes.	The	first	through	the	doorway	 were	the	old	man	and
the	old	woman,	the	Meewinks	whom	 John	had	nearly	shot	that	afternoon.
       The	old	 man	held	a	rope;	the	woman,	a	cleaver.


The	house	of	the	Meewinks	 stood	where	the	land	lay	 low,	on	a	knoll	 above	a

63
foul	 soup	of	 mud	and	water	 from	 whose	surface	rotting	 trees	projected	 like
half-decayed	corpses.	Squat-built,	 it	 was	larger	 than	 it	 looked—stone	walls
behind	it	showed	one	 wing	half-buried	 underground.	In	 spite	of	 the	cold,	the
air	around	 the	place	was	 fetid	 with	 the	 smell	of	 putrefying	  fish,	 and	Jenny
closed	her	teeth	hard	against	a	queasiness	that	washed	over	her	at	the	sight	of
the	place.	 Since	 first	 she	 had	 known	 what	 they	 were,	 she	 had	hated	 the
Meewinks.
       John	 slid	from	 his	 dapple	war	 horse	Osprey’s	back	and	looped	 his	rein
and	 Battlehammer’s	 over	  the	 limb	  of	 a	 sapling.	  His	 face,	  in	 the	 rainy
darkness,	was	taut	with	a	mingling	of	 hatred	and	disgust.	Twice	households	of
Meewinks	 had	tried	 to	establish	themselves	near	 Alyn	 Hold;	 both	 times,	as
soon	as	he	 had	learned	 of	 them,	 he	had	 raised	what	 militia	  he	 could	 and
burned	them	out.	A	few	 had	been	killed	each	time,	but	he	had	lacked	the	men
to	pursue	them	through	 the	wild	 lands	and	eradicate	them	completely.	 Jenny
knew	he	still	had	nightmares	about	what	he	had	found	in	their	cellars.
       He	 whispered,	 “Listen,”	  and	Jenny	nodded.	From	 the	 house	she	could
detect	a	faint	clamor	of	 voices,	muffled,	 as	if	half-below	 the	ground,	 thin	and
yammering	like	 the	barking	of	 beasts.	Jenny	slid	her	halberd	from	the	 holster
on	Moon	 Horse’s	 saddle	and	breathed	 to	all	 three	 mounts	for	 stillness	 and
silence.	She	sketched	over	 them	 the	spells	 of	 ward,	 so	that	 the	casual	 eye
would	pass	them	by,	or	think	they	 were	something	other	than	horses—a	hazel
thicket,	or	 the	oddly	 shaped	shadow	of	a	tree.	It	 was	these	same	spells	upon
the	camp,	she	knew,	that	had	prevented	Gareth	from	 finding	 his	way	 back	to
it,	once	what	must	have	been	the	Whisperer	had	led	him	away.
       John	 tucked	his	spectacles	into	an	 inner	pocket.	“Right,”	  he	murmured.
“You	get	Gar—I’ll	  cover	you	both.”
       Jenny	nodded,	feeling	cold	 inside,	as	she	did	when	she	emptied	her	mind
to	do	some	 great	magic	beyond	 her	power,	and	 steeled	herself	for	 what	she
knew	was	coming.	 As	 they	crossed	the	 filthy	 yard	 and	the	strange,	muffled
outcry	in	 the	house	grew	stronger,	John	kissed	her	and,	turning,	 smashed	his
booted	foot	into	the	small	house’s	door.
       They	 broke	through	the	door	like	 raiders	robbing	Hell.	 A	hot,	 damp	fetor

64
smote	Jenny	in	the	face	as	she	barged	through	on	John’s	heels,	the	putrid	stink
of	the	filth	 the	Meewinks	 lived	 in	and	of	the	decaying	fish	 they	ate—above	it
all	was	 the	sharp,	copper-bright	 stench	of	new-shed	 blood.	The	 noise	was	a
pandemonium	of	 yammering	 screams;	after	 the	 darkness	outside,	 even	the
smoky	 glow	 of	  the	 fire	 in	  the	unnaturally	  huge	 hearth	 seemed	blinding.
Bodies	seethed	in	a	heaving	mob	around	the	small	door	at	the	opposite	side	of
the	room;	now	and	then	sharp	flashes	of	light	glinted	from	 the	knives	clutched
in	moist	little	 hands.
       Gareth	 was	 backed	to	 the	 doorpost	in	 the	 midst	 of	 the	 mob.	 He	 had
evidently	fought	 his	way	that	far	but	knew	 if	he	descended	into	the	more	open
space	of	the	 big	room	 he	would	 be	 surrounded.	His	 left	 arm	was	 wrapped,
shieldlike,	in	 a	muffling	 tangle	of	stained	and	filthy	 bedding;	in	 his	right	hand
was	his	belt,	the	buckle-end	of	which	 he	was	using	to	slash	at	the	faces	of	the
Meewinks	 all	 around	 him.	 His	  own	 face	 was	streaming	 with	  blood	 from
knife-cuts	 and	bites—mixed	  with	 sweat,	 it	 ran	down	  and	encrimsoned	 his
shirt	as	if	his	 throat	had	been	cut.	His	naked	gray	eyes	were	wide	with	 a	look
of	sickened,	nightmare	horror.
       The	 Meewinks	around	him	 were	gibbering	 like	 the	souls	of	the	damned.
There	must	have	been	fifty	 of	them,	all	 armed	with	their	 little	 knives	of	 steel,
or	of	 sharpened	shell.	As	 John	and	Jenny	 broke	in,	 Jenny	saw	one	 of	them
crawl	in	 close	to	 Gareth	and	 slash	at	the	back	 of	 his	knee.	His	 thighs	 were
already	gashed	with	 a	dozen	such	attempts,	his	 boots	sticky	 with	 runnels	of
blood;	he	kicked	 his	attacker	in	 the	face,	rolling	 her	 down	a	step	or	two	 into
the	mass	 of	 her	 fellows.	  It	 was	 the	 old	  woman	 he	 had	kept	  John	from
shooting.
       Without	  a	 word,	 John	plunged	 down	 into	 the	 heaving,	 stinking	 mob.
Jenny	sprang	after	him,	guarding	his	 back;	blood	splattered	her	from	 the	first
swing	of	 his	sword,	 and	around	them	the	noise	 rose	like	the	 redoubling	of	 a
storm	at	sea.	The	Meewinks	were	a	small	folk,	 though	 some	of	the	men	were
as	tall	 as	she;	it	  made	her	cringe	 inside	 to	 cut	 at	the	 slack	white	  faces	of
people	no	bigger	 than	children	 and	to	slam	 the	weighted	butt	 of	 the	halberd
into	those	pouchy	little	 stomachs	and	watch	them	fall,	 gasping,	vomiting,	 and

65
choking.	 But	 there	were	 so	many	 of	 them.	 She	had	kilted	  her	faded	 plaid
skirts	up	to	 her	knees	to	fight	 and	she	felt	 hands	snatch	and	drag	at	them,	as
one	man	caught	up	 a	cleaver	from	  among	the	butcher’s	 things	lying	  on	the
room’s	 big	 table,	trying	  to	 cripple	 her.	Her	 blade	 caught	 him	 high	 on	the
cheekbone	and	opened	his	face	down	 to	the	 opposite	corner	 of	his	 jaw.	His
scream	ripped	the	cut	wider.	The	stench	of	blood	was	everywhere.
       It	  seemed	 to	  take	 only	  seconds	 to	 cross	 the	  room.	 Jenny	  yelled,
“Gareth!”	 but	 he	swung	at	 her	with	 the	belt—she	 was	short	 enough	to	be	a
Meewink,	 and	he	had	lost	 his	 spectacles.	She	flung	up	 the	halberd;	the	 belt
wrapped	itself	 around	 the	shaft,	 and	she	 wrenched	it	 from	 his	 hands.	“It’s
Jenny!”	 she	shouted,	as	 John’s	sword	 strokes	came	 down,	 defending	them
both	as	it	splattered	them	with	 flying	 droplets	 of	gore.	She	grabbed	the	boy’s
bony	wrist,	jerking	 him	down	 the	steps	into	the	room.	“Now,	run!”
       “But	  we	can’t...”	  he	began,	looking	 back	 at	John,	and	 she	shoved	him
violently	 in	the	direction	 of	the	door.	After	 what	 appeared	to	be	a	momentary
struggle	with	  a	 desire	not	 to	 seem	a	 coward	 by	 abandoning	 his	 rescuers,
Gareth	ran.	They	passed	the	table	and	he	 caught	up	a	meat	hook	 in	passing,
swinging	at	the	pallid,	 puffy	 faces	all	around	them	and	at	the	little	 hands	with
their	jabbing	 knives.	 Three	Meewinks	 were	guarding	 the	door,	but	 fell	 back
screaming	before	the	greater	length	of	Jenny’s	weapon.	Behind	her,	she	could
hear	the	squeaky	cacophony	around	John	rising	 to	a	crescendo;	she	knew	he
was	outnumbered,	and	her	instincts	to	rush	back	to	fight	at	his	side	dragged	at
her	like	wet	rope.	It	 was	all	she	could	do	to	force	herself	to	hurl	 open	the	door
and	drag	Gareth	at	a	run	across	the	clearing	outside.
       Gareth	balked,	panicky.	“Where	 are	the	horses?	How	are	we...?”
       For	 all	 her	 small	 size,	she	 was	strong;	 her	shove	 nearly	 toppled	him.
“Don’t	 ask	questions!”	 Already	small,	 slumped	forms	were	running	 about	the
darkness	of	the	woods	ahead.	The	ooze	underfoot	soaked	through	her	boots	as
she	hauled	Gareth	toward	where	she,	at	least,	could	see	the	three	horses,	and
she	heard	Gareth	gulp	when	they	got	close	enough	for	 the	spells	to	lose	their
effectiveness.
       While	 the	boy	scrambled	up	to	Battlehammer’s	 back,	Jenny	flung	herself

66
onto	Moon	 Horse,	 caught	Osprey’s	 lead-rein,	 and	spurred	 back	toward	 the
house	in	 a	porridgey	 spatter	of	 mud.	 Pitching	 her	voice	 to	 cut	 through	the
screaming	clamor	within,	 she	called	out,	“JOHN!”	 A	 moment	later	a	confused
tangle	of	figures	erupted	through	 the	low	 doorway,	like	a	pack	 of	dogs	trying
to	bring	 down	 a	 bear.	The	 white	 glare	 of	 the	witchlight	  showed	 Aversin’s
sword	bloody	  to	the	 pommel,	 his	 face	streaked	and	 running	 with	 his	 own
blood	and	that	of	his	attackers,	his	breath	pouring	like	 a	ribbon	of	 steam	from
his	mouth.	Meewinks	 clung	to	 his	arms	and	his	belt,	 hacking	and	chewing	 at
the	leather	of	his	boots.
       With	  a	screaming	battle	cry	 like	 a	gull’s,	 Jenny	 rode	down	 upon	them,
swinging	her	halberd	like	 a	scythe.	Meewinks	 scattered,	mewing	and	hissing,
and	John	wrenched	himself	 free	of	 the	last	 of	them	 and	flung	 himself	 up	to
Osprey’s	saddle.	A	 tiny	 Meewink	 child	 hurled	 up	after	 him,	 clinging	 to	 the
stirrup	leather	and	jabbing	 with	 its	 little	 shell	knife	 at	his	 groin;	 John	swung
his	arm	 downward	 and	caught	 the	child	  across	its	 narrow	 temple	with	  the
spikes	of	his	armband,	sweeping	it	off	as	he	would	have	swept	a	rat.
       Jenny	 wheeled	 her	horse	 sharply,	spurring	 back	 to	 where	 Gareth	still
clung	 to	  Battlehammer’s	 saddle	 on	  the	 edge	 of	  the	 clearing.	 With	  the
precision	of	 circus	riders,	 she	and	John	split	 to	grab	 the	big	 gelding’s	reins,
one	on	either	side,	and,	with	 Gareth	in	 tow	between	them,	plunged	 back	into
the	night.


“There.”	 Aversin	 dipped	one	finger	 into	 a	puddle	 of	rainwater	 and	flicked	 a
droplet	onto	the	 iron	griddle	 balanced	over	the	fire.	 Satisfied	 with	 the	sizzle,
he	patted	cornmeal	 into	 a	cake	and	 dropped	it	 into	 place.	Then	 he	glanced
across	at	 Gareth,	 who	 was	 struggling	  not	 to	 cry	 out	  as	Jenny	 poured	 a
scouring	concoction	 of	marigold-simple	 into	 his	 wounds.	“Now	 you	 can	say
you’ve	seen	Aversin	the	Dragonsbane	run	like	hell	 from	 a	troop	of	forty	 four-
foot-tall	 septuagenarians.”	 His	 bitten,	 bandaged	hands	patted	 another	cake
into	shape,	and	the	dawn	grayness	flashed	off	his	specs	as	he	grinned.
       “Will	  they	be	after	us?”	Gareth	asked	faintly.
       “I	   doubt	 it.”	  He	 picked	  a	 fleck	  of	 cornmeal	  off	 the	  spikes	 of	 his

67
armbands.	“They’ll	 have	enough	of	their	own	dead	to	keep	them	fed	awhile.”
       The	boy	 swallowed	queasily,	though	having	seen	the	instruments	laid	out
on	the	table	in	the	Meewinks’	 house,	there	could	be	little	doubt	what	 they	had
meant	for	him.
       At	 Jenny’s	insistence,	after	the	rescue,	they	had	shifted	 their	camp	away
from	the	garnered	darkness	of	the	woods.	Dawn	 had	found	them	in	 relatively
open	ground	on	 the	formless	 verges	of	 a	marsh,	 where	long	 wastes	of	 ice-
scummed,	standing	water	reflected	a	 steely	sky	among	the	black	 pen	strokes
of	a	thousand	reeds.	Jenny	had	worked,	cold	and	weary,	to	lay	spells	about	the
camp,	then	had	 occupied	herself	 with	 the	contents	 of	her	 medicine	 satchel,
leaving	 John,	 somewhat	 against	 her	 better	 judgment,	 to	  make	 breakfast.
Gareth	had	dug	 into	his	 packs	for	 the	bent	 and	battered	spectacles	that	had
survived	the	fight	in	 the	ruins	up	north,	and	they	perched	forlornly	 askew	now
on	the	end	of	his	nose.
       “They	 were	always	a	little	 folk,”	  John	went	on,	coming	over	to	the	packs
where	the	boy	 sat,	letting	 Jenny	finish	 binding	 up	 his	slashed	knees.	“After
the	King’s	troops	left	 the	Winterlands,	their	villages	 were	forever	being	raided
by	bandits,	who’d	 steal	whatever	food	 they	raised.	They	 never	were	a	match
for	an	armored	man,	but	a	village	of	’em	 could	pull	 one	down—or,	better	still,
wait	 till	 he	was	 asleep	and	hack	 him	up	 as	he	lay.	 In	 the	starving	 times,	 a
bandit’s	horse	could	feed	a	whole	village	 for	 a	week.	I	expect	it	started	out	as
only	the	horses.”
       Gareth	swallowed	 again	and	looked	as	if	he	were	going	to	be	ill.
       John	put	 his	hands	through	his	 metal-plated	belt.	 “They	 generally	strike
right	before	dawn,	when	sleep	is	deepest—it’s	why	 I	switched	the	watches,	so
I’d	be	the	one	they	dealt	with,	 instead	of	you.	 It	was	a	Whisperer	that	got	you
away	from	the	camp,	wasn’t	it?”
       “I—I	  suppose	so.”	 He	looked	at	 the	ground,	a	shadow	crossing	 his	thin
face.	“I	don’t	 know.	It	was	something...”	 Jenny	felt	him	shudder.
       “I’ve	  seen	them	on	my	watch,	once	or	twice...	Jen?”
       “Once.”	  Jenny	spoke	shortly,	hating	 the	memory	of	 those	crying	 shapes
in	the	darkness.

68
       “They	  take	all	 forms,”	 John	 said,	sitting	 on	the	 ground	beside	 her	and
wrapping	his	arms	about	his	 knees.	“One	night	 one	even	took	Jen’s,	with	 her
lying	 beside	me...	Polyborus	says	in	his	Analects—or	 maybe	it’s	 in	that	half-
signature	of	Terens’	Of	 Ghosts—that	they	 read	your	dreams	and	take	 on	the
forms	that	they	 see	there.	From	Terens—or	is	it	 Polyborus?	Or	 maybe	it’s	in
Clivy,	 though	it’s	 a	bit	accurate	for	 Clivy—I	  get	the	impression	 they	used	to
be	much	rarer	than	they	are	now,	whatever	they	are.”
       “I	  don’t	know,”	 Gareth	 said	quietly.	“They	 must	 have	been,	because	I’d
never	heard	of	them,	or	of	the	Meewinks,	 either.	After	it—it	  lured	me	into	the
woods,	it	attacked	me.	I	ran,	but	I	 couldn’t	 seem	to	find	the	camp	again.	I	 ran
and	ran...	and	then	I	saw	the	light	from	 that	house...”	He	fell	 silent	 again	with
a	shudder.
       Jenny	 finished	wrapping	 Gareth’s	knee.	 The	wounds	weren’t	 deep,	but,
like	those	on	John’s	face	and	hands,	they	were	vicious,	not	only	the	knife	cuts,
but	the	small,	crescent-shaped	tears	of	human	teeth.	Her	own	body	bore	them,
too,	 and	 experience	had	 taught	  her	 that	 such	 wounds	 were	 filthier	  than
poisoned	arrows.	For	 the	rest,	she	was	aching	 and	stiff	 with	 pulled	 muscles
and	the	general	 fatigue	 of	 battle,	something	 she	supposed	Gareth’s	 ballads
neglected	to	mention	as	the	inevitable	result	of	 physical	combat.	She	felt	cold
inside,	too,	as	she	did	when	she	worked	the	death-spells,	something	else	they
never	mentioned	in	ballads,	where	all	 killing	 was	done	with	 serene	and	noble
confidence.	She	had	taken	the	lives	 of	 at	least	four	 human	beings	last	night,
she	knew,	for	all	that	 they	had	been	born	and	raised	into	a	cannibal	tribe;	 had
maimed	others	who	would	 either	die	 when	their	wounds	 turned	septic	in	that
atmosphere	of	festering	decay,	or	would	be	killed	by	their	brothers.
       To	 survive	in	 the	Winterlands,	 she	had	become	a	very	 competent	killer.
But	the	longer	 she	was	a	healer,	the	more	she	learned	about	magic	and	about
life	from	 which	all	 magic	stemmed,	the	more	she	loathed	what	she	did.	Living
in	the	Winterlands,	 she	had	seen	what	death	did	to	those	who	dealt	 it	out	too
casually.
       The	 gray	waters	of	the	marsh	began	to	brighten	with	 the	remote	shine	of
daybreak	beyond	the	clouds.	With	a	soft	 winnowing	 of	 a	thousand	wings,	the

69
wild	 geese	rose	from	 the	black	 cattail	 beds,	seeking	again	 the	roads	 of	the
colorless	sky.	Jenny	sighed,	weary	to	 her	bones	and	knowing	 that	they	could
not	afford	to	rest—knowing	 that	she	would	have	no	rest	until	 they	crossed	the
great	river	Wildspae	and	entered	the	lands	of	Belmarie.
       Quietly,	   Gareth	 said,	 “Aversin—Lord	    John—I—I’m	   sorry.	 I	  didn’t
understand	about	the	 Winterlands.”	  He	looked	 up,	 his	 gray	 eyes	tired	 and
unhappy	behind	their	cracked	specs.	“And	 I	didn’t	 understand	about	you.	I—
I	hated	you,	for	not	being	what—what	 I	thought	you	should	 be.”
       “Oh,	  aye,	I	knew	 that,”	 John	said	 with	 a	fleet	 grin.	“But	  what	you	 felt
about	me	was	none	of	my	business.	My	business	was	to	see	you	safe	in	a	land
you	had	no	 knowledge	of.	 And	 as	for	 being	what	 you	 expected—Well,	you
can	only	know	 what	 you	know,	 and	all	you	 knew	were	 those	songs.	I	mean,
it’s	 like	 Polyborus	  and	Clivy	  and	 those	others.	 I	 know	  bears	aren’t	 born
completely	shapeless	for	their	mothers	to	sculpt	with	 their	 tongues,	like	Clivy
says,	because	I’ve	seen	newborn	bear	cubs.	But	for	 all	 I	know,	 lions	 may	be
born	dead,	although	personally	I	don’t	think	 it’s	likely.”
       “They	  aren’t,”	 Gareth	said.	“Father	 had	a	lioness	once	as	a	pet,	 when	I
was	very	 little—her	  cubs	 were	born	 live,	  just	 like	 big	 kittens.	 They	 were
spotted.”
       “Really?”	   Aversin	  looked	  genuinely	  pleased	 for	   one	 more	  bit	  of
knowledge	 to	  add	 to	  the	 lumber	  room	  of	  his	 mind.	  “I’m	   not	  saying
Dragonsbanes	aren’t	heroic,	 because	Selkythar	and	Antara	 Warlady	 and	the
others	might	have	been,	and	may	have	gone	about	it	all	with	swords	in	golden
armor	and	plumes.	It’s	just	 that	I	know	 I’m	 not.	If	 I’d	 had	a	choice,	I’d	 never
have	gone	near	the	 bloody	 dragon,	but	 nobody	asked	me.”	 He	 grinned	and
added,	“I’m	 sorry	you	were	disappointed.”
       Gareth	  grinned	  back.	  “I	  suppose	 it	  had	  to	  rain	 on	  my	  birthday
sometime,”	he	 said,	a	little	 shyly.	 Then	he	hesitated,	as	if	 struggling	 against
some	inner	constraint.	 “Aversin,	 listen,”	 he	stammered.	Then	 he	coughed	as
the	wind	shifted,	and	smoke	swept	over	them	all.
       “God’s	  Grandmother,	 it’s	 the	 bloody	 cakes!”	 John	 swore	 and	dashed
back	to	the	fire,	cursing	awesomely.	“Jen,	it	isn’t	 my	fault...”

70
       “It	 is.”	Jenny	walked	in	a	more	leisurely	manner	to	join	him,	in	time	to
help	him	pick	the	last	pitiful	black	lump	from	the	griddle	and	toss	it	into	the
waters	of	the	marsh	with	a	milky	plash.	“I	should	have	known	better	than	to
trust	you	with	this.	Now	go	tend	the	horses	and	let	me	do	what	you	brought
me	along	to	do.”	She	picked	up	the	bowl	of	meal.	Though	she	kept	her	face
stern,	the	touch	of	her	eyes	upon	his	was	like	a	kiss.

71
                                  CHAPTER	                    IV


IN	THE	DAYS	that	followed,	Jenny	was	interested	to	notice	the	change	in
Gareth’s	attitude	toward	her	and	toward	John.	For	the	most	part	he	seemed	to
return	to	the	confiding	friendliness	he	had	shown	her	after	she	had	rescued
him	from	the	bandits	among	the	ruins,	before	he	had	learned	that	she	was	his
hero’s	mistress,	but	it	was	not	quite	the	same.	It	alternated	with	a	growing
nervousness	and	with	odd,	struggling	silences	in	his	conversation.	If	he	had
lied	about	something	at	the	Hold,	Jenny	thought,	he	was	regretting	it	now—
but	not	regretting	it	enough	yet	to	confess	the	truth.
       Whatever	the	truth	was,	she	felt	that	she	came	close	to	learning	it	the	day
after	the	rescue	from	the	 Meewinks.	John	had	ridden	ahead	to	scout	the
ruinous	stone	bridge	that	spanned	the	torrent	of	the	Snake	River,	leaving	them
alone	with	the	spare	horses	and	mules	in	the	louring	silence	of	the	winter
woods.	“Are	the	 Whisperers	real?”	he	asked	her	softly,	glancing	over	his
shoulder	as	if	he	feared	to	see	last	night’s	vision	fading	into	daytime	reality
from	the	mists	between	the	trees.
       “Real	enough	to	kill	a	man,”	Jenny	said,	“if	they	can	lure	him	away	from
his	friends.	Since	they	drink	blood,	they	must	be	fleshly	enough	to	require
sustenance;	but,	other	than	that,	no	one	knows	much	about	them.	You	had	a
narrow	escape.”
       “I	 know,”	he	mumbled,	looking	shamefacedly	down	at	his	hands.	They
were	bare,	and	chapped	with	cold—as	well	as	his	cloak	and	sword,	he	had
lost	his	gloves	in	the	house	of	the	Meewinks;	Jenny	suspected	that	later	in	the
winter	the	Meewinks	would	boil	them	and	eat	the	leather.	One	of	John’s	old
plaids	was	draped	on	over	the	boy’s	doublet	and	borrowed	jerkin.	With	his
thin	 hair	 dripping	 with	 moisture	 down	 onto	the	 lenses	of	  his	 cracked
spectacles,	he	looked	very	little	like	the	young	courtier	who	had	come	to	the
Hold.
       “Jenny,”	he	said	hesitantly,	“thank	you—this	 is	the	 second	time—for

72
saving	my	 life.	  I—I’m	  sorry	 I’ve	  behaved	toward	 you	 as	I	 have.	 It’s	 just
that...”	His	voice	 tailed	off	uncertainly.
       “I	  suspect,”	said	Jenny	kindly,	 “that	 you	 had	me	mistaken	 for	someone
else	that	you	know.”
       Ready	color	 flooded	to	 the	boy’s	cheeks.	Wind	moaned	through	the	bare
trees—he	startled,	then	 turned	 back	to	 her	 with	 a	sigh.	 “The	 thing	 is,	 you
saved	my	life	 at	the	risk	 of	 your	own,	 and	I	endangered	you	both	 stupidly.	 I
should	have	known	better	than	to	trust	the	Meewinks;	 I	should	never	have	left
the	camp.	But...”
       Jenny	smiled	 and	shook	her	head.	The	rain	 had	ceased,	and	she	had	put
back	her	hood,	letting	the	wind	 stir	in	 her	long	hair;	with	 a	touch	of	her	heels,
she	urged	The	Stupider	 Roan	on	 again,	and	the	whole	 train	 of	 them	moved
slowly	down	 the	trail.
       “It	   is	  difficult,”	   she	 said,	  “not	  to	  believe	 in	  the	  illusions	  of	  the
Whisperers.	Even	though	you	know	 that	those	whom	you	see	cannot	possibly
be	there	outside	the	spell-circle	 crying	 your	name,	there	is	 a	part	of	 you	that
needs	to	go	to	them.”
       “What—what	   shapes	have	 you	 seen	them	 take?”	  Gareth	 asked	in	 a
hushed	voice.
       The	  memory	 was	 an	 evil	  one,	 and	 it	 was	 a	 moment	 before	  Jenny
answered.	Then	she	said,	“My	 sons.	Ian	and	Adric.”	  The	vision	 had	been	so
real	that	even	calling	 their	images	in	 Caerdinn’s	scrying-crystal	 to	make	sure
that	they	were	 safe	at	the	Hold	 had	not	 entirely	 banished	her	fears	for	 them
from	her	mind.	 After	 a	moment’s	thought	she	added,	“They	 have	an	uncanny
way	of	 taking	 the	shape	that	 most	troubles	you;	 of	 knowing,	 not	 only	 your
love,	but	your	guilt	 and	your	longing.”
       Gareth	 flinched	 at	that,	and	looked	 away.	They	rode	 on	in	 silence	for	 a
few	moments;	then	he	asked,	“How	do	they	know?”
       She	 shook	her	head.	“Perhaps	 they	do	 read	your	dreams.	Perhaps	they
are	themselves	only	 mirrors	 and,	 like	 mirrors,	 have	no	 knowledge	 of	 what
they	reflect.	 The	spells	we	 lay	 upon	them	cannot	 be	binding	 because	we	do
not	know	their	essence.”

73
       He	 frowned	at	her,	puzzled.	“Their	 what?”
       “Their	  essence—their	inner	 being.”	  She	drew	 rein	 just	 above	 a	long,
flooded	dip	in	 the	road	where	water	lay	 among	the	trees	like	a	shining	 snake.
“Who	are	you,	Gareth	of	Magloshaldon?”
       He	 startled	at	that,	and	for	 an	instant	she	saw	fright	and	guilt	 in	 his	gray
eyes.	He	stammered,	“I—I’m	 Gareth	of—of	 Magloshaldon.	 It’s	 a	province	of
Belmarie...”
       Her	 eyes	sought	his	and	held	them	in	the	gray	shadows	of	the	trees.	“And
if	you	were	not	of	 that	province,	would	you	 still	be	Gareth?”
       “Er—yes.	 Of	 course.	I...”
       “And	  if	 you	 were	not	 Gareth?”	 she	pressed	him,	holding	 his	 gaze	and
mind	locked	with	 her	own.	 “Would	 you	still	 be	you?	If	 you	were	 crippled,	or
old—if	 you	became	a	leper,	or	lost	your	manhood—who	would	you	 be	then?”
       “I	 don’t	 know—”
       “You	 know.”
       “Stop	  it!”	  He	 tried	 to	 look	  away	and	 could	 not.	 Her	 grip	  upon	 him
tightened,	as	she	probed	at	his	mind,	showing	him	it	 through	her	eyes:	a	vivid
kaleidoscope	of	the	borrowed	 images	of	a	thousand	ballads,	burning	with	 the
overwhelming	 physical	 desires	 of	 the	 adolescent;	the	 raw	 wounds	 left	 by
some	bitter	  betrayal,	 and	over	 all,	  the	 shadowing	 darkness	of	 a	 scarcely
bearable	guilt	and	fear.
       She	 probed	at	 that	darkness—the	lies	 he	had	 told	 her	and	 John	at	 the
Hold,	and	some	greater	guilt	besides.	A	true	crime,	she	wondered,	or	only	that
which	seemed	one	to	him?	 Gareth	cried,	 “Stop	 it!”	 again,	and	 she	heard	the
despair	and	 terror	 in	 his	 voice;	 for	 a	 moment,	 through	 his	 eyes,	she	saw
herself—pitiless	 blue	eyes	in	a	face	 like	a	 white	wedge	of	 bone	between	the
cloud-dark	streams	of	her	hair.	She	remembered	when	Caerdinn	had	done	this
same	thing	to	her,	and	released	Gareth	quickly.	He	 turned	away,	covering	his
face,	his	whole	body	shivering	with	 shock	and	fright.
       After	  a	moment	Jenny	said	softly,	 “I’m	 sorry.	 But	this	 is	the	inner	 heart
of	magic,	the	way	 all	spells	 work—with	 the	essence,	the	true	name.	It	is	true
of	the	Whisperers	 and	of	 the	greatest	of	mages	as	well.”	  She	clucked	to	 the

74
horses	and	they	started	forward	again,	their	 hooves	sinking	squishily	 into	 the
tea-colored	ooze.	 She	 went	 on,	 “All	   you	 can	 do	 is	 ask	 yourself	  if	 it	  is
reasonable	that	those	you	see	would	be	there	in	the	woods,	calling	to	you.”
       “But	   that’s	 just	 it,”	   said	 Gareth.	 “It	  was	 reasonable.	 Zyerne...”	  He
stopped	himself.
       “Zyerne?”	  It	 was	the	name	he	had	 muttered	in	 his	dreams	at	the	 Hold,
when	he	had	flinched	aside	from	her	touch.
       “The	  Lady	  Zyerne,”	 he	 said	 hesitantly.	 “The—the	  King’s	  mistress.”
Under	its	streaking	of	 rain	and	mud	his	face	was	bright	 carnation	pink.	 Jenny
remembered	her	strange	and	cloudy	dream	of	the	dark-haired	woman	and	her
tinkling	 laughter.
       “And	 you	 love	her?”
       Gareth	 blushed	even	redder.	In	 a	stifled	 voice	 he	repeated,	“She	 is	the
King’s	mistress.”
       As	 I	 am	John’s,	Jenny	 thought,	suddenly	 realizing	whence	 his	anger	at
her	had	stemmed.
       “In	  any	case,”	Gareth	 went	on	 after	a	 moment,	“we’re	  all	in	 love	 with
her.	That	is—she’s	the	 first	lady	 of	 the	Court,	 the	most	beautiful...	 We	write
sonnets	to	her	beauty...”
       “Does	 she	love	 you?”	 inquired	 Jenny,	and	Gareth	fell	 silent	 for	a	 time,
concentrating	on	 urging	 his	horse	 through	 the	mud	 and	up	 the	stony	 slope
beyond.
       At	 length	he	said,	“I—I	 don’t	 know.	Sometimes	I	think...”	 Then	he	shook
his	head.	“She	frightens	me,”	he	admitted.	“And	 yet—she’s	a	witch,	you	see.”
       “Yes,”	 said	Jenny	softly.	“I	 guessed	that,	from	what	you	said	at	the	Hold.
You	feared	I	would	be	like	her.”
       He	 looked	stricken,	as	if	 caught	in	some	horrible	 social	gaffe.	“But—but
you’re	 not.	 She’s	very	 beautiful...”	  He	 broke	 off,	 blushing	 in	 earnest,	and
Jenny	laughed.
       “Don’t	  worry.	I	 learned	a	long	time	ago	what	a	mirror	was	for.”
       “But	  you	are	 beautiful,”	 he	 insisted.	“That	 is—Beautiful	  isn’t	 the	right
word.”

75
       “No.”	  Jenny	smiled.	“I	 do	think	‘ugly’	 is	 the	word	you’re	looking	 for.”
       Gareth	shook	 his	head	stubbornly,	his	honesty	forbidding	 him	to	 call	her
beautiful	 and	his	inexperience	 making	 it	 impossible	 to	express	what	 he	did
mean.	“Beauty—beauty	really	 doesn’t	have	anything	to	do	with	 it,”	 he	said	at
last.	“And	 she’s	nothing	 like	 you—for	  all	her	 beauty,	she’s	crafty	 and	hard-
hearted	and	cares	for	nothing	save	the	pursuit	of	her	powers.”
       “Then	 she	is	like	me,”	 said	Jenny.	“For	I	am	crafty—skilled	  in	my	crafts,
such	as	they	are—and	I	have	been	called	hard-hearted	since	I	was	a	little	 girl
and	chose	to	sit	staring	at	the	flame	of	a	candle	until	 the	pictures	came,	rather
than	play	at	house	with	the	other	little	 girls.	And	 as	for	the	rest...”	She	sighed.
“The	key	to	magic	 is	magic;	to	be	a	mage	you	must	be	a	mage.	My	old	master
used	to	say	that.	The	pursuit	of	your	power	takes	all	 that	you	have,	if	you	 will
be	great—it	 leaves	neither	time,	 nor	 energy,	for	 anything	 else.	We	are	born
with	the	 seeds	of	power	in	us	and	driven	 to	be	what	 we	are	by	 a	hunger	that
knows	no	slaking.	Knowledge—power—to	  know	what	songs	the	stars	sing;	to
center	all	the	forces	 of	creation	 upon	a	rune	drawn	 in	the	 air—we	can	 never
give	over	the	seeking	of	it.	It	 is	the	stuff	of	loneliness,	Gareth.”
       They	 rode	on	in	 silence	for	 a	time.	 The	woods	about	them	 were	pewter
and	iron,	streaked	here	and	there	with	 the	 rust	of	 the	dying	 year.	In	the	wan
light	Gareth	 looked	older	 than	he	had	when	they	began,	for	 he	had	lost	flesh
on	the	trip,	and	lack	of	sleep	had	left	permanent	smudges	of	bister	beneath	his
eyes.	At	 length	 he	 turned	to	 her	 again	and	 asked,	“And	  do	 the	mageborn
love?”
       Jenny	sighed	again.	“They	 say	that	a	wizard’s	wife	 is	a	widow.	A	woman
who	bears	a	wizard’s	child	 must	know	that	he	will	  leave	her	to	raise	the	child
alone,	should	his	powers	call	him	elsewhere.	It	 is	for	this	reason	that	no	priest
will	 perform	the	wedding	ceremony	for	 the	mageborn,	and	no	flute	player	will
officiate	 upon	the	rites.	And	 it	 would	be	an	act	 of	cruelty	 for	 a	witch	to	 bear
any	man’s	child.”
       He	 looked	across	at	her,	puzzled	both	by	 her	words	and	by	 the	coolness
of	her	voice,	as	if	the	matter	had	nothing	to	do	with	 her.
       She	went	on,	 looking	 ahead	at	the	half-hidden	road	beneath	its	foul	mire

76
of	 tangled	 weeds,	“A	  witch	 will	  always	 care	 more	 for	 the	 pursuit	 of	 her
powers	than	for	her	child,	 or	 for	any	man.	She	will	  either	desert	her	child,	or
come	to	hate	it	for	 keeping	her	from	 the	time	she	needs	to	meditate,	to	study,
to	grow	in	her	arts.	Did	you	 know	John’s	mother	was	a	witch?”
       Gareth	stared	at	her,	shocked.
       “She	 was	a	shaman	of	 the	Iceriders—his	 father	took	 her	in	 battle.	Your
ballads	said	nothing	of	it?”
       He	 shook	his	head	numbly.	“Nothing—in	  fact,	in	 the	Greenhythe	variant
of	the	 ballad	 of	 Aversin	 and	the	 Golden	Worm	 of	 Wyr,	 it	 talks	 about	 him
bidding	 farewell	 to	 his	 mother	 in	 her	bower,	 before	 going	 off	 to	 fight	 the
dragon—but	 now	 that	 I	  think	 of	  it,	 there	 is	 a	 scene	very	  like	 it	  in	 the
Greenhythe	ballad	of	 Selkythar	 Dragonsbane	and	in	one	 of	the	 late	Halnath
variants	of	  the	 Song	of	  Antara	 Warlady.	 I	 just	 thought	 it	 was	 something
Dragonsbanes	did.”
       A	 smile	 brushed	her	lips,	 then	 faded.	“She	 was	my	 first	 teacher	in	 the
ways	of	power,	when	 I	was	six.	 They	used	to	say	of	her	what	 you	thought	of
me—that	she	had	laid	spells	upon	her	lord	to	make	him	love	 her,	tangling	him
in	her	long	hair.	I	thought	 so,	too,	as	a	little	child—until	  I	saw	how	she	fought
for	the	freedom	that	he	would	 not	give	her.	When	I	 knew	her,	she	had	already
borne	his	child;	but	when	 John	was	five,	she	left	in	the	screaming	winds	of	 an
icestorm,	she	and	the	frost-eyed	wolf	who	 was	her	companion.	She	was	never
seen	in	the	Winterlands	again.	And	I...”
       There	 was	long	silence,	broken	 only	by	 the	soft	squish	 of	hooves	in	 the
roadbed,	the	patter	of	rain,	and	the	occasional	pop	of	the	mule	Clivy’s	 hooves
as	he	overreached	his	own	stride.	When	she	went	on,	her	voice	was	low,	as	if
she	spoke	to	herself.
       “He	 asked	me	to	bear	his	children,	for	he	wanted	children,	and	he	wanted
those	children	to	 be	mine	also.	 He	knew	 I	would	 never	live	 with	 him	 as	his
wife	and	devote	 my	time	 to	his	comfort	 and	that	of	 his	sons.	I	 knew	it,	 too.”
She	sighed.	“The	 lioness	bears	her	 cubs	and	then	 goes	back	to	 the	hunting
trail.	I	 thought	I	could	 do	the	same.	All	my	 life	I	 have	been	called	heartless—
would	that	it	were	really	 so.	I	hadn’t	thought	that	I	 would	love	them.”

77
       Through	 the	trees,	the	dilapidated	towers	of	the	Snake	River	bridge	came
into	view,	the	water	 streaming	high	and	yellow	 beneath	the	crumbling	arches.
Before	 them,	 a	 dark	 figure	 sat	 his	 horse	 in	 the	 gloomy	  road,	 spectacles
flashing	like	 rounds	 of	dirty	  ice	in	 the	cold	 daylight,	 signaling	 that	the	way
was	safe.


They	made	camp	that	night	outside	the	ruined	town	of	Ember,	once	the	capital
of	the	 province	 of	 Wyr.	 Nothing	 remained	of	 it	 now	 save	a	 dimpled	 stone
mound,	overgrown	 with	 birch	and	seedling	maple,	 and	the	decaying	remains
of	 the	 curtain	 wall.	  Jenny	knew	  it	 of	  old,	 from	 the	 days	 when	 she	 and
Caerdinn	had	searched	for	books	in	the	buried	cellars.	He	had	beaten	her,	she
remembered,	when	she	had	spoken	of	the	beauty	of	the	skeleton	lines	of	stone
that	shimmered	through	the	dark	cloak	of	the	fallow	 earth.
       As	 dusk	 came	down,	 they	pitched	 their	 camp	outside	 the	walls.	 Jenny
gathered	the	quick-burning	 bark	 of	the	 paper	birch	 for	 kindling	 and	fetched
water	from	the	spring	 nearby.	Gareth	saw	her	coming	and	broke	purposefully
away	from	his	 own	tasks	to	join	 her.	“Jenny,”	he	began,	and	she	looked	up	at
him.
       “Yes?”
       He	 paused,	like	a	naked	swimmer	 on	the	bank	of	 a	very	cold	 pool,	then
visibly	 lost	his	courage.	“Er—is	 there	some	reason	why	we	didn’t	camp	in	the
ruins	of	the	town	itself?”
       It	 was	patently	 not	what	he	 had	been	about	to	say,	but	she	only	glanced
back	toward	the	white	bones	of	the	town,	wrapped	in	shadow	and	vine.	“Yes.”
       His	 voice	dropped.	“Is	 there—is	there	something	that	haunts	the	ruins?”
       The	 corners	of	 her	mouth	 tucked	 a	little.	 “Not	  that	I	 know	 of.	 But	 the
entire	town	 is	 buried	under	 the	biggest	 patch	of	 poison	ivy	  this	side	 of	the
Gray	Mountains.	 Even	so,”	 she	said,	kneeling	 beside	the	little	  dry	 firewood
they	had	been	able	to	find	and	arranging	the	birchbark	beneath	it,	“I	 have	laid
spells	of	ward	about	the	camp,	so	take	care	not	to	leave	it.”
       He	 ducked	his	head	a	little	at	this	gentle	teasing	and	blushed.
       A	 little	  curiously,	 she	added,	“Even	 if	  this	Lady	 Zyerne	 of	 yours	 is	 a

78
sorceress—even	if	she	is	fond	of	you—she	would	 never	have	come	here	from
the	south,	you	know.	 Mages	only	 transform	themselves	into	 birds	in	 ballads,
for	to	change	your	essence	into	the	essence	of	some	other	life	form—which	is
what	shapeshifting	 is—aside	 from	  being	dangerous,	 requires	an	 incredible
amount	of	 power.	It	 is	 not	something	 done	lightly.	 When	 the	mageborn	 go,
they	go	upon	their	two	feet.”
       “But...”	  His	high	 forehead	wrinkled	in	 a	frown.	Having	 decided	to	be	her
champion,	he	was	unwilling	 to	believe	there	was	anything	beyond	her	powers.
“But	the	Lady	 Zyerne	does	it	all	the	time.	I’ve	 seen	her.”
       Jenny	froze	in	 the	act	of	arranging	the	logs,	cut	by	an	unexpected	pang	of
a	 hot	 jealousy	 she	 had	 thought	 that	  she	had	 long	  outgrown—the	  bitter
jealousy	of	her	youth	toward	those	who	had	greater	skills	than	she.	All	 her	life
she	had	worked	to	rid	herself	of	it,	knowing	 it	 crippled	her	from	 learning	from
those	more	powerful.	 It	 was	this	 that	 made	her	tell	 herself,	a	 moment	later,
that	she	ought	not	to	be	shocked	to	learn	of	another’s	use	of	power.
       Yet	 in	the	back	of	 her	mind	she	could	hear	old	 Caerdinn	speaking	of	the
dangers	of	taking	 on	an	alien	 essence,	even	if	one	 had	the	enormous	power
necessary	to	perform	 the	 transformation	 and	of	 the	 hold	 that	another	 form
could	take	on	the	minds	of	all	but	the	very	greatest.
       “She	 must	be	a	powerful	mage	indeed,”	she	said,	rebuking	her	own	envy.
With	 a	touch	 of	 her	mind,	 she	called	 fire	 to	 the	kindling,	  and	it	 blazed	 up
hotly	 beneath	the	 logs.	 Even	 that	 small	 magic	 pricked	  her,	like	  a	needle
carelessly	left	in	 a	garment,	with	 the	bitter	 reflection	 of	 the	smallness	of	her
power.	“What	 forms	have	you	 seen	her	take?”	She	realized	as	she	spoke	that
she	hoped	he	would	say	he	had	seen	none	himself	and	that	it	was,	in	fact,	only
rumor.
       “Once	  a	cat,”	 he	said.	 “And	  once	a	bird,	  a	swallow.	 And	 she’s	taken
other	shapes	in—in	dreams	I’ve	 had.	It’s	 odd,”	 he	went	on	rather	hastily.	 “In
ballads	they	don’t	 make	much	of	 it.	 But	it’s	 hideous,	the	most	 horrible	 thing
I’ve	 ever	seen—a	woman,	and	a	 woman	I—I—”	  He	 stumbled	in	 his	words,
barely	biting	 back	some	other	verb	that	he	replaced	with,	“—I	  know,	twisting
and	withering,	changing	 into	a	beast.	And	then	 the	beast	will	 watch	you	with

79
her	eyes.”
       He	 folded	 himself	 up	cross-legged	beside	the	fire	 as	Jenny	put	the	iron
skillet	 over	it	 and	began	to	mix	 the	meal	for	 the	cakes.	Jenny	asked	him,	“Is
she	why	you	 asked	the	 King	 to	send	you	 north	 on	this	 quest?	To	get	 away
from	her?”
       Gareth	 turned	 his	face	 from	 her.	After	  a	moment	 he	nodded.	 “I	 don’t
want	to	 betray—to	 betray	the	 King.”	  His	 words	 caught	oddly	 as	he	spoke.
“But	sometimes	I	feel	 I’m	destined	to	do	so.	And	I	 don’t	know	 what	to	do.
       “Polycarp	  hated	her,”	 he	 went	on,	 after	 a	few	 moments	 during	 which
John’s	 voice	  could	  be	 heard,	 cheerfully	   cursing	  the	 mules	  Clivy	   and
Melonhead	 as	 he	unloaded	 the	  last	 of	 the	 packs.	 “The	  rebel	 Master	 of
Halnath,	 He	 always	 told	  me	 to	 stay	 away	  from	 her.	 And	  he	 hated	 her
influence	over	the	King.”
       “Is	 that	why	 he	rebelled?”
       “It	  might	 have	 had	something	 to	do	 with	 it.	 I	 don’t	  know.”	 He	 toyed
wretchedly	with	 a	scrap	of	meal	left	 in	the	bowl.	 “He—he	 tried	to	murder	 the
King	 and—and	the	 Heir	 to	the	 throne,	the	King’s	  son.	Polycarp	 is	the	 next
heir,	the	 King’s	  nephew.	He	 was	 brought	 up	 in	 the	palace	 as	a	 sort	 of	 a
hostage	after	his	father	rebelled.	Polycarp	stretched	a	cable	over	a	fence	in	the
hunting	field	 on	a	foggy	 morning	 when	he	thought	 no	one	would	 see	until	it
was	too	late.”	His	 voice	cracked	a	little	 as	he	added,	“I	 was	the	one	who	saw
him	do	it.”
       Jenny	 glanced	across	at	 his	 face,	broken	 by	 darkness	and	the	 leaping
light	of	 the	flames	into	a	harsh	mosaic	of	plane	and	shadows.	“You	loved	him,
didn’t	you?”
       He	 managed	to	nod.	 “I	 think	 he	was	a	 better	friend	 to	me	 than	anyone
else	at	Court.	People—people	our	age	there—Polycarp	is	five	years	older	than
I	am—used	to	mock	 at	me,	because	I	collect	ballads	and	because	I’m	clumsy
and	can’t	see	without	 my	 spectacles;	they’d	 mock	at	 him	because	his	father
was	executed	for	treason	and	because	he’s	a	philosopher.	Many	of	the	Masters
have	been.	It’s	because	of	the	University	 at	Halnath—they’re	 usually	 atheists
and	 troublemakers.	 His	  father	 was,	 who	  married	 the	  King’s	  sister.	 But

80
Polycarp	was	always	like	 a	son	to	the	King.”	  He	pushed	back	the	thin,	 damp
weeds	of	his	 hair	 from	 his	high	 forehead	and	 finished	 in	a	 strangled	voice,
“Even	when	I	saw	him	 do	it,	I	couldn’t	 believe	it.”
       “And	 you	 denounced	him?”
       Gareth’s	breath	escaped	in	a	defeated	sigh.	“What	could	I	do?”
       Had	 this,	Jenny	wondered,	been	what	he	had	hidden	from	them?	The	fact
that	the	Realm	itself	was	split	 by	threat	of	civil	 war,	 like	the	Kinwars	 that	had
drawn	the	 King’s	 troops	away	 from	 the	Winterlands	 to	 begin	with?	 Had	 he
feared	that	if	John	knew	that	there	was	a	chance	the	King	would	refuse	to	lend
him	forces	needed	at	home,	he	would	not	consent	to	make	the	journey?
       Or	 was	there	something	else?
       It	 had	grown	 fully	 dark	now.	Jenny	picked	 the	crisp	mealcakes	from	 the
griddle	and	set	them	on	a	wooden	plate	at	her	side	while	she	cooked	salt	pork
and	beans.	While	 Gareth	 had	been	speaking,	 John	had	 come	to	 join	 them,
half-listening	 to	what	 was	said,	half-watching	  the	woods	that	 hemmed	them
in.
       As	 they	ate,	Gareth	went	 on,	“Anyway,	  Polycarp	managed	to	get	out	 of
the	city	before	they	came	for	 him.	The	King’s	 troops	were	waiting	 for	 him	on
the	road	to	Halnath,	 but	we	think	 he	went	 to	the	Deep,	and	the	 gnomes	took
him	through	 to	the	Citadel	 that	way.	Then	 they—the	gnomes—bolted	 up	the
doors	leading	from	the	Deep	to	the	Citadel	and	said	they	would	 not	meddle	in
the	affairs	of	men.	They	wouldn’t	 admit	the	King’s	 troops	through	the	Deep	to
take	the	Citadel	 from	 the	rear,	but	they	 wouldn’t	 let	 the	rebels	out	that	 way,
either,	or	sell	them	food.	 There	was	some	talk	of	 them	using	blasting	 powder
to	close	up	the	tunnels	to	Halnath	completely.	But	then	the	dragon	came.”
       “And	 when	 the	dragon	came?”	asked	John.
       “When	 the	dragon	came,	Polycarp	 opened	the	Citadel	gates	that	led	into
the	Deep	 and	let	 the	 gnomes	take	 refuge	 with	 him.	 At	  least,	a	 lot	 of	 the
gnomes	did	take	refuge	with	him,	though	Zyerne	 says	they	were	the	ones	who
were	on	 the	Master’s	 side	 to	 begin	 with.	 And	 she	should	 know—she	 was
brought	up	in	the	Deep.”
       “Was	 she,	now?”	 John	tossed	one	of	 the	small	 pork	bones	into	 the	fire

81
and	wiped	his	 fingers	 on	a	piece	 of	corncake.	“I	  thought	the	 name	sounded
like	the	tongue	of	the	gnomes.”
       Gareth	nodded.	“The	 gnomes	used	to	take	a	lot	of	the	children	of	 men	as
apprentices	in	the	Deep—usually	children	 from	Deeping,	the	town	 that	stands
—stood—in	 the	 vale	 before	 the	great	 gates	of	 the	 Deep	 itself,	 where	 the
smelting	of	the	gold	and	the	trade	in	foodstuffs	went	 on.	They	haven’t	done	so
in	the	last	 year	or	 so—in	fact	 in	 the	last	year	they	 forbade	men	 to	enter	the
Deep	at	all.”
       “Did	  they?”	asked	John,	curious.	“Why	was	that?”
       Gareth	 shrugged.	“I	  don’t	 know.	They’re	  strange	creatures,	and	tricky.
You	can’t	ever	tell	what	they’re	 up	to,	Zyerne	says.”
       As	 the	night	deepened,	Jenny	left	the	men	by	the	fire	and	silently	 walked
the	bounds	of	the	camp,	checking	the	spell-circles	that	defended	it	 against	the
blood-devils,	the	Whisperers,	 and	the	sad	ghosts	that	haunted	the	ruins	of	the
old	town.	She	sat	on	what	had	been	a	boundary	stone,	just	beyond	the	edge	of
the	fire’s	circle	 of	light,	 and	sank	into	her	meditations,	 which	for	 some	nights
now	she	had	neglected.
       It	 was	not	the	first	time	 she	had	neglected	them—she	was	too	well	aware
of	the	nights	she	had	let	them	go	by	 while	 she	was	at	the	Hold	with	 John	and
her	sons.	Had	she	not	neglected	 them—had	she	not	neglected	the	 pursuit	of
her	power—would	  she	 be	as	 powerful	 as	 this	 Zyerne,	 who	 could	 deal	in
shapeshifting	at	a	casual	whim?	Caerdinn’s	strictures	against	it	returned	to	her
mind,	but	 she	wondered	if	 that	was	just	her	 own	jealousy	speaking,	 her	own
spite	at	another’s	power.	Caerdinn	had	been	old,	and	there	had	been	nowhere
in	the	Winterlands	 that	she	could	turn	 for	 other	instruction	 after	he	had	died.
Like	John,	she	was	a	scholar	bereft	of	the	meat	of	scholarship;	like	 the	people
of	the	village	 of	Alyn,	 she	was	circumscribed	by	 the	fate	that	had	planted	her
in	such	stony	soil.
       Against	 the	twisting	  yellow	 ribbons	of	 the	flames,	she	could	 see	John’s
body	swaying	 as	he	gestured,	telling	 Gareth	some	outrageous	story	from	 his
vast	collection	of	 tales	about	the	Winterlands	 and	its	folk.	 The	Fattest	Bandit
in	the	Winterlands?	 she	wondered.	Or	one	about	his	 incredible	 Aunt	Mattie?

82
It	occurred	to	her	for	the	first	 time	that	it	was	for	 her,	as	well	as	for	his	people,
that	he	 had	undertaken	 the	 King’s	 command—for	  the	 things	 that	she	 had
never	gotten,	and	for	their	sons.
       It’s	 not	worth	 his	 life!	 she	thought	desperately,	watching	 him.	 I	do	 well
with	what	 I	 have!	But	 the	 silent	ruins	 of	 Ember	mocked	 at	her,	their	 naked
bones	veiled	by	darkness,	and	the	calm	part	of	her	heart	whispered	to	her	that
it	was	his	to	 choose,	not	hers.	She	could	only	 do	what	she	was	doing—make
her	choice	and	abandon	her	studies	to	 ride	with	  him.	The	 King	 had	sent	his
command	and	his	promise,	and	John	would	obey	the	King.
       Five	 days	south	of	 Ember,	the	 lands	opened	up	once	more.	 The	forests
gave	way	to	the	 long,	flat,	 alluvial	 slopes	that	led	 down	to	the	 Wildspae,	the
northern	boundary	of	the	lands	of	 Belmarie.	It	 was	an	empty	countryside,	but
without	the	haunted	desolation	of	the	Winterlands;	 there	were	farms	here,	like
little	 walled	 fortresses,	and	the	road	 was	at	least	passably	drained.	 Here	for
the	first	 time	they	 met	other	 travelers,	merchants	going	 north	and	east,	with
news	and	rumor	 of	 the	capital—of	 the	 dread	of	 the	dragon	that	 gripped	the
land,	and	the	unrest	in	Bel	due	to	the	high	price	of	grain.
       “Stands	  to	  reason,	don’t	  it?”	   said	 a	 foxlike	   little	  trader,	 with	  his
cavalcade	of	 laden	 mules	behind	 him.	 “What	  with	 the	 dragon	 ruining	 the
harvest,	and	the	 grain	rotting	  in	 the	fields;	 yes,	 and	the	gnomes	 what	took
refuge	in	 Bel	itself	 hoarding	 the	stuff,	 taking	 it	 out	of	 the	mouths	 of	honest
folk	with	 their	ill-got	 gold.”
       “Ill-got?”	    asked	John	 curiously.	 “They	  mined	 and	 smelted	 it,	  didn’t
they?”	 Jenny,	who	  wanted	 news	without	  irritating	  its	  bearer,	kicked	 him
surreptitiously	in	 the	shin.
       The	merchant	spat	into	the	brimming	 ditch	 by	the	roadside	and	wiped	his
grizzled	reddish	beard.	“That	gives	 them	no	call	to	buy	grain	 away	from	folks
that	needs	it,”	 he	said.	“And	 word	 has	it	that	 they’re	trafficking	  regular	with
their	brothers	up	in	Halnath—yes,	 and	that	they	and	the	Master	between	them
kidnapped	the	King’s	Heir,	his	 only	child,	 to	hold	for	ransom.”
       “Could	 they	have?”	John	inquired.
       “Course	 they	could.	 The	Master’s	 a	sorcerer,	isn’t	 he?	And	 the	gnomes

83
have	never	been	up	to	any	good,	causing	riot	and	mayhem	in	the	capital...”
       “Riot	  and	mayhem?”	 Gareth	protested.	“But	 the	gnomes	have	been	our
allies	for	time	out	of	 mind!	 There’s	never	been	trouble	between	us.”
       The	 man	squinted	 up	at	him	 suspiciously.	 But	he	 only	 grumbled,	“Just
goes	to	 show,	doesn’t	 it?	 Treacherous	 little	 buggers.”	 Jerking	 on	 his	 lead
mule’s	bridle,	he	passed	them	by.
       Not	  long	 after	 this	 they	  met	 a	company	 of	  the	 gnomes	themselves,
traveling	 banded	together,	 surrounded	by	 guards	 for	 protection,	 with	  their
wealth	 piled	 in	  carts	 and	carriages.	 They	 peered	 up	 at	 John	 with	  wary,
shortsighted	eyes	of	amber	 or	pale	 blue	beneath	low,	 wide	brows,	 and	gave
him	unwilling	 answers	to	his	questions	about	the	south.
       “The	 dragon?	Aye,	it	lairs	 yet	in	Ylferdun,	 and	none	of	the	men	the	King
has	sent	have	dislodged	it.”	The	 gnome	leader	toyed	with	 the	soft	fur	 trim	 of
his	 gloves,	 and	 the	 thin	 winds	  billowed	  at	 the	 silk	 of	  his	 strangely	 cut
garments.	Behind	him,	 the	guards	of	 the	cavalcade	watched	 the	strangers	in
deepest	suspicion,	as	if	fearing	 an	attack	from	 even	that	 few.	“As	 for	 us,	by
the	heart	of	the	Deep,	we	have	had	enough	of	 the	charity	of	 the	sons	of	men,
who	charge	us	four	 times	 the	going	 price	 for	 rooms	the	household	 servants
would	 scorn	and	for	 food	 retrieved	from	 the	 rats.”	His	 voice,	 thin	 and	high
like	that	of	 all	the	gnomes,	was	bitter	with	 the	verjuice	 of	hate	given	back	for
hate.	“Without	  the	gold	 taken	 from	 the	 Deep,	their	 city	 would	  never	have
been	built,	 and	yet	 not	a	man	 will	 speak	to	 us	in	 the	streets,	save	to	 curse.
They	say	in	the	city	 now	that	 we	plot	with	 our	 brethren	who	fled	 through	the
back	ways	of	the	Deep	into	the	Citadel	of	 Halnath.	By	 the	Stone,	it	is	lies;	but
such	lies	are	believed	now	in	Bel.”
       From	 the	 carts	and	 carriages	and	curtained	 litters,	 a	 murmur	 of	 anger
went	up,	the	rage	of	those	who	have	never	before	been	helpless.	Jenny,	sitting
quietly	 on	Moon	 Horse,	realized	that	 it	 was	the	first	 time	 she	had	ever	seen
gnomes	by	daylight.	 Their	 eyes,	wide	 and	nearly	 colorless,	were	 ill-attuned
for	its	glare;	 the	hearing	that	could	catch	the	whispers	of	 the	cave	bats	would
be	daily	tortured	by	the	clamor	of	 the	cities	of	men.
       Aversin	 asked,	“And	the	King?”

84
       “The	  King?”	  The	 gnome’s	 piping	  voice	 was	 vicious,	 and	 his	 whole
stooping	little	 body	bristled	with	 the	raw	hurt	of	 humiliation.	 “The	 King	 cares
nothing	for	 us.	With	 all	our	 wealth	mewed	up	in	 the	Deep,	where	the	dragon
sits	hoarding	over	it,	 we	have	little	 to	trade	upon	but	promises,	and	with	 each
day	that	passes	those	promises	buy	less	in	a	city	where	bread	is	dear.	And	all
this,	while	the	King’s	 whore	sits	with	 his	head	in	her	lap	and	poisons	his	mind
as	she	poisons	everything	she	touches—as	she	poisoned	the	very	heart	of	the
Deep.”
       Beside	 her,	Jenny	heard	the	hissing	of	 Gareth’s	indrawn	breath	and	saw
the	anger	 that	 flashed	in	  his	eyes,	 but	 he	said	 nothing.	 When	 her	 glance
questioned	him,	he	looked	away	in	shame.
       As	  the	 gnomes	moved	 out	 of	  sight	 once	 again	into	  the	 mists,	 John
remarked,	“Sounds	  a	proper	  snakes’	nest.	 Could	 this	 Master	  really	 have
kidnapped	the	King’s	child?”
       “No,”	  Gareth	said	miserably,	as	the	horses	resumed	their	walk	toward	the
ferry,	invisible	 in	 the	foggy	 bottomlands	to	 the	south.	“He	 couldn’t	 have	left
the	Citadel.	 He	isn’t	 a	 sorcerer—just	a	philosopher	 and	an	 atheist.	I—don’t
worry	  about	 the	 King’s	  Heir.”	  He	  looked	 down	  at	 his	  hands,	 and	 the
expression	on	his	face	 was	the	one	that	 Jenny	had	seen	in	the	camp	 outside
Ember	 that	 night—a	  struggle	 to	 gather	 his	  courage.	“Listen,”	   he	 began
shakily.	“I	 have	to...”
       “Gar,”	  said	John	quietly,	and	the	boy	startled	 as	if	burned.	There	was	an
ironic	glint	 in	 John’s	brown	 eyes	and	an	edge	like	chipped	 flint	 to	his	 voice.
“Now—the	 King	  wouldn’t	 by	 any	 chance	have	sent	for	 me	 for	 some	other
reason	than	the	dragon,	would	he?”
       “No,”	  Gareth	said	faintly,	not	meeting	his	eyes.	“No,	 he—he	didn’t.”
       “Didn’t	  what?”
       Gareth	 swallowed,	his	 pale	face	suddenly	very	 strained.	“He—he	 didn’t
send	for	you—for	any	other	reason.	That	is...”
       “Because,”	 John	 went	on	 in	that	 quiet	voice,	 “if	  the	King	 happened	to
send	me	his	signet	 ring	 to	get	 me	involved	 in	 rescuing	 that	child	 of	 his,	or
helping	 him	 against	this	 Master	 of	 Halnath	 I	 hear	 such	tell	  of,	 or	 for	 his

85
dealings	with	  the	 gnomes,	 I	 do	 have	 better	 things	 to	 do.	 There	 are	real
problems,	not	just	money	and	power,	in	my	 own	lands,	and	the	winter	closing
in	looks	to	be	a	bad	one.	I’ll	 put	my	 life	at	risk	 against	the	dragon	for	the	sake
of	the	King’s	protection	 to	the	Winterlands,	but	if	 there’s	aught	else	in	it...”
       “No!”	  Gareth	caught	his	 arm	desperately,	a	terrible	fear	in	 his	face,	as	if
he	thought	 that	 with	  little	  more	provocation	  the	 Dragonsbane	would	 turn
around	then	and	there	and	ride	back	to	Wyr.
       And	 perhaps,	Jenny	thought,	remembering	her	vision	 in	 the	water	bowl,
it	might	be	better	if	 they	did.
       “Aversin,	  it	 isn’t	  like	 that.	 You	 are	here	to	 slay	 the	 dragon—because
you’re	the	only	 Dragonsbane	living.	That’s	the	only	 reason	I	sought	you	out,	I
swear	it.	  I	 swear	 it!	  Don’t	  worry	  about	politics	  and—and	 all	  that.”	 His
shortsighted	gray	eyes	pleaded	with	Aversin	to	believe,	 but	in	them	there	was
a	desperation	that	could	never	have	stemmed	from	innocence.
       John’s	gaze	held	his	for	a	long	 moment,	gauging	him.	Then	he	said,	“I’m
trusting	you,	my	hero.”
       In	 dismal	silence,	Gareth	touched	his	heels	to	Battlehammer’s	 sides,	and
the	big	 horse	moved	out	 ahead	of	 them,	the	 boy’s	 borrowed	plaids	 making
them	fade	quickly	  into	 no	 more	than	 a	dark,	 cut-out	shape	in	 the	 colorless
fogs.	John,	 riding	 a	 little	 behind,	 slowed	 his	 horse	so	that	 he	 was	next	 to
Jenny,	who	had	watched	in	speculative	silence	throughout.
       “Maybe	 it’s	 just	as	well	you’re	 with	me	after	all,	 love.”
       She	glanced	from	 Gareth	up	to	 John,	and	then	back.	Somewhere	a	crow
called,	like	the	voice	 of	that	melancholy	 land.	“I	 don’t	 think	 he	means	us	ill,”
she	said	softly.
       “That	  doesn’t	 mean	he	 isn’t	 gormless	 enough	to	 get	us	 killed	  all	 the
same.”
       The	 mists	 thickened	  as	they	 approached	the	 river,	  until	 they	 moved
through	a	chill	  white	 world	 where	the	 only	 sound	was	the	creak	 of	 harness
leather,	the	pop	of	 hooves,	the	faint	 jingle	 of	bits,	 and	the	soughing	rattle	 of
the	wind	in	the	spiky	 cattails	growing	in	 the	flooded	ditches.	From	that	watery
grayness,	each	stone	or	solitary	tree	emerged,	silent	and	dark,	like	a	portent	of

86
strange	events.	More	than	all	 else,	Jenny	felt	 the	weight	 of	 Gareth’s	silence,
his	fear	and	 dread	and	guilt.	 John	felt	 it,	 too,	she	knew;	 he	watched	the	 tall
boy	from	 the	corner	of	 his	eye	and	listened	to	 the	hush	of	those	empty	 lands
like	a	 man	waiting	 for	 ambush.	As	evening	 darkened	the	air,	 Jenny	called	a
blue	ball	 of	witchfire	  to	light	 their	 feet,	 but	the	soft,	 opalescent	walls	of	 the
mist	threw	back	the	light	at	them	and	left	 them	nearly	as	blind	as	before.
       “Jen.”	 John	drew	rein,	his	head	cocked	to	listen.	“Can	you	hear	it?”
       “Hear	 what?”	 Gareth	whispered,	coming	up	beside	them	at	the	top	of	the
slope	which	dropped	away	into	blankets	of	moving	 fog.
       Jenny	 flung	 her	senses	wide	through	the	 dun-colored	clouds,	 feeling	as
much	 as	hearing	 the	 rushing	 voice	 of	  the	river	  below.	 There	 were	 other
sounds,	muffled	 and	 altered	by	 the	 fog,	 but	 unmistakable.	“Yes,”	  she	said
quietly,	her	breath	a	 puff	of	 white	 in	the	 raw	air.	“Voices—	 horses—a	group
of	them	on	the	other	side.”
       John	glanced	sharply	 sidelong	at	Gareth.	“They	 could	be	waiting	 for	 the
ferry,”	he	said,	“if	 they	had	business	in	the	empty	lands	west	of	the	river	at	the
fall	of	 night.”
       Gareth	 said	nothing,	but	 his	face	looked	 white	 and	set.	After	 a	moment
John	clucked	softly	to	 Cow,	and	the	big,	shaggy	sorrel	plodded	forward	 again
down	the	slope	to	the	ferry	through	the	clammy	wall	 of	vapor.
       Jenny	let	 the	witchlight	  ravel	away	 as	John	pounded	on	the	door	 of	the
squat	stone	ferry	 house.	She	and	Gareth	 remained	in	 the	background	 while
John	and	the	 ferryman	negotiated	 the	fare	 for	 three	people,	six	 horses,	and
two	mules.	 “Penny	 a	leg,”	 said	the	 ferryman,	 his	squirrel-dark	 eyes	darting
from	 one	to	the	 other	with	 the	 sharp	interest	of	 one	who	 sees	all	the	 world
pass	his	doorstep.	“But	there’ll	 be	supper	here	in	an	hour,	and	lodging	for	 the
night.	It’s	growing	 mortal	dark,	and	there’s	chowder	fog.”
       “We	  can	get	 along	 a	 few	 miles	 before	 full	  dark;	 and	besides,”	 John
added,	with	 an	odd	glint	 in	 his	 eye	as	he	glanced	back	 at	the	silent	 Gareth,
“we	may	have	someone	waiting	for	us	on	the	far	bank.”
       “Ah.”	  The	 man’s	wide	mouth	 shut	itself	 like	a	trap.	 “So	it’s	 you	they’re
expecting.	I	heard	’em	out	 there	a	bit	ago,	but	they	didn’t	 ring	 no	bell	for	 me,

87
so	I	bided	by	my	stove	where	it’s	warm.”
       Holding	  up	the	 lantern	and	struggling	 into	 his	 heavy	quilted	 jacket,	 he
led	the	way	down	to	the	slip,	 while	Jenny	followed	 silently	 behind,	digging	 in
the	purse	at	her	belt	for	coin.
       The	 great	horse	 Battlehammer	had	 traveled	north	 with	 Gareth	 by	 ship
and,	in	any	case,	disdained	balking	at	anything	 as	sheer	bad	manners;	neither
Moon	 Horse	nor	 Osprey	nor	 any	 of	the	 spares	had	such	scruples,	 with	 the
exception	of	Cow,	 who	would	 have	crossed	a	bridge	of	flaming	 knives	 at	his
customary	phlegmatic	plod.	 It	 took	 Jenny	much	whispered	talk	 and	stroking
of	ears	before	any	 of	 them	would	 consent	to	set	foot	 upon	 the	big	 raft.	The
ferryman	made	the	gate	at	the	raft’s	 tail	fast	and	fixed	 his	lantern	 on	the	pole
at	its	head;	then	he	set	to	turning	 the	winch	 that	drew	 the	wide,	flat	 platform
out	across	the	opaque	silk	of	the	river.	 The	single	lantern	made	a	woolly	 blur
of	yellowish	 light	 in	 the	leaden	smoke	of	the	fog;	 now	and	then,	on	 the	edge
of	the	gleam,	Jenny	could	see	the	brown	waters	parting	around	a	snagged	root
or	branch	that	projected	from	the	current	like	a	drowned	hand.
       From	 somewhere	across	the	water	she	heard	the	jingle	of	metal	on	metal,
the	soft	blowing	  of	a	 horse,	and	men’s	voices.	Gareth	 still	 said	nothing,	 but
she	felt	that,	if	 she	laid	a	hand	upon	him,	 she	would	 find	him	 quivering,	 as	a
rope	does	before	it	 snaps.	John	came	quietly	 to	 her	side,	his	 fingers	 twined
warm	and	strong	 about	hers.	His	spectacles	flashed	softly	 in	 the	lanternlight
as	he	slung	an	end	of	his	voluminous	plaid	around	her	shoulders	and	drew	her
to	his	side.
       “John,”	 Gareth	said	quietly,	“I—I	  have	something	to	tell	you.”
       Dimly	  through	 the	fog	 came	another	 sound,	a	woman’s	 laugh	 like	 the
tinkling	 of	 silver	bells.	 Gareth	twitched,	 and	John,	a	dangerous	flicker	 in	 his
lazy-lidded	eyes,	said,	“I	thought	 you	might.”
       “Aversin,”	   Gareth	stammered	and	stopped.	 Then	he	 forced	himself	  on
with	a	rush,	 “Aversin,	 Jenny,	listen.	I’m	 sorry.	I	 lied	to	 you—I	 betrayed	you,
but	I	couldn’t	 help	it;	I	 had	no	other	choice.	I’m	sorry.”
       “Ah,”	  said	 John	softly.	 “So	there	was	 something	you	 forgot	to	 mention
before	we	left	the	Hold?”

88
       Unable	 to	meet	his	 eyes,	Gareth	said,	“I	 meant	to	tell	 you	earlier,	but—
but	I	couldn’t.	  I	was	afraid	 you’d	 turn	back	and—and	I	 couldn’t	 let	 you	turn
back.	We	need	you,	we	really	do.”
       “For	 a	lad	who’s	 always	on	about	honor	and	courage,”	 Aversin	said,	and
there	was	an	ugly	edge	to	 his	quiet	voice,	 “you	 haven’t	shown	 very	much	of
either,	have	you?”
       Gareth	 raised	his	head,	and	 met	his	eyes,	“No,”	  he	said.	 “I—I’ve	  been
realizing	that.	I	thought	it	 was	all	right	 to	deceive	you	in	a	good	cause—that	is
—I	had	to	get	you	to	come...”
       “All	  right,	 then,”	said	John.	“What	is	the	truth?”
       Jenny	 glanced	 from	 the	 faces	 of	 the	 two	 men	 toward	 the	 far	 shore,
visible	dimly	  now	as	a	dark	blur	 and	a	few	lights	 moving	 like	 fireflies	 in	 the
mist.	A	 slightly	  darker	cloud	 beyond	would	 be	 the	woodlands	 of	 Belmarie.
She	touched	John’s	spiked	 elbow	 warningly,	 and	 he	looked	 quickly	 in	 that
direction.	Movement	 stirred	there,	shapes	crowding	down	to	wait	for	 the	ferry
to	put	 in.	The	 horse	Battlehammer	 flung	 up	his	 head	and	whinnied,	 and	 an
answering	whinny	 trumpeted	back	across	the	water.	The	Dragonsbane’s	eyes
returned	to	Gareth	and	he	folded	his	hands	over	the	hilt	of	his	sword.
       Gareth	 drew	a	 deep	breath.	“The	 truth	 is	that	 the	King	  didn’t	 send	for
you,”	he	said.	“In	 fact,	he—he	forbade	me	to	come	looking	 for	you.	He	said	it
was	a	foolish	quest,	because	you	probably	didn’t	 exist	 at	all	 and,	even	if	you
did,	you’d	  have	been	killed	 by	 another	dragon	 long	 ago.	He	 said	he	didn’t
want	me	to	 risk	 my	life	 chasing	 a	phantom.	But—but	 I	 had	to	 find	 you.	He
wasn’t	going	to	send	anyone	else.	And	you’re	the	only	 Dragonsbane,	as	it	was
in	all	 the	 ballads...”	 He	 stammered	uncertainly.	 “Except	 that	I	 didn’t	  know
then	that	it	 wasn’t	like	 the	ballads.	But	 I	 knew	you	had	to	 exist.	And	 I	 knew
we	needed	someone.	I	couldn’t	 stand	by	and	let	the	dragon	 go	on	terrorizing
the	countryside.	I	 had	to	come	and	find	 you.	 And	once	I	 found	you,	 I	had	to
bring	you	back...”
       “Having	  decided	you	knew	 better	about	the	needs	of	my	people	and	my
own	 choice	 in	  the	 matter	 than	 I	 did?”	  John’s	 face	 never	 showed	 much
expression,	but	his	voice	had	a	sting	to	it	now,	like	a	scorpion’s	tail.

89
       Gareth	 shied	from	  it,	 as	from	 a	 lash.	“I—I	  thought	 of	 that,	 these	last
days,”	he	 said	softly.	 He	 looked	up	 again,	his	 face	white	 with	 an	 agony	of
shame.	“But	I	 couldn’t	 let	you	 turn	back.	And	 you	 will	 be	rewarded,	I	 swear
I’ll	 see	that	you	get	the	reward	somehow.”
       “And	  just	how’ll	  you	manage	that?”	John’s	tone	was	sharp	with	 disgust.
The	deck	jarred	beneath	their	feet	as	the	raft	ground	against	the	shoals.	Lights
like	 marsh	candles	bobbed	 down	toward	 them	 through	 the	gloom.	 “With	  a
mage	at	 the	Court,	 it	  couldn’t	 have	 taken	 them	long	  to	figure	  out	 who’d
pinched	the	 King’s	 seal,	 nor	when	 he’d	 be	back	 in	 Belmarie.	 I	 expect	 the
welcoming	  committee...”	  he	  gestured	 toward	  the	 dark	  forms	  crowding
forward	from	 the	mists.	“...is	here	to	arrest	you	for	treason.”
       “No,”	   Gareth	 said	in	  a	defeated	 voice.	 “They’ll	   be	my	 friends	  from
Court.”
       As	 if	 stepping	through	a	door	the	forms	 came	into	visibility;	  lanternlight
danced	over	the	hard	gleam	of	satin,	caressed	velvet’s	softer	nap,	and	touched
edges	of	stiffened	lace	and	the	cloudy	gauze	of	women’s	 veils,	salted	all	 over
with	 the	leaping	 fire	 of	 jewels.	 In	 the	 forefront	 of	 them	 all	 was	a	 slender,
dark-haired	girl	 in	 amber	silk,	 whose	eyes,	golden	as	honey	 with	 a	touch	of
gray,	sought	Gareth’s	and	caused	the	boy	to	turn	aside	with	a	blush.	One	man
was	holding	  a	cloak	  for	 her	 of	 ermine-tagged	 velvet;	 another	 her	 golden
pomander	ball.	She	laughed,	a	sound	at	once	silvery	 and	husky,	like	 an	echo
from	a	troubled	dream.
       It	 could	be	no	one	but	Zyerne.
       John	looked	inquiringly	  back	at	Gareth.
       “That	  seal	you	showed	 me	was	real,”	 he	 said.	“I’ve	  seen	it	 on	the	old
documents,	down	to	the	little	 nicks	 on	its	edges.	They’re	taking	 its	theft	 a	bit
casually,	aren’t	they?”
       He	 laid	 hold	 of	 Cow’s	 bridle	  and	led	 him	 down	 the	short	 gangplank,
forcing	 the	others	 to	follow.	  As	 they	 stepped	ashore,	every	courtier	 on	 the
bank,	led	by	Zyerne,	swept	in	unison	into	an	elaborate	Phoenix	Rising	salaam,
touching	their	knees	in	respect	to	the	clammy,	fish-smelling	mud.
       Crimson-faced,	 Gareth	admitted,	“Not	 really.	 Technically	it	 wasn’t	theft.

90
The	King	is	my	father.	I’m	the	missing	Heir.”

91
                                    CHAPTER	                    V


“SO	THAT’S	YOUR	Dragonsbane,	is	it?”
       At	the	sound	of	Zyerne’s	voice,	Jenny	paused	in	the	stony	blue	dimness
of	the	hall	of	the	enchantress’s	hunting	lodge.	From	the	gloom	in	which	she
stood,	the	little	antechamber	beyond	the	hall	glowed	like	a	lighted	stage;	the
rose-colored	gauze	of	Zyerne’s	gown,	the	whites	 and	violets	of	 Gareth’s
doublet,	sleeves,	and	hose,	and	the	pinks	and	blacks	of	the	rugs	beneath	their
feet	all	seemed	to	burn	like	the	hues	of	stained	glass	in	the	ember-colored
lamplight.	The	 instincts	of	  the	Winterlands	kept	 Jenny	to	 the	 shadows.
Neither	saw	her.
       Zyerne	held	her	tiny	goblet	of	crystal	and	glass	up	to	one	of	the	lamps	on
the	mantel,	admiring	the	blood	red	lights	of	the	liqueur	within.	 She	smiled
mischievously.	“I	must	say,	I	prefer	the	ballad	version	myself.”
       Seated	in	one	of	the	gilt-footed	ivory	chairs	on	the	opposite	side	of	the
low	wine	table,	Gareth	only	looked	unhappy	and	confused.	The	dimple	on	the
side	of	Zyerne’s	curving,	shell	pink	lips	deepened,	and	she	brushed	a	corner
of	her	lace	veils	aside	from	her	cheek.	Combs	of	crystal	and	sardonyx	flashed
in	her	dark	hair	as	she	tipped	her	head.
       When	Gareth	didn’t	speak,	her	smile	widened	a	little,	and	she	moved
with	sinuous	grace	to	stand	near	enough	to	him	to	envelop	him	in	the	faint
aura	of	her	 perfume.	Like	shooting	stars,	the	lamplight	 jumped	from	 the
crystal	facets	of	Gareth’s	goblet	with	the	involuntary	tremor	of	his	hand.
       “Aren’t	you	even	going	to	thank	me	for	coming	to	meet	you	and	offering
you	the	hospitality	of	my	lodge?”	Zyerne	asked,	her	voice	teasing.
       Because	she	was	jealous	of	Zyerne’s	greater	powers,	Jenny	had	forced
herself	to	feel,	 upon	meeting	her	at	the	ferry,	 nothing	but	 surprise	at	the
enchantress’s	youth.	She	looked	no	more	than	twenty,	though	at	the	lowest
computation—which	Jenny	could	not	keep	herself	from	making,	though	the
cattiness	of	her	reaction	distressed	her—	her	age	could	not	have	been	much

92
less	than	twenty-six.	 Where	 there	was	jealousy,	 there	could	 be	no	 learning,
she	had	told	herself;	and	in	any	case	she	owed	this	girl	justice.
       But	 now	 anger	stirred	 in	 her.	Zyerne’s	closeness	and	the	hand	 that	she
laid	with	 such	artless	intimacy	 on	Gareth’s	shoulder,	so	 that	less	than	a	half-
inch	of	her	fingertip	  touched	the	flesh	of	his	 neck	above	his	collar-lace	could
be	nothing	 but	 calculated	 temptations.	 From	 what	 he	 had	 told	 her—from
every	tense	line	 of	 his	face	 and	body	 now—Jenny	 knew	he	 was	struggling
with	all	 that	was	in	him	against	his	desire	for	his	 father’s	mistress.	Judging	by
her	expression	in	the	lamplight,	 Gareth’s	efforts	to	resist	amused	Zyerne	very
much.
       “Lady—Lady	  Jenny?”
       Jenny’s	 head	turned	 quickly	 at	 the	hesitant	voice.	 The	 stairway	 of	 the
lodge	was	enclosed	in	an	elaborate	latticework	of	 pierced	stone;	in	the	fretted
shadows,	she	could	make	out	the	shape	of	a	girl	of	sixteen	or	 so.	Only	a	little
taller	 than	Jenny	herself,	 she	was	 like	 an	exquisitely	 dressed	doll,	 her	 hair
done	up	 in	 an	 exaggeration	 of	 Zyerne’s	 elaborate	 coiffure	  and	dyed	 like
white-and-purple	taffy.
       The	 girl	  curtseyed.	 “My	  name	 is	 Trey,	 Trey	 Clerlock.”	  She	 glanced
nervously	at	the	 two	forms	 framed	in	 the	lighted	 antechamber,	then	back	up
the	stair,	as	if	fearing	that	one	of	Zyerne’s	other	 guests	would	come	down	and
overhear.	“Please	don’t	 take	this	wrongly,	  but	I	 came	to	offer	 to	 lend	you	 a
dress	for	dinner,	if	you’d	 like	one.”
       Jenny	glanced	down	 at	her	own	gown,	 russet	wool	with	 a	hand	like	silk,
banded	with	 embroideries	 of	 red	 and	 blue.	 In	 deference	to	 custom	 which
dictated	 that	 no	  woman	 in	  polite	  society	 was	 ever	  seen	with	  her	  hair
uncovered,	she	had	even	donned	the	white	silk	veil	 John	had	brought	back	to
her	from	the	east.	In	 the	Winterlands	she	would	 have	been	accounted	royally
clad.
       “Does	 it	matter	so	much?”
       The	 girl	  Trey	 looked	 as	 embarrassed	as	years	of	  deportment	lessons
would	let	 her.	“It	 shouldn’t,”	 she	said	frankly.	“It	  doesn’t,	really,	to	 me,	but...
but	some	people	at	Court	can	be	very	cruel,	especially	about	things	like	 being

93
properly	dressed.	I’m	 sorry,”	 she	added	quickly,	 blushing	as	she	stepped	out
of	the	checkered	darkness	of	the	stair.	Jenny	could	see	now	that	she	carried	a
bundle	of	black	and	silver	 satin	and	a	long,	trailing	 mass	of	transparent	gauze
veils,	whose	random	sequins	caught	stray	spangles	of	light.
       Jenny	 hesitated.	Ordinarily	 the	 conventions	of	 polite	 society	 never	had
bothered	her,	and	her	work	left	 her	little	 time	 for	them	 in	any	case.	Knowing
she	would	be	coming	 to	the	King’s	 court,	she	had	brought	 the	best	gown	she
had—her	only	formal	 gown,	 as	a	matter	of	fact—	 aware	that	it	 would	 be	out
of	date.	It	had	been	no	concern	to	 her	what	others	thought	of	 her	for	 wearing
it.
       But	 from	the	moment	she	had	stepped	from	the	ferry	earlier	that	evening,
she	had	had	the	feeling	of	 walking	 among	unmarked	pitfalls.	 Zyerne	and	her
little	band	of	courtiers	 had	been	all	polite	graciousness,	but	she	had	sensed	the
covert	mockery	in	 their	language	of	eyebrows	and	glances.	It	had	angered	her
and	puzzled	her,	too,	reminding	her	too	much	of	 the	way	the	other	children	 in
the	village	had	treated	her	as	a	child.	But	 the	child	in	 her	was	alive	enough	to
feel	a	morbid	dread	of	their	sport.
       Zyerne’s	 sweet	laughter	drifted	 out	 into	the	 hall.	“I	 vow	 the	fellow	  was
looking	 about	him	  for	 a	bootscraper	as	 he	crossed	the	 threshold...	I	 didn’t
know	whether	 to	offer	 him	 a	room	with	 a	bed	 or	a	pile	 of	nice,	 comfortable
rushes	on	the	floor—you	 know	 a	good	 hostess	must	make	her	guests	feel	at
home...”
       For	 a	moment	Jenny’s	natural	suspicion	 made	her	wonder	if	 the	offer	of
a	gown	itself	 might	be	part	of	 some	scheme	to	make	her	look	ridiculous.	 But
Trey’s	worried	 blue	 eyes	held	 nothing	 but	concern	 for	 her—and	a	little	  for
herself,	lest	she	be	spotted	in	the	act	of	spoiling	 sport.	Jenny	considered	for	a
moment	 defying	 them,	 then	 discarded	 the	 idea—whatever	 gratification	  it
might	 bring	  was	 scarcely	  worth	 the	  fight.	  She	 had	 been	 raised	 in	 the
Winterlands,	and	every	instinct	 she	possessed	whispered	for	the	concealment
of	protective	coloration.
       She	held	out	her	hands	for	the	slithery	armfuls	 of	satin.
       “You	  can	change	 in	 the	 little	 room	 beneath	the	 stairs,”	 Trey	 offered,

94
looking	relieved.	“It’s	  a	long	way	back	to	your	rooms.”
       “And	  a	longer	one	back	to	your	own	home,”	 Jenny	pointed	out,	her	hand
on	the	latch	of	the	concealed	door.	“Did	you	send	for	this	specially,	 then?”
       Trey	 regarded	her	with	 guileless	 surprise.	“Oh,	 no.	When	 Zyerne	knew
Gareth	was	returning,	 she	told	us	all	 we’d	 come	here	for	 a	welcome	 dinner:
my	brother	 Bond	 and	 myself,	 the	Beautiful	  Isolde,	Caspar	 of	 Walfrith	 and
Merriwyn	  of	 Longcleat,	  and	 all	 the	 others.	 I	 always	  bring	 two	  or	 three
different	dinner	gowns.	I	 mean,	I	didn’t	know	 two	days	ago	what	I	might	 want
to	wear.”
       She	was	perfectly	serious,	so	Jenny	repressed	her	smile.
       She	went	 on,	“It’s	  a	little	 long,	but	 I	thought	 it	 looked	like	 your	 colors.
Here	in	the	south,	only	servants	wear	brown.”
       “Ah.”	   Jenny	 touched	  the	 folds	 of	  her	 own	  gown,	 which	  caught	 a
cinnamon	edge	in	the	glow	from	 the	antechamber’s	lamps.	“Thank	 you,	Trey,
very	much—and	Trey?	Could	I	 ask	yet	another	favor?”
       “Of	 course,”	 the	girl	said	generously.	“I	can	help...”
       “I	  think	  I	 can	manage.	 John—Lord	 Aversin—will	   be	down	 in	  a	few
moments...”	  She	 paused,	 thinking	   of	  the	  somewhat	  old-fashioned	  but
perfectly	 decent	brown	 velvet	 of	 his	 doublet	 and	indoor	 cloak.	 But	 it	  was
something	about	which	 she	could	do	 nothing,	and	she	shook	her	 head.	“Ask
him	to	wait,	if	 you	would.”
       The	 room	 beneath	the	stairs	 was	small,	 but	 showed	evidence	of	 hasty
toilettes	 and	 even	hastier	 romantic	  assignations.	As	 she	 changed	clothes,
Jenny	could	hear	the	 courtiers	assembling	in	 the	 hall	to	 await	 the	summons
for	dinner.	Occasionally	 she	could	catch	some	of	the	muted	bustling	 from	 the
servants	in	the	dining	 hall	beyond	 the	antechamber,	laying	the	six	 cloths	and
undercover	so	 necessary,	according	 to	 Gareth,	to	 the	 proper	 conduct	 of	 a
meal;	now	and	then	a	maid	would	laugh	and	be	rebuked	by	the	butler.	Nearer,
soft	 voices	gossiped	 and	teased:	“...	  well,	 really,	 what	 can	 you	 say	about
someone	who	still	wears	those	awful	smocked	sleeves—and	she’s	so	proud	of
them,	 too!”...	   “Yes,	  but	  in	  broad	  daylight?	  Outdoors?	  And	  with	   her
husband?”...	“Well,	 of	 course	it’s	 all	a	 plot	by	 the	gnomes...”	 “Did	 you	 hear

95
the	joke	about	why	gnomes	have	flat	noses?”
       Closer,	 a	 man’s	voice	 laughed,	 and	asked,	 “Gareth,	 are	you	 sure	you
found	 the	 right	  man?	I	  mean,	you	  didn’t	  mistake	 the	 address	and	 fetch
someone	else	entirely?”
       “Er—well—”	   Gareth	sounded	torn	between	his	loyalty	 to	his	friends	and
his	dread	of	mockery.	“I	suppose	you’d	call	 him	a	bit	barbaric,	Bond...”
       “A	  bit!”	 The	 man	Bond	 laughed	richly.	 “That	 is	 to	say	that	 the	dragon
has	caused	‘a	bit’	of	 trouble,	or	 that	old	Polycarp	 tried	to	 murder	you	‘a	 bit.’
And	you’re	 taking	him	to	Court?	Father	will	 be	pleased.”
       “Gareth?”	 There	was	sudden	concern	in	 Zyerne’s	lilting	 voice.	 “You	 did
get	his	 credentials,	didn’t	 you?	 Membership	 in	 the	Guild	 of	 Dragonsbanes,
Proof	of	Slaughter...”
       “Testimonials	  from	 Rescued	Maidens,”	Bond	 added.	“Or	 is	 that	one	of
his	rescued	maidens	he	has	with	him?”
       Above	 her	head,	Jenny	felt	rather	than	heard	a	light	 descending	tread	on
the	steps.	It	 was	the	tread	of	 a	man	 raised	to	caution	 and	it	 stopped,	as	her
own	had	stopped	for	a	moment,	at	the	point	on	the	stairs	just	behind	where	the
light	 fell	 from	  the	room	 beyond.	 As	 she	hastened	to	 pull	 on	 the	 stiffened
petticoats,	she	could	feel	his	 silence	in	the	entwining	 shadows	of	 the	latticed
staircase.
       “Of	   course!”	  Bond	  was	 saying,	  in	  the	 voice	  of	  a	 man	  suddenly
enlightened.	“He	  has	to	 carry	 her	 about	 with	 him	  because	nobody	in	  the
Winterlands	can	read	a	 written	 testimonial!	 It’s	 similar	 to	the	 barter	system,
you	see...”
       “Well,”	  another	woman’s	voice	purred,	“if	  you	ask	me,	she	isn’t	much	of
a	maiden.”
       With	 teasing	naughtiness,	Zyerne	giggled.	 “Perhaps	it	 wasn’t	much	 of	a
dragon.”
       “She	 must	be	thirty	if	 she’s	a	day,”	someone	else	added.
       “Now,	  my	dear,”	 Zyerne	chided,	“let	 us	not	 be	catty.	That	 rescue	was	a
long	time	ago.”
       In	 the	general	laugh,	 Jenny	was	not	sure,	but	 she	thought	she	heard	the

96
footsteps	overhead	soundlessly	retreat.	 Zyerne	 went	on,	 “I	 do	 think,	 if	 this
Dragonsbane	of	yours	 was	going	 to	 cart	 a	woman	 along,	he	 might	 at	least
have	picked	 a	pretty	 one,	 instead	of	 someone	who	 looks	 like	 a	 gnome—a
short	little	thing	 with	all	 that	hair.	She	scarcely	needs	a	veil	for	modesty.”
       “That’s	 probably	 why	she	doesn’t	wear	one.”
       “If	  you’re	going	 to	be	charitable,	my	dear...”
       “She	 isn’t...”	 began	Gareth’s	voice	indignantly.
       “Oh,	  Gareth,	 don’t	  take	 everything	  so	seriously!”	   Zyerne’s	 laughter
mocked	him.	 “It’s	 such	a	 bore,	darling,	 besides	giving	 you	 wrinkles.	 There.
Smile.	Really,	 it’s	 all	in	 jest—a	 man	who	 can’t	take	a	 little	 joking	 is	 only	a
short	step	from	far	 more	serious	sins,	like	 eating	his	 salad	with	 a	fish	fork.	 I
say,	you	don’t	think...”
       Her	 hands	shaking	with	  a	queerly	feelingless	 anger,	Jenny	straightened
her	veils.	The	mere	touch	of	 the	stiffened	gauze	fired	a	new	spurt	of	 irritation
through	her,	annoyance	at	them	and	that	same	sense	of	bafflement	she	had	felt
before.	The	patterns	of	human	 relationships	interested	her,	and	this	one,	shot
through	with	 a	 web	of	 artificiality	  and	 malice,	explained	 a	good	 deal	about
Gareth.	But	the	childishness	 of	it	 quelled	her	 anger,	and	she	was	able	to	slip
soundlessly	from	 her	cubbyhole	 and	stand	among	 them	for	 several	 minutes
before	any	of	them	became	aware	of	her	presence.
       Lamps	 had	been	kindled	  in	the	 hall.	 In	 the	midst	 of	 a	small	 crowd	 of
admiring	courtiers,	Zyerne	seemed	to	sparkle	bewitchingly	 under	a	powdering
of	diamonds	 and	lace.	“I’ll	  tell	 you,”	  she	was	saying.	“However	 much	 gold
Gareth	was	moved	to	offer	the	noble	 Dagonsbane	as	a	reward,	I	think	we	can
offer	him	a	greater	one.	We’ll	 show	him	a	few	of	 the	amenities	of	civilization.
How	does	that	sound?	He	slays	our	dragon	and	we	teach	him	how	 to	eat	with
a	fork?”
       There	 was	a	good	deal	of	appreciative	laughter	at	this.	 Jenny	noticed	the
girl	Trey	 joining	 in,	 but	without	 much	enthusiasm.	The	man	standing	next	 to
her	must	 be	her	 brother	 Bond,	she	 guessed;	he	had	his	 sister’s	 fine-boned
prettiness,	set	off	by	fair	hair	 of	which	 one	lovelock,	trailing	 down	onto	a	lace
collar,	was	 dyed	blue.	Beside	 his	graceful	 slimness,	Gareth	looked—and	 no

97
doubt	felt—	  gangly,	overgrown,	 and	miserably	 out	 of	 place;	his	 expression
was	one	of	profound	unhappiness	and	embarrassment.
       It	 might	 have	been	merely	 because	he	wasn’t	 wearing	his	 spectacles—
they	were	doubtless	hideously	unfashionable—but	 he	was	looking	 about	him
at	the	exquisite	carvings	of	 the	rafters,	at	the	familiar	  glimmer	of	 lamplit	 silk
and	stiffened	lace,	and	at	the	faces	of	his	friends,	with	a	weary	confusion,	as	if
they	had	all	become	strangers	to	him.
       Even	 now,	 Bond	 was	 saying,	 “And	  is	 your	 Dragonsbane	as	 great	as
Silkydrawers	 the	  Magnificent,	  who	  slew	 the	 Crimson-and-Purple-Striped
Dragon	 in	 the	 Golden	 Woods	 back	 in	  the	 Reign	 of	 Potpourri	  the	 Well-
Endowed—or	was	it	Kneebiter	 the	Ineffectual?	Do	enlighten	me,	Prince.”
       But	  before	 the	wretched	 Gareth	 could	 answer,	Zyerne	 said	 suddenly,
“My	  dears!”	 and	came	hurrying	  to	Jenny,	 her	small	 white	 hands	stretched
from	the	creamy	lace	of	her	sleeve	ruffles.	The	smile	on	her	face	was	as	sweet
and	welcoming	as	if	she	greeted	a	long-lost	friend.	“My	 dearest	Lady	Jenny—
forgive	 me	for	 not	seeing	you	 sooner!	You	look	 exquisite!	 Did	 darling	 Trey
lend	you	her	black-and-silver?	How	 very	charitable	of	her...”
       A	 bell	rang	 in	the	dining	 room,	and	the	minstrels	 in	the	gallery	 began	to
play.	Zyerne	took	 Jenny’s	arm	to	lead	in	 the	guests—first	 women,	then	men,
after	the	custom	 of	 the	south—to	 dinner.	Jenny	 glanced	quickly	 around	 the
hall,	looking	 for	 John	but	 knowing	 he	would	 not	 be	there.	A	 qualm	crossed
her	stomach	at	the	thought	of	sitting	through	this	alone.
       Beside	 her,	 the	light	  voice	 danced	on.	 “Oh,	 yes,	 you’re	 a	 mage,	too,
aren’t	you?...	You	 know	I	 did	have	some	very	 good	training,	 but	it’s	 the	sort
of	thing	that	has	always	come	to	me	by	instinct.	 You	must	tell	 me	about	using
your	powers	to	make	a	living.	 I’ve	 never	had	to	do	that,	you	know...”	 Like	the
prick	of	 knives	in	 her	back,	she	felt	the	covert	smiles	of	 those	who	walked	 in
procession	behind.
       Yet	because	they	were	deliberate,	Jenny	found	that	the	younger	woman’s
slights	had	lost	 all	 power	 to	wound	 her.	They	 stirred	in	 her	 less	anger	than
Zyerne’s	temptation	of	Gareth	had.	Arrogance	she	had	expected,	for	it	was	the
besetting	sin	of	the	mageborn	and	Jenny	knew	herself	to	be	as	much	prey	to	it

98
as	the	others	 and	she	 sensed	the	enormous	power	 within	  Zyerne.	 But	 this
condescension	was	a	girl’s	ploy,	the	trick	of	one	who	was	herself	insecure.
       What,	 she	wondered,	did	Zyerne	have	to	feel	insecure	about?
       As	 they	took	their	 places	at	the	table,	Jenny’s	eyes	traveled	slowly	along
its	length,	seeing	it	 laid	 like	 a	winter	forest	 with	 snowy	linen	 and	the	crystal
icicles	of	 candelabra	pendant	with	 jewels.	 Each	silver	 plate	 was	inlaid	 with
traceries	of	  gold	 and	 flanked	  with	  a	 dozen	 little	  forks	  and	 spoons,	the
complicated	armory	  of	 etiquette;	all	 these	 young	courtiers	 in	 their	 scented
velvet	 and	stiffened	 lace	 were	 clearly	 her	 slaves,	each	 more	 interested	in
carrying	 on	 a	 dialogue,	 however	  brief,	 with	  her,	 than	 with	  any	 of	 their
neighbors.	Everything	  about	 that	 delicate	 hunting	  lodge	 was	 designed	to
speak	her	name,	from	 the	 entwined	Zs	 and	Us	carved	 in	the	 corners	of	 the
ceiling	 to	the	 delicate	bronze	 of	 the	horned	goddess	of	 love	 Hartemgarbes,
wrought	in	Zyerne’s	 image,	in	its	niche	near	the	door.	Even	the	delicate	music
of	hautbois	 and	hurdy-gurdy	 in	 the	gallery	 was	a	proclamation,	 a	boast	that
Zyerne	had	and	would	tolerate	nothing	but	the	very	finest.
       Why	 then	the	nagging	fear	that	lay	behind	pettiness?
       She	turned	to	look	 at	Zyerne	with	 clinical	 curiosity,	 wondering	about	the
pattern	of	that	 girl’s	 life.	 Zyerne’s	eyes	met	hers	and	caught	their	 expression
of	 calm	  and	 slightly	  pitying	   question.	 For	  an	 instant,	 the	  golden	 orbs
narrowed,	scorn	and	spite	 and	anger	stirring	 in	 their	depths.	Then	 the	sweet
smile	returned,	and	Zyerne	 asked,	“My	 dear,	you	haven’t	 touched	a	bite.	 Do
you	use	forks	in	the	north?”
       There	 was	a	sudden	commotion	 in	the	arched	doorway	 of	 the	hall.	 One
of	the	minstrels	 in	the	 gallery,	shocked,	hit	 a	glaringly	 wrong	 squawk	out	 of
his	recorder;	the	others	stumbled	to	silence.
       “Gaw,”	 Aversin’s	 voice	said,	and	every	head	along	the	shimmering	board
turned,	as	if	at	the	clatter	of	a	dropped	plate.	“Late	again.”
       He	 stepped	into	the	waxlight	 brightness	of	 the	hall	with	 a	faint	 jingle	 of
scraps	of	chain	mail	and	stood	looking	 about	him,	 his	spectacles	glinting	 like
steel-rimmed	moons.	 He	 had	changed	 back	into	  the	battered	 black	 leather
he’d	worn	 on	the	journey,	the	wolfhide-lined	  jerkin	 with	 its	stray	bits	of	 mail

99
and	metal	plates	and	spikes	and	the	dark	 leather	breeches	and	scarred	boots.
His	plaids	were	slung	back	over	his	 shoulder	like	a	cloak,	cleaned	of	 mud	but
frayed	and	scruffy,	and	there	was	a	world	of	bright	mischief	 in	his	eyes.
       Gareth,	 at	the	other	end	 of	the	table,	 went	red	 with	 mortification	 to	 the
roots	of	 his	 thinning	 hair.	Jenny	 only	 sighed,	momentarily	 closed	 her	eyes,
and	thought	resignedly,	John.
       He	 strode	cheerily	into	 the	room,	 bowing	with	 impartial	 goodwill	  to	the
courtiers	along	 the	 board,	 not	 one	of	 whom	  seemed	capable	of	 making	 a
sound.	They	had,	for	the	most	part,	been	looking	 forward	to	 baiting	a	country
cousin	as	he	tried	 unsuccessfully	 to	ape	his	 betters;	they	 had	scarcely	been
prepared	for	 an	out-and-out	 barbarian	who	 obviously	  wasn’t	even	 going	 to
bother	to	try.
       With	  a	 friendly	  nod	 to	 his	 hostess,	he	 settled	 into	 his	 place	 on	 the
opposite	side	of	Zyerne	 from	 Jenny.	For	a	moment,	he	studied	the	enormous
battery	of	 cutlery	 arrayed	 on	both	 sides	of	 his	 plate	and	then,	 with	 perfect
neatness	and	cleanliness,	proceeded	to	eat	with	his	fingers.
       Zyerne	 recovered	her	composure	first.	With	 a	silky	 smile,	she	picked	up
a	fish	 fork	 and	offered	 it	 to	him.	 “Just	 as	a	suggestion,	my	 lord.	 We	do	 do
things	differently	 here.”
       Somewhere	down	 the	board,	one	of	 the	ladies	tittered.	Aversin	 regarded
Zyerne	with	 undisguised	suspicion.	 She	speared	a	scallop	with	 the	 fish	fork
and	held	 it	  out	 to	 him,	 by	 way	 of	  demonstration,	 and	he	 broke	 into	 his
sunniest	smile.	“Ah,	 so	that’s	 what	they’re	 for,”	 he	said,	relieved.	 Removing
the	scallop	from	 the	tines	 with	 his	fingers,	 he	took	a	neat	bite	 out	of	 it.	 In	a
north-country	brogue	six	times	worse	than	anything	 Jenny	had	ever	heard	him
use	at	home,	he	added,	“And	 here	I	was	thinking	  I’d	 been	in	your	 lands	less
than	a	night,	and	already	challenged	to	a	duel	with	an	unfamiliar	 weapon,	and
by	the	local	magewife	at	that.	You	had	me	gie	worrit.”
       On	 his	 other	side,	Bond	 Clerlock	 nearly	 choked	on	 his	soup,	and	John
thumped	him	helpfully	 on	the	back.
       “You	  know,”	  he	 went	 on,	 gesturing	 with	  the	 fork	  in	 one	 hand	 and
selecting	another	scallop	with	 the	other,	“we	did	 uncover	a	great	box	of	 these

100
things—all	 different	  sizes	they	 were,	like	  these	here—in	 the	 vaults	 of	 the
Hold	the	year	we	looked	out	the	bath	for	 my	cousin	Kat’s	wedding.	 We	hadn’t
a	clue	what	they	were	for,	not	even	Father	Hiero—Father	 Hiero’s	our	priest—
but	the	next	time	the	bandits	came	down	raiding	 from	the	hills,	 we	loaded	the
lot	into	 the	ballistas	instead	of	 stone	shot	and	let	fly.	 Killed	  one	of	’em	 dead
on	the	spot	and	two	 others	went	riding	 off	 over	the	moor	 with	 all	 these	little
spikey	things	sticking	into	 their	backs...”
       “I	  take	it,”	 Zyerne	 said	smoothly,	as	stifled	 giggles	skittered	 around	the
table,	 “that	 your	  cousin’s	 wedding	 was	 an	 event	 of	 some	 moment,	 if	  it
occasioned	a	bath?”
       “Oh,	  aye.”	 For	  someone	whose	 usual	 expression	was	 one	 of	 closed
watchfulness,	Aversin	had	a	dazzling	 smile.	“She	was	marrying	 this	 southern
fellow...”
       It	 was	probably,	Jenny	thought,	 the	first	time	 that	anyone	had	succeeded
in	taking	 an	audience	away	from	 Zyerne,	and,	by	 the	glint	 in	 the	sorceress’s
eyes,	she	did	not	like	it.	But	the	courtiers,	laughing,	were	drawn	 into	the	circle
of	Aversin’s	 warm	and	dotty	 charm;	his	exaggerated	barbarity	disarmed	their
mockery	as	his	increasingly	 outrageous	tale	of	his	 cousin’s	fictitious	 nuptials
reduced	them	to	undignified	whoops.	 Jenny	had	enough	of	a	spiteful	streak	in
her	to	derive	 a	certain	amount	 of	enjoyment	 from	 Zyerne’s	 discomfiture—it
was	Zyerne,	after	all,	who	 had	mocked	Gareth	for	not	 being	able	to	take	jests
—but	confined	 her	attention	to	 her	plate.	If	 John	was	going	 to	the	trouble	 of
drawing	 their	fire	  so	that	 she	could	 finish	 her	meal	 in	 peace,	the	least	 she
could	do	was	not	let	his	efforts	go	to	waste.
       On	 her	other	side,	 Trey	said	softly,	 “He	 doesn’t	 look	terribly	  ferocious.
From	Gareth’s	ballads,	I’d	pictured	 him	differently—stern	 and	handsome,	like
the	statues	of	 the	god	Sarmendes.	But	 then,”	 she	added,	winkling	  the	meat
from	 an	escargot	with	 the	special	tongs	 to	show	 Jenny	how	 it	was	 done,	“I
suppose	it	would	 have	been	a	 terrific	 bore	for	 you	 to	 ride	all	 the	way	 back
from	 the	  Winterlands	 with	  someone	 who	  just	 spent	 his	 time	  ‘scanning
th’encircling	 welkin	 with	his	eagle-lidded	eyes,’	as	the	song	says.”
       In	 spite	of	 Zyerne’s	 disapproving	glances,	her	handsome	cicisbeo	 Bond

101
was	wiping	  tears	of	 laughter	 from	 his	 eyes,	albeit	 with	  great	 care	for	 his
makeup.	Even	 the	 servants	 were	 having	 a	 hard	 time	 keeping	 their	  faces
properly	expressionless	as	they	carried	in	peacocks	roasted	and	resplendent	in
all	their	feathers	and	steaming	removes	of	venison	in	cream.
       “...so	 the	bridegroom	 looked	about	for	 one	of	those	wood	things	 such	as
you	have	here	in	 my	 rooms,”	 John	was	continuing,	 “but	 as	he	couldn’t	 find
one,	he	hung	 his	 clothes	over	 the	 armor-stand,	and	 damned	if	 Cousin	 Kat
didn’t	 wake	 in	 the	 night	 and	 set	about	 it	 with	  her	 sword,	 taking	 it	 for	  a
bandit...”
       Trust	 John,	 Jenny	thought,	 that	if	  he	couldn’t	  make	an	 impression	on
them	on	 their	  own	 grounds,	 he	 wouldn’t	  try	 to	 do	 it	  on	 the	 grounds	of
Gareth’s	ballads,	either.	They	had	succumbed	to	the	devil	 of	mischief	 in	him,
the	devil	that	had	drawn	her	from	 the	first	moment	 they	had	met	as	adults.	He
had	used	his	outrageousness	as	a	defense	against	their	scorn,	but	the	fact	that
he	had	been	able	to	use	it	successfully	 made	her	think	 a	little	 better	of	 these
courtiers	of	Zyerne’s.
       She	finished	her	meal	in	 silence,	and	none	of	them	saw	her	go.


“Jenny,	wait.”	 A	tall	 figure	 detached	itself	from	 the	cluster	of	 bright	forms	 in
the	antechamber	and	 hurried	 across	 the	hall	  to	 catch	her,	 tripping	  over	 a
footstool	halfway.
       Jenny	 paused	in	  the	 enclosing	 shadow	of	  the	 stair	 lattice.	 From	 the
anteroom,	music	 was	already	 lilting—not	  the	notes	 of	 the	hired	 musicians,
this	time,	 but	the	 complex	tunes	 made	to	show	 off	 the	skill	 of	 the	courtiers
themselves.	To	play	well,	 it	seemed,	was	the	mark	of	a	true	gentleperson;	the
music	of	the	cwrdth	 and	the	double-dulcimer	blended	into	 a	counterpoint	like
lace,	from	which	 themes	would	emerge	like	 half-familiar	  faces	glimpsed	in	a
crowd.	Over	the	 elaborate	harmonies,	she	heard	the	blithe,	unrepentant	air	of
the	pennywhistle,	following	  the	melody	by	 ear,	and	she	smiled.	If	the	Twelve
Gods	of	the	Cosmos	came	down,	they	would	be	hard	put	to	disconcert	John.
       “Jenny,	 I—I’m	 sorry.”	 Gareth	was	panting	a	little	 from	 his	haste.	He	had
resumed	his	battered	spectacles;	the	fracture	in	 the	bottom	 of	 the	right-hand

102
lens	glinted	like	 a	star.	“I	didn’t	 know	 it	 would	be	like	 that.	I	thought—he’s	 a
Dragonsbane...”
       She	 was	standing	 a	few	 steps	up	 the	flight;	  she	put	 out	 her	hand	and
touched	his	face,	nearly	on	level	 with	her	own.	 “Do	 you	remember	when	you
first	met	him?”
       He	 flushed	with	 embarrassment.	In	the	 illuminated	 antechamber,	John’s
scruffy	leather	and	plaids	made	him	look	 like	 a	mongrel	in	a	pack	of	 lapdogs.
He	was	 examining	 a	lute-shaped	 hurdy-gurdy	 with	 vast	 interest,	 while	 the
red-haired,	Beautiful	  Isolde	 of	 Greenhythe	told	 the	 latest	of	 her	 enormous
stock	of	 scatalogical	jokes	 about	the	 gnomes.	Everyone	guffawed	 but	 John,
who	 was	far	 too	 interested	in	 the	 musical	 instrument	 in	 his	 lap	 to	 notice;
Jenny	 saw	 Gareth’s	  mouth	 tighten	  with	  something	  between	 anger	 and
confused	pain.	 He	 went	 north	 seeking	a	 dream,	 she	thought;	 now	 he	 had
neither	that	which	 he	had	sought	nor	 that	to	which	 he	had	thought	 he	would
return.
       “I	  shouldn’t	have	let	 them	bait	you	like	 that,”	 he	said	after	a	moment.	“I
didn’t	think	 Zyerne...”
       He	 broke	off,	 unable	to	say	it.	 She	saw	bitterness	harden	his	mouth,	and
a	disillusion	worse	 than	the	one	John	had	dealt	him	beside	the	pigsty	at	Alyn.
He	 had	probably	  never	 seen	Zyerne	 being	  petty	 before,	 she	 thought;	 or
perhaps	he	had	only	 seen	her	 in	 the	context	 of	 the	world	  she	had	created,
never	having	been	outside	of	it	himself.	He	took	 a	deep	breath	and	went	on,	“I
know	I	should	have	taken	up	for	 you	somehow,	but...	but	I	didn’t	 know	how!”
He	spread	his	 hands	helplessly.	With	  the	first	 rueful	 humor	 at	 himself	 that
Jenny	had	 seen,	he	 added,	 “You	 know,	  in	 ballads	 it’s	 so	 easy	 to	 rescue
someone.	I	mean,	even	if	you’re	 defeated,	at	least	you	can	die	gracefully	 and
not	have	everyone	you	knew	laugh	at	you	for	the	next	three	weeks.”
       Jenny	laughed	and	reached	out	to	pat	his	 arm.	In	the	gloom,	 his	features
were	only	an	edge	of	 gold	along	the	awkward	 cheekline,	and	the	twin	 circles
of	 glass	were	opaque	 with	 the	 lamplight’s	 reflection	 that	 glinted	 on	 a	few
flame-caught	strands	of	hair	and	formed	 a	spiky	 illumination	 along	the	edges
of	his	lace	collar.	 “Don’t	 worry	 about	it.”	  She	smiled.	“Like	 slaying	 dragons,

103
it’s	a	special	art.”
       “Look,”	 said	Gareth,	“I—I’m	sorry	I	tricked	you.	I	 wouldn’t	have	done
it,	if	 I’d	 known	it	 would	 be	like	this.	 But	Zyerne	sent	a	messenger	to	my
father—it’s	only	a	day’s	ride	to	Bel,	and	a	guest	house	is	being	prepared	for
you	in	the	Palace.	I’ll	be	with	you	when	you	present	yourselves	to	him,	and	I
know	he’ll	be	willing	to	make	terms...”	He	caught	himself,	as	if	remembering
his	earlier	lying	assurances.	“That	is,	I	really	do	know	it,	this	time.	Since	the
coming	of	the	dragon,	there’s	been	a	huge	standing	reward	for	its	slaying,
more	than	the	pay	of	a	garrison	for	a	year.	He	has	to	listen	to	John.”
       Jenny	leaned	one	shoulder	against	the	openwork	of	the	newel	post,	the
chips	of	 reflected	lamplight	filtering	 through	the	 lattice	and	dappling	her
black	and	silver	gown	with	gold.	“Is	it	so	important	to	you?”
       He	nodded.	Even	with	the	fashionable	padding	of	his	white-and-violet
doublet,	his	narrow	shoulders	looked	stooped	with	tiredness	and	defeat.	“I
didn’t	tell	very	much	truth	at	the	Hold,”	he	said	quietly.	“But	I	 did	tell	this:
that	I	know	I’m	not	a	warrior,	or	a	knight,	and	I	know	I’m	not	good	at	games.
And	I’m	 not	stupid	enough	to	think	 that	the	dragon	wouldn’t	kill	 me	in	 a
minute,	if	I	went	there.	But—I	know	everyone	around	here	laughs	when	I	talk
about	chivalry	and	honor	and	a	knight’s	duty,	and	you	and	John	do,	too...	But
that’s	what	makes	John	the	Thane	of	the	Winterlands	and	not	just	another
bandit,	doesn’t	it?	He	didn’t	have	to	kill	that	first	dragon.”	The	boy	gestured
wearily,	a	half-shrug	that	sent	fragments	of	luminosity	slithering	along	the
white	stripes	of	his	slashed	sleeves	to	the	diamonds	at	his	cuffs.	“I	couldn’t
not	do	something.	Even	if	I	did	muff	it	up.”
       Jenny	felt	she	had	never	liked	him	so	well.	She	said,	“If	you	had	truly
muffed	it	up,	we	wouldn’t	be	here.”
       She	climbed	the	stairs	slowly	and	crossed	the	gallery	that	spanned	the
hall	below.	Like	the	stair,	it	was	enclosed	in	a	stone	trellis	cut	into	the	shapes
of	vines	and	trees,	and	the	shadows	flickered	in	a	restless	harlequin	over	her
gown	and	hair.	She	felt	tired	and	cold	from	holding	herself	braced	all	evening
—the	sly	baiting	and	lace-trimmed	malice	of	Zyerne’s	court	had	stung	more
than	she	cared	to	admit.	She	pitied	them,	a	little,	for	what	they	were,	but	she

104
did	not	have	John’s	brass	hide.
       She	and	John	had	been	given	the	smaller	 of	the	two	 rooms	at	the	end	of
the	wing;	  Gareth,	 the	 larger,	next	 door	 to	  theirs.	 Like	 everything	  else	in
Zyerne’s	 lodge,	 they	 were	 beautifully	   appointed.	 The	 red	 damasked	bed
hangings	and	alabaster	lamps	 were	designed	both	 as	a	 setting	for	 Zyerne’s
beauty	and	a	boast	of	 her	power	 to	get	what	 she	wanted	from	 the	King.	 No
wonder,	thought	Jenny,	Gareth	distrusted	and	hated	any	witch	who	held	 sway
over	a	ruler’s	heart.
       As	  she	left	 the	 noise	of	  the	gallery	  behind	her	 and	 turned	 down	 the
corridor	 toward	her	 room,	 she	became	conscious	of	the	 stiff	 rustling	 of	 her
borrowed	finery	 upon	 the	inlaid	 wood	of	 the	floor	 and,	 with	 her	old	instinct
for	silence,	gathered	the	heavy	skirts	up	 in	her	hands.	Lamplight	 from	 a	half-
opened	door	laid	a	molten	 trapezoid	of	 brightness	across	the	darkness	before
her.	Zyerne,	 Jenny	knew,	 was	not	 downstairs	 with	 the	 others,	and	 she	felt
uneasy	about	meeting	that	beautiful,	spoiled,	powerful	 girl,	 especially	 here	in
her	own	hunting	 lodge	where	she	held	sole	dominion.	 Thus	Jenny	passed	the
open	doorway	in	a	drift	 of	 illusion;	 and,	though	she	paused	in	the	shadows	at
what	she	saw	by	the	lights	within,	she	remained	herself	unseen.
       It	 would	 have	been	so,	she	thought	later,	even	had	she	not	been	cloaked
in	the	spells	that	 thwart	the	casual	eye.	Zyerne	sat	in	 an	island	of	 brightness,
the	glow	 of	 a	night-lamp	 stroking	 the	 gilt-work	  of	 her	blackwood	 chair,	 so
still	 that	not	 even	the	 rose-point	shadows	of	 her	 lace	veils	 stirred	upon	 her
gown.	Her	hands	were	cupped	around	the	face	of	Bond	Clerlock,	who	 knelt	at
her	feet,	and	such	was	his	immobility	  that	not	even	the	sapphires	pinning	 his
hair	glinted,	but	burned	steadily	with	 a	single	reflection.	 Though	he	looked	up
toward	her	face,	his	eyes	were	closed;	his	expression	was	the	contorted,	intent
face	of	a	man	in	ecstasy	so	strong	that	it	borders	pain.
       The	room	 smoked	with	magic,	the	weight	 of	it	like	 a	glittering	 lour	in	the
air.	As	 a	mage,	 Jenny	could	 feel	 it,	 smell	it	 like	  an	incense;	but	 it	 was	an
incense	tainted	 with	 rot.	 She	 stepped	back,	repelled.	 Though	 the	 touch	 of
Zyerne’s	hands	 upon	Bond’s	 face	 was	 the	only	  contact	between	 their	 two
bodies,	she	had	the	sickened	sensation	of	having	looked	upon	that	which	 was

105
obscene.	Zyerne’s	eyes	 were	closed,	 her	childlike	  brow	 puckered	 in	 slight
concentration;	 the	 smile	  that	 curved	  her	 lips	  was	 one	 of	  physical	  and
emotional	satisfaction,	like	 a	woman’s	after	the	act	of	love.
       Not	  love,	 thought	  Jenny,	drawing	  back	 from	 the	 scene	 and	moving
soundlessly	down	the	hall	once	more,	but	some	private	satiation.
       She	sat	for	 a	long	 time	 in	the	dark	 window	 embrasure	of	her	 room	and
thought	about	Zyerne.	The	moon	rose,	flecking	the	bare	tips	of	the	trees	above
the	white	carpet	 of	ground	 mists;	she	heard	the	clocks	 strike	downstairs	 and
the	drift	  of	  voices	 and	 laughter.	 The	 moon	 was	 in	 its	  first	 quarter,	 and
something	about	that	troubled	her,	though	she	could	not	for	 the	moment	think
what.	After	 a	long	time	 she	heard	the	door	open	softly	behind	 her	and	turned
to	 see	John	 silhouetted	 in	 the	 dim	 lamplight	  from	 the	 hall,	  its	 reflection
throwing	a	scatter	of	metallic	 glints	from	 his	doublet	and	putting	 a	rough	halo
on	the	coarse	wool	of	his	plaids.
       Into	 the	darkness	he	said	softly,	“Jen?”
       “Here.”
       Moonlight	  flashed	 across	his	specs.	She	moved	a	little—the	  barring	 of
the	casement	shadows	on	her	black	and	silver	gown	made	her	nearly	invisible.
He	came	cautiously	 across	the	unfamiliar	 terrain	 of	 the	floor,	 his	hands	and
face	pale	blurs	against	his	dark	clothing.
       “Gaw,”	  he	said	in	 disgust	 as	he	slung	off	 his	 plaids.	“To	 come	 here	to
risk	my	bones	slaying	a	dragon	and	end	up	playing	dancing	bear	for	 a	pack	of
children.”	 He	 sat	 on	the	 edge	of	 the	 curtained	 bed,	working	  at	 the	heavy
buckles	of	his	doublet.
       “Did	  Gareth	speak	to	you?”
       His	 spectacles	flashed	again	as	he	nodded.
       “And?”
       John	 shrugged.	“Seeing	the	pack	 he	runs	with,	 I’m	 not	 surprised	he’s	a
gammy-handed	 chuff	  with	  less	 sense	than	 my	  Cousin	 Dilly’s	   mulberry
bushes.	And	he	 did	 take	the	 risk	to	 search	for	 me,	 I’ll	  give	 him	 that.”	 His
voice	was	muffled	as	he	bent	over	to	pull	off	 his	boots.	“Though	 I’ll	 wager	all
the	dragon’s	gold	to	little	 green	apples	he	had	no	idea	how	dangerous	it	would

106
be.	God	knows	 what	 I’d	 have	done	 in	 his	shoes,	and	him	 that	 desperate	to
help	and	knowing	 he	hadn’t	a	chance	against	the	dragon	himself.”	 He	 set	his
boots	on	the	floor	and	sat	up	again.	“However	 we	came	here,	I’d	be	a	fool	not
to	speak	with	 the	King	 and	 see	what	he’ll	 offer	 me,	though	 it’s	 in	my	 mind
that	we’ll	 run	up	against	Zyerne	in	any	dealings	we	have	with	him.”
       Even	 while	 playing	  dancing	bear,	thought	 Jenny	as	 she	drew	the	 pins
from	her	hair	and	let	her	fashionable	veils	slither	 to	the	floor,	John	didn’t	 miss
much.	The	 stiffened	 silk	 felt	 cold	 under	her	 fingers,	 from	 the	touch	 of	 the
window’s	 nearness,	even	as	her	hair	did	when	she	unwound	its	thick	coil	 and
let	it	whisper	dryly	 down	over	her	bony,	half-bared	shoulders.
       At	 length	she	said,	“When	 Gareth	first	spoke	to	me	of	 her,	I	was	jealous,
hating	her	 without	 ever	having	 seen	her.	She	 has	everything	 that	I	 wanted,
John:	genius,	time...	and	beauty,”	she	added,	realizing	that	that,	too,	mattered.
“I	was	afraid	it	 was	that,	still.”
       “I	 don’t	 know,	love.”	 He	got	to	 his	feet,	barefoot	in	breeches	and	creased
shirt,	and	came	to	the	window	where	she	sat.	“It	doesn’t	sound	very	like	 you.”
His	hands	were	warm	through	the	stiff,	 chilly	 satins	of	 her	borrowed	gown	as
he	collected	 the	 raven	 weight	 of	 her	 hair	 and	sorted	 it	 into	  columns	that
spilled	down	 through	his	fingers.	 “I	 don’t	 know	about	her	magic,	 for	I’m	  not
mageborn	myself,	but	I	do	know	 she	is	cruel	for	the	sport	of	it—not	 in	 the	big
things	that	would	 get	her	pointed	 at,	but	in	 the	little	 ones—and	she	leads	the
others	on,	teaching	them	by	example	and	jest	to	be	as	cruel	as	she.	Myself,	I’d
take	a	whip	to	Ian,	if	 he	treated	a	guest	as	she	treated	you.	I	see	now	what	that
gnome	we	met	on	the	road	meant	when	he	said	she	poisons	what	she	touches.
But	she’s	only	 a	mistress,	when	 all’s	said.	 And	as	for	 her	being	 beautiful...”
He	shrugged.	“If	I	 was	a	bit	shapecrafty,	I’d	be	beautiful,	too.”
       In	 spite	of	herself	Jenny	laughed	and	leaned	back	into	his	arms.
       But	 later,	 in	 the	darkness	of	 the	curtained	 bed,	the	 memory	of	 Zyerne
returned	once	more	to	her	thoughts.	She	saw	again	the	enchantress	and	Bond
in	the	rosy	aura	of	the	nightlamp	and	felt	 the	weight	and	strength	of	the	magic
that	had	filled	 the	room	like	 the	silent	 build	of	 thunder.	Was	it	the	magnitude
of	the	power	alone	that	had	frightened	her,	she	wondered.	Or	had	it	been	some

107
sense	of	filthiness	 that	lay	 in	 it,	like	 the	 back-taste	of	souring	 milk?	 Or	 had
that,	in	its	turn,	 been	only	the	wormwood	 of	her	own	 jealousy	of	 the	younger
woman’s	greater	arts?
       John	 had	said	that	 it	 didn’t	 sound	 very	 like	 her,	but	 she	knew	 he	was
wrong.	It	was	like	 her,	like	the	part	of	herself	 she	fought	against,	the	fourteen-
year-old	girl	 still	buried	 in	her	soul,	weeping	with	 exhausted,	bitter	rage	when
the	rains	summoned	by	her	teacher	would	 not	disperse	at	her	command.	 She
had	hated	Caerdinn	for	being	 stronger	than	she.	And	although	 the	long	years
of	looking	 after	the	 irascible	old	 man	had	turned	that	hatred	to	 affection,	she
had	never	forgotten	that	 she	was	capable	of	it.	 Even,	she	added	ironically	 to
herself,	as	she	was	capable	of	working	 the	death-spells	on	a	helpless	man,	as
she	had	on	the	dying	robber	in	the	ruins	of	 the	town;	even	as	she	was	capable
of	leaving	 a	man	and	two	children	 who	 loved	her,	because	of	her	love	 of	the
quest	for	power.
       Would	 I	 have	been	able	to	understand	what	I	 saw	tonight	 if	 I	had	given
all	my	time,	 all	my	heart,	to	the	study	 of	magic?	Would	I	 have	had	power	like
that,	mighty	as	a	storm	gathered	into	my	two	hands?
       Through	 the	windows	 beyond	the	half-parted	 bedcurtains,	she	could	see
the	chill	  white	  eye	of	  the	 moon.	 Its	 light,	  broken	 by	 the	 leading	 of	 the
casement,	lay	scattered	like	the	spangles	of	a	fish’s	mail	 across	the	black	and
silver	 satin	of	 the	gown	 that	 she	had	worn	 and	over	 the	respectable	brown
velvet	suit	that	 John	had	not.	It	touched	the	bed	and	picked	 out	the	scars	that
crossed	John’s	bare	arm,	glimmered	 on	 the	upturned	palm	 of	 his	hand,	 and
outlined	the	shape	of	his	nose	and	lips	against	the	darkness.	Her	vision	 in	the
water	bowl	returned	to	her	again,	an	icy	shadow	on	her	heart.
       Would	  she	 be	 able	 to	 save	 him,	  she	 wondered,	 if	  she	 were	 more
powerful?	 If	  she	 had	 given	  her	 time	  to	 her	 powers	 wholly,	   instead	 of
portioning	 it	between	them	 and	him?	Was	that,	ultimately,	 what	 she	had	cast
unknowingly	 away?
       Somewhere	in	 the	night	a	hinge	 creaked.	Stilling	 her	breathing	to	listen,
she	heard	the	 almost	 soundless	pat	 of	 bare	feet	 outside	 her	 door	 and	the
muffled	vibration	 of	a	shoulder	blundering	into	 the	wall.

108
       She	slid	 from	 beneath	the	silken	 quilts	 and	pulled	 on	her	 shift.	 Over	it
she	wrapped	the	first	 garment	 she	laid	 hands	on,	John’s	voluminous	 plaids,
and	swiftly	 crossed	the	blackness	of	the	room	to	open	the	door.
       “Gar?”
       He	 was	standing	a	few	feet	 from	her,	gawky	 and	very	boyish-looking	  in
his	long	 nightshirt.	 His	 gray	 eyes	stared	out	straight	 ahead	of	 him,	 without
benefit	of	 spectacles,	and	 his	thin	  hair	was	 flattened	 and	tangled	 from	 the
pillow.	 He	gasped	at	the	sound	of	 her	voice	 and	almost	 fell,	 groping	for	 the
wall’s	support.	She	realized	then	that	she	had	waked	him.
       “Gar,	 it’s	me,	Jenny.	Are	you	all	 right?”
       His	 breathing	was	fast	with	 shock.	She	put	her	hand	gently	on	his	arm	to
steady	him,	and	 he	blinked	 myopically	 down	 at	her	 for	 a	moment.	Then	 he
drew	a	long	 breath.	“Fine,”	 he	said	shakily.	 “I’m	  fine,	Jenny.	I...”	 He	looked
around	him	and	ran	an	unsteady	hand	through	his	 hair.	“I—I	  must	have	been
walking	in	 my	sleep	again.”
       “Do	 you	often?”
       He	 nodded	and	rubbed	his	face.	“That	 is...	I	 didn’t	 in	the	north,	 but	I	 do
sometimes	here.	It’s	 just	 that	 I	 dreamed...”	He	 paused,	frowning,	  trying	 to
recall.	“Zyerne...”
       “Zyerne?”
       Sudden	 color	  flooded	 his	  pallid	  face.	 “Nothing,”	   he	 mumbled,	 and
avoided	her	eyes.	“That	is—I	don’t	 remember.”
       After	  she	had	seen	him	 safely	 back	to	 the	 dark	doorway	 of	 his	 room,
Jenny	stood	for	a	moment	in	the	hall,	 hearing	the	small	sounds	of	bedcurtains
and	sheets	as	he	returned	to	his	rest.	How	late	it	was,	she	could	not	guess.	The
hunting	lodge	 was	deathly	silent	 about	her,	the	 smells	of	 long-dead	candles,
spilled	wine,	 and	the	frowsty	residue	of	 spent	passions	now	flat	and	stale.	All
the	length	of	 the	corridor,	 every	room	 was	dark	 save	one,	whose	door	stood
ajar.	The	dim	glow	of	 a	single	nightlamp	shone	within,	 and	its	light	 lay	across
the	silky	parquet	of	the	floor	 like	a	dropped	scarf	of	luminous	 gold.

109
                                  CHAPTER	                    VI


“HE’LL	HAVE	TO	listen	to	you.”	Gareth	perched	himself	in	the	embrasure	of	one
of	the	tall	 windows	that	ran	the	length	of	 the	southern	wall	of	 the	King’s
Gallery,	the	 wan	sunlight	 shimmering	with	 moony	 radiance	in	 the	 old-
fashioned	jewels	he	wore.	“I’ve	  just	heard	that	the	 dragon	destroyed	the
convoy	taking	supplies	out	to	the	siege	troops	at	Halnath	last	night.	Over	a
thousand	pounds	of	flour	and	sugar	and	meat	destroyed—horses	and	oxen
dead	or	scattered—the	bodies	of	the	guards	burned	past	recognition.”
       He	nervously	adjusted	the	elaborate	folds	of	his	ceremonial	mantlings
and	peered	shortsightedly	at	John	and	Jenny,	who	shared	a	carved	bench	of
ebony	inlaid	with	malachite.	Due	to	the	exigencies	of	court	etiquette,	formal
costume	had	been	petrified	into	a	fashion	a	hundred	and	fifty	years	out	of
date,	with	the	result	that	all	the	courtiers	and	petitioners	assembled	in	the	long
room	had	the	stilted,	costumed	look	of	characters	in	a	masquerade.	Jenny
noticed	that	John,	though	he	might	persist	in	playing	 the	barbarian	in	his
leather	and	plaids	among	the	admiring	younger	courtiers,	was	not	about	to	do
so	in	the	presence	of	the	King.	Gareth	had	draped	John’s	blue-and-cream	satin
mantlings	for	him—a	valet’s	job.	 Bond	Clerlock	 had	offered	to	do	it	 but,
Jenny	gathered,	there	were	rigid	sartorial	rules	governing	such	matters;	it
would	have	been	very	like	Bond	to	arrange	the	elaborate	garment	in	some
ridiculous	style,	knowing	the	Dragonsbane	was	unable	to	tell	the	difference.
       Bond	was	present	among	the	courtiers	who	awaited	the	arrival	of	the
King.	Jenny	could	see	him,	further	down	the	King’s	Gallery,	standing	in	one
of	the	slanting	bars	of	pale,	platinum	light.	As	usual,	his	costume	outshone
every	other	man’s	present;	his	mantlings	were	a	miracle	of	complex	folds	and
studied	elegance,	so	thick	with	embroidery	that	they	glittered	like	a	snake’s
back;	his	flowing	 sleeves,	six	generations	out	of	 date,	were	precise	to	 a
quarter-inch	in	their	length	and	hang.	He	had	even	painted	his	face	in	the
archaic	formal	fashion,	which	some	of	the	courtiers	did	in	preference	to	the

110
modern	applications	  of	 kohl	  and	rouge—John	 had	 flatly	  refused	 to	 have
anything	to	 do	with	 either	 style.	The	 colors	accentuated	the	pallor	 of	 young
Clerlock’s	 face,	though	he	looked	 better,	Jenny	noted,	than	he	had	yesterday
on	the	ride	from	Zyerne’s	hunting	 lodge	to	Bel—less	drawn	and	exhausted.
       He	  was	looking	  about	 him	 now	  with	 nervous	 anxiety,	 searching	 for
someone—probably	Zyerne.	In	 spite	of	 how	 ill	 he	had	seemed	yesterday,	he
had	been	her	most	faithful	 attendant,	riding	at	her	 side	and	holding	her	whip,
her	pomander	ball,	and	 the	reins	of	 her	palfrey	 when	she	dismounted.	Small
thanks,	Jenny	thought,	he	had	gotten	for	 it.	 Zyerne	had	spent	the	day	flirting
with	the	unresponsive	Gareth.
       It	 was	not	 that	Gareth	was	immune	 to	her	 charms.	As	a	nonparticipant,
Jenny	had	 an	 odd	 sense	of	 unobserved	 leisure,	 as	 if	 she	 were	 watching
squirrels	from	 a	blind.	 Unnoticed	by	 the	courtiers,	she	could	 see	that	Zyerne
was	deliberately	teasing	Gareth’s	 senses	with	every	touch	 and	smile.	Do	 the
mageborn	love?	  he	had	 asked	 her	 once,	 back	 in	 the	 bleak	  Winterlands.
Evidently	 he	had	come	 to	his	 own	conclusions	 about	whether	Zyerne	 loved
him,	 or	 he	 her.	But	 Jenny	 knew	 full	  well	  that	love	  and	desire	 were	 two
different	 things,	  particularly	  to	 a	 boy	 of	  eighteen.	Under	  her	 innocently
minxish	 airs,	Zyerne	 was	 a	woman	 skilled	 at	 manipulating	 the	passions	of
men.
       Why?	 Jenny	wondered,	looking	 up	at	the	boy’s	 awkward	 profile	 against
the	soft	 cobalt	 shadows	 of	 the	 gallery.	 For	 the	amusement	of	  seeing	him
struggle	not	to	 betray	his	father?	Somehow	to	 use	his	guilt	 to	control	 him	 so
that	one	day	she	could	turn	the	King	against	him	by	crying	 rape?
       A	 stir	ran	the	length	of	the	gallery,	like	 wind	 in	dry	wheat.	At	 the	far	end,
voices	murmured,	 “The	 King!	 The	 King!”	  Gareth	scrambled	to	 his	feet	 and
hastily	 checked	 the	 folds	 of	 his	 mantlings	  again.	 John	rose,	 pushing	 his
anachronistic	specs	a	little	 more	firmly	  up	on	 the	bridge	of	 his	nose.	Taking
Jenny’s	hand,	he	followed	 more	slowly,	 as	Gareth	hurried	 toward	the	line	 of
courtiers	that	was	forming	up	in	the	center	of	the	hall.
       At	   the	  far	  end,	  bronze	  doors	  swung	  inward.	   The	  Chamberlain
Badegamus	stepped	through,	stout,	pink,	and	elderly,	 emblazoned	in	a	livery

111
of	crimson	and	gold	that	smote	the	eye	with	its	splendor.	“My	 lords,	my	 ladies
—the	King.”
       Her	 arm	 against	 Gareth’s	in	 the	 press,	Jenny	was	 aware	of	 the	 boy’s
shudder	 of	 nervousness.	 He	 had,	 after	  all,	  stolen	 his	 father’s	  seal	 and
disobeyed	his	 orders—and	 he	 was	 no	 longer	  as	blithely	  unaware	 of	 the
consequences	of	his	actions	as	the	characters	of	 most	ballads	 seemed	to	be.
She	felt	him	 poised,	ready	to	step	forward	 and	execute	the	proper	salaam,	as
others	 down	   the	  rank	  were	  already	  doing,	  and	  receive	  his	  father’s
acknowledgment	and	invitation	 to	a	private	interview.
       The	 King’s	head	loomed	above	all	 others,	taller	even	than	his	son;	Jenny
could	 see	that	his	 hair	 was	 as	fair	  as	Gareth’s	 but	 much	thicker,	  a	warm
barley-gold	that	 was	beginning	to	 fade	to	 the	color	of	 straw.	Like	 the	steady
murmuring	of	 waves	on	the	shore,	voices	repeated	“My	lord...	my	lord...”
       Her	 mind	 returned	briefly	 to	 the	Winterlands.	 She	supposed	she	should
have	felt	 resentment	for	the	 Kings	 who	 had	withdrawn	 their	 troops	and	left
the	lands	to	 ruin,	 or	awe	at	 finally	 seeing	 the	source	of	 the	King’s	 law	 that
John	was	ready	to	die	to	 uphold.	But	 she	felt	neither,	knowing	 that	this	 man,
Uriens	of	Bel,	 had	had	nothing	to	 do	with	 either	withdrawing	 those	troops	or
making	the	 Law,	but	 was	merely	 the	heir	 of	the	 men	who	had.	 Like	 Gareth
before	he	had	traveled	to	the	Winterlands,	he	undoubtedly	had	no	more	notion
of	 those	 things	 than	 what	 he	 had	 learned	 from	  his	 tutors	 and	 promptly
forgotten.
       As	 he	approached,	nodding	 to	this	 woman	or	 that	man,	 signing	that	 he
would	speak	to	 them	in	private,	 Jenny	felt	 a	vast	sense	of	distance	from	 this
tall	  man	 in	  his	  regal	 crimson	  robes.	 Her	  only	  allegiance	  was	 to	  the
Winterlands	and	to	the	individuals	  who	dwelt	 there,	to	people	and	a	land	she
knew.	It	was	John	who	felt	 the	ancient	bond	of	fealty;	 John	who	had	sworn	to
this	man	his	allegiance,	his	sword,	and	his	life.
       Nevertheless,	she	felt	 the	tension	as	the	King	 approached	them,	tangible
as	a	 color	  in	 the	 air.	 Covert	  eyes	were	 on	  them,	 the	 younger	 courtiers
watching,	waiting	 to	see	the	reunion	between	the	King	and	his	errant	son.
       Gareth	 stepped	forward,	 the	oak-leaf-cut	 end	of	 his	mantlings	 gathered

112
like	 a	cloak	 between	 the	second	 and	third	 fingers	 of	  his	right	  hand.	With
surprising	grace,	he	bent	his	long,	 gangly	frame	 into	a	perfect	Sarmendes-in-
Splendor	salaam,	such	 as	only	 the	 Heir	 could	 make,	 and	then	 only	 to	 the
monarch.	“My	 lord.”
       King	 Uriens	 II	of	 Belmarie,	Suzerain	of	 the	Marches,	High	Lord	 of	Wyr,
Nast,	and	the	Seven	Islands,	regarded	his	son	for	a	moment	out	of	hollow	and
colorless	eyes	set	deep	within	 a	haggard,	brittle	 face.	Then,	 without	 a	word,
he	turned	away	to	acknowledge	the	next	petitioner.
       The	 silence	 in	 the	gallery	  would	 have	blistered	 the	 paint	 from	 wood.
Like	 black	poison	 dumped	into	 clear	water,	 it	spread	to	 the	farthest	ends	of
the	room.	The	last	few	petitioners’	 voices	were	audible	through	it,	 clearer	and
clearer,	as	if	they	shouted;	the	closing	 of	the	gilded	 bronze	doors	as	the	King
passed	on	into	his	audience	room	sounded	like	the	booming	of	thunder.	Jenny
was	conscious	of	the	eyes	of	all	the	room	 looking	anywhere	but	 at	them,	then
sliding	 back	in	 surreptitious	 glances,	 and	of	 Gareth’s	 face,	as	white	 as	 his
collar	lace.
       A	 soft	voice	behind	them	said,	“Please	don’t	be	angry	with	 him,	Gareth.”
       Zyerne	 stood	there,	in	plum-colored	silk	 so	dark	it	was	nearly	black,	with
knots	of	 pink-tinted	 cream	upon	her	 trailing	 sleeves.	Her	mead-colored	eyes
were	troubled.	  “You	 did	 take	 his	 seal,	you	  know,	 and	depart	 without	  his
permission.”
       John	spoke	up.	“Bit	  of	an	expensive	slap	on	the	 wrist,	though,	 isn’t	it?	 I
mean,	there	the	dragon	 is	and	all,	 while	 we’re	 here	 waiting	 for	 leave	to	 go
after	it.”
       Zyerne’s	 lips	 tightened	 a	little,	  then	smoothed.	At	  the	near	end	 of	 the
King’s	 Gallery,	a	 small	door	 in	the	 great	ones	opened,	and	the	Chamberlain
Badegamus	appeared,	quietly	summoning	the	first	of	the	petitioners	whom	the
King	had	acknowledged.
       “There	 really	 is	 no	danger	to	 us	here,	you	 know.	 The	dragon	has	been
confining	his	depredations	to	the	farmsteads	along	the	feet	of	Nast	Wall.”
       “Ah,”	  John	said	comprehendingly.	 “That	 makes	it	all	 right,	then.	 And	is
this	what	you’ve	 told	the	people	of	 those	farmsteads	to	which,	as	you	say,	the

113
dragon’s	been	confining	his	depredations?”
       The	 flash	of	 anger	in	 her	eyes	was	stronger	then,	as	if	 no	one	 had	ever
spoken	to	her	so—or	 at	least,	 thought	Jenny,	observing	 silently	 from	 John’s
side,	not	for	 a	 long	 time.	With	  visible	 effort,	 Zyerne	controlled	  herself	and
said	with	 an	air	 of	 one	reproving	 a	child,	 “You	 must	 understand.	There	are
many	more	pressing	concerns	facing	the	King...”
       “More	   pressing	 than	 a	 dragon	 sitting	  on	  his	 doorstep?”	  demanded
Gareth,	outraged.
       She	 burst	into	 a	sweet	 gurgle	of	 laughter.	“There’s	  no	need	to	 enact	a
Dockmarket	 drama	over	it,	 you	 know.	 I’ve	 told	 you	 before,	darling,	 it	 isn’t
worth	the	wrinkles	 it	will	 give	you.”
       He	  pulled	 his	 head	 back	 from	  her	 playful	  touch.	 “Wrinkles!	   We’re
talking	about	people	being	killed!”
       “Tut,	  Gareth,”	Bond	 Clerlock	 drawled,	strolling	 languidly	 over	 to	them.
“You’re	 getting	as	bad	as	old	Polycarp	used	to	be.”
       Under	 the	paint,	his	face	looked	 even	more	washed-out	next	to	Zyerne’s
sparkling	radiance.	With	 a	forced	effort	at	his	 old	lightness,	he	went	on,	“You
shouldn’t	grudge	those	poor	farmers	the	only	spice	in	their	dull	 little	 lives.”
       “Spice...”	 Gareth	began,	and	Zyerne	squeezed	his	hand	chidingly.
       “Don’t	  tell	 me	 you’re	 going	to	 go	all	 dull	 and	 altruistic	 on	us.	What	 a
bore	that	would	 be.”	 She	smiled.	“And	  I	will	  tell	 you	this,”	 she	added	more
soberly.	“Don’t	 do	anything	that	would	 further	anger	your	father.	Be	patient—
and	try	to	understand.”
       Halfway	   down	  the	 long	  gallery,	  the	 Chamberlain	  Badegamus	 was
returning,	passing	the	small	 group	of	 gnomes	who	sat,	an	island	of	 isolation,
in	the	shadow	of	 one	of	the	 fluted	ornamental	 arches	along	the	east	wall.	As
the	Chamberlain	walked	by,	 one	of	them	rose	in	 a	silken	whisper	 of	flowing,
alien	 robes,	the	 cloudy	  wisps	 of	 his	  milk-white	  hair	 floating	  around	 his
slumped	  back.	   Gareth	   had	   pointed	   him	    out	   to	   Jenny	   earlier—
Azwylcartusherands,	 called	  Dromar	  by	 the	 folk	   of	 men	  who	 had	 little
patience	with	 the	tongue	of	 gnomes,	longtime	 ambassador	from	the	Lord	 of
the	Deep	to	 the	Court	 of	 Bel.	 Badegamus	saw	him	 and	 checked	his	stride,

114
then	glanced	quickly	 at	Zyerne.	 She	shook	her	head.	Badegamus	averted	his
face	and	walked	past	the	gnomes	without	seeing	them.
       “They	  grow	 impudent,”	  the	 enchantress	said	softly.	  “To	 send	envoys
here,	when	they	fight	on	the	side	of	the	traitors	of	Halnath.”
       “Well,	  they	 can	hardly	 help	 that,	can	 they,	if	 the	 back	way	 out	 of	 the
Deep	leads	into	the	Citadel,”	John	remarked.
       “They	 could	have	opened	the	Citadel	gates	to	let	the	King’s	troops	in.”
       John	scratched	the	side	of	his	long	nose.	“Well,	 being	a	barbarian	and	all,
I	 wouldn’t	 know	 how	 things	 are	 done	in	 civilized	  lands,”	 he	said.	 “In	  the
north,	we’ve	 got	a	word	 for	 someone	who’d	do	 that	to	a	man	who	 gave	him
shelter	when	he	was	driven	from	his	home.”
       For	 an	instant	 Zyerne	 was	silent,	 her	power	 and	her	 anger	seeming	to
crackle	in	 the	 air.	Then	 she	burst	into	 another	 peal	of	 chiming	 laughter.	 “I
swear,	Dragonsbane,	you	 do	 have	 a	refreshingly	  naïve	way	  of	 looking	 at
things.	You	 make	me	 feel	 positively	 ancient.”	 She	brushed	a	 tendril	 of	 her
hair	aside	from	her	cheek	as	she	spoke;	she	looked	as	sweet	and	guileless	as	a
girl	 of	twenty.	 “Come.	 Some	of	us	are	going	 to	slip	 away	from	 this	 silliness
and	go	riding	 along	 the	sea	cliffs.	  Will	 you	 come,	Gareth?”	 Her	 hand	stole
into	 his	in	 such	a	 way	 that	he	 could	 not	avoid	 it	 without	  rudeness—Jenny
could	see	his	face	color	 slightly	 at	 the	touch.	“And	  you,	our	 barbarian?	You
know	the	King	 won’t	see	you	today.”
       “Be	 that	as	it	may,”	John	said	quietly.	“I’ll	  stay	here	on	the	off	chance.”
       Bond	 laughed	tinnily.	“There’s	 the	spirit	that	won	 the	Realm!”
       “Aye,”	  John	 agreed	in	 a	mild	  voice	and	 returned	to	 the	 carved	bench
where	 he	 and	 Jenny	 had	 been,	 secure	 in	 his	  established	reputation	  for
barbarous	eccentricity.
       Gareth	 drew	his	 hand	from	 Zyerne’s	and	sat	down	 nearby,	catching	his
mantlings	in	 the	lion’s-head	 arm	 of	 the	chair.	“I	  think	 I’ll	  stay	as	well,”	  he
said,	with	as	much	dignity	as	one	could	have	while	disentangling	 oneself	from
the	furniture.
       Bond	 laughed	again.	“I	 think	our	 Prince	has	been	in	the	north	too	long!”
Zyerne	wrinkled	 her	nose,	as	if	at	a	joke	in	doubtful	taste.

115
       “Run	 along,	 Bond.”	 She	smiled.	 “I	 must	speak	to	the	 King.	 I	shall	 join
you	presently.”	Gathering	up	her	train,	she	moved	off	 toward	the	bronze	doors
of	 the	 King’s	  antechamber,	the	 opals	 that	 spangled	 her	 veils	  giving	  the
impression	of	dew	flecking	  an	apple	blossom	as	she	passed	the	pale	bands	of
the	windowlight.	  As	 she	came	near	the	little	  group	of	 gnomes,	old	 Dromar
rose	again	and	walked	 toward	her	 with	 the	air	 of	 one	steeling	himself	 for	 a
loathed	but	 necessary	encounter.	But	 she	 turned	her	 glance	 from	 him	 and
quickened	her	step,	so	that,	to	intercept	her,	he	would	have	to	run	after	her	on
his	short,	bandy	legs.	This	 he	would	not	 do,	but	stood	looking	 after	 her	for	 a
moment,	smoldering	anger	in	his	pale	amber	eyes.


“I	 don’t	 understand	it,”	 said	Gareth,	much	 later,	as	the	three	of	 them	jostled
their	way	 along	 the	narrow	 lanes	of	 the	crowded	Dockmarket	 quarter.	 “She
said	Father	was	angry,	yes—but	he	knew	whom	I’d	 be	bringing	with	 me.	And
he	must	have	known	 about	the	dragon’s	latest	attack.”	 He	hopped	across	the
fish-smelling	  slime	 of	  the	 gutter	 to	 avoid	 a	 trio	  of	  sailors	 who’d	  come
staggering	out	of	 one	of	 the	taverns	that	 lined	 the	cobbled	street	and	 nearly
tripped	over	his	own	cloak.
       When	 Badegamus	had	announced	 to	the	 nearly	empty	 gallery	 that	 the
King	 would	 see	no	one	else	that	 day,	John	and	Jenny	had	taken	 the	baffled
and	fuming	Gareth	back	with	 them	to	the	guest	house	they	had	been	assigned
in	one	of	 the	outer	courts	of	 the	Palace.	There	they	had	changed	out	of	 their
borrowed	court	 dress,	and	John	had	announced	his	intention	 of	spending	the
remainder	of	the	afternoon	in	the	town,	in	quest	of	gnomes.
       “Gnomes?”	 Gareth	said,	surprised.
       “Well,	  if	 it	hasn’t	 occurred	to	anyone	else,	it	 has	occurred	to	me	that,	if
I’m	 to	fight	 this	drake,	I’m	 going	 to	need	to	know	 the	layout	of	 the	caverns.”
With	surprising	 deftness,	he	disentangled	himself	from	the	intricate	 crisscross
folds	of	 his	mantlings,	 his	head	emerging	 from	 the	double-faced	satin	like	 a
tousled	and	unruly	weed.	“And	 since	it	 didn’t	 seem	the	thing	to	address	them
at	Court...”
       “But	  they’re	 plotting!”	  Gareth	protested.	He	 paused	in	his	 search	for	 a

116
place	to	dump	the	handful	 of	old-fashioned	 neck-chains	and	rings	among	the
already-accumulating	litter	  of	 books,	harpoons,	and	 the	contents	of	 Jenny’s
medical	pouch	 on	 the	table.	 “Speaking	 to	 them	at	 Court	 would	 have	 been
suicide!	And	 besides,	you’re	 not	going	 to	 fight	 him	 in	the	 Deep,	are	you?	I
mean...”	He	barely	stopped	himself	from	 the	observation	that	in	all	the	ballads
the	Dragonsbanes	had	slain	their	foes	in	front	of	their	lairs,	not	in	 them.
       “If	  I	fight	 him	outside	and	he	takes	to	the	air,	it’s	all	over,”	John	returned,
as	if	 he	were	talking	 about	 backgammon	strategy.	“And	  though	it’s	 crossed
my	 mind	 we’re	 walking	  through	 a	 morass	of	  plots	 here,	it’s	  to	 no	one’s
advantage	to	have	the	dragon	stay	in	the	Deep.	The	rest	of	it’s	all	 none	of	my
business.	Now,	are	you	going	to	guide	us,	or	do	we	go	about	the	streets	asking
folk	where	the	gnomes	might	be	found?”
       To	 Jenny’s	surprise	and	probably	 a	little	  to	his	own,	 Gareth	offered	 his
services	as	a	guide.
       “Tell	  me	about	Zyerne,	 Gar,”	Jenny	said	 now,	thrusting	 her	hands	deep
into	her	 jacket	pockets	 as	she	walked.	“Who	  is	she?	Who	 was	her	teacher?
What	Line	was	she	in?”
       “Teacher?”	  Gareth	 had	 obviously	  never	given	  the	 matter	 a	 thought.
“Line?”
       “If	   she	is	 a	 mage,	 she	 must	 have	been	 taught	 by	 someone.”	 Jenny
glanced	up	at	the	tall	boy	towering	 beside	her,	while	 they	detoured	to	avoid	a
gaggle	of	passersby	around	a	couple	of	 street-corner	jugglers.	 Beyond	them,
in	a	fountain	 square,	a	fat	man	with	 the	dark	complexion	 of	a	southerner	had
set	up	a	waffle	 stand,	bellowing	 his	wares	amid	clouds	 of	steam	that	scented
the	raw,	misty	air	for	yards.
       “There	 are	ten	or	twelve	 major	Lines,	 named	for	the	mages	that	founded
them.	There	 used	to	 be	 more,	but	 some	 have	decayed	and	 died.	 My	 own
master	Caerdinn,	and	therefore	I	and	any	other	pupils	of	 his,	or	of	 his	teacher
Spaeth,	or	Spaeth’s	other	students,	are	all	 in	 the	Line	 of	 Herne.	To	 a	mage,
knowing	that	I	 am	of	the	Line	 of	 Herne	says—oh,	a	hundred	things	about	my
power	and	my	 attitude	 toward	power,	 about	the	kinds	 of	 spells	that	I	 know,
and	about	the	kind	that	I	will	 not	use.”

117
       “Really?”	   Gareth	was	 fascinated.	“I	  didn’t	 know	 it	  was	anything	 like
that.	I	 thought	 that	 magic	 was	 just	 something—well,	 something	 you	 were
born	with.”
       “So	 is	 the	 talent	for	 art,”	 Jenny	 said.	“But	  without	 proper	 teaching,	it
never	comes	to	fullest	 fruition;	  without	 sufficient	 time	 given	to	 the	study	 of
magic,	sufficient	  striving...”	  She	broke	 off,	 with	 an	 ironic	 smile	 at	herself.
“All	 power	has	to	be	paid	for,”	 she	continued	after	a	moment.	“And	 all	power
must	come	from	somewhere,	have	been	passed	along	by	someone.”
       It	 was	difficult	 for	 her	to	speak	of	her	power;	aside	from	the	confusion	of
her	heart	about	her	own	 power,	there	was	 much	in	 it	that	 any	not	 mageborn
simply	did	 not	understand.	She	had	in	all	 her	life	 met	only	 one	who	did,	 and
he	was	presently	over	beside	the	waffle	 stand,	getting	powdered	sugar	on	his
plaids.
       Jenny	sighed	and	came	to	a	halt	to	wait	for	 him	at	the	edge	of	the	square.
The	cobbles	were	slimy	 here	with	 sea	air	and	offal;	 the	wind	 smelled	of	 fish
and,	as	everywhere	in	the	city	 of	Bel,	 of	the	intoxicating	  wildness	of	the	 sea.
This	square	was	typical	of	the	hundreds	that	made	up	the	interlocking	warrens
of	Bel’s	 Dockmarket,	 hemmed	in	 on	three-and-a-half	 sides	by	the	towering,
rickety	 tenements	and	 dominated	 by	 the	 moldering	 stones	 of	 a	slate-gray
clock	tower,	 at	whose	 foot	 a	neglected	shrine	housed	the	 battered	image	of
Quis,	the	 enigmatic	 Lord	  of	 Time.	 In	 the	 center	 of	 the	 square	bubbled	 a
fountain	 in	 a	wide	 basin	 of	 chip-edged	granite,	 the	stones	 of	 its	rim	  worn
smooth	and	white	 above	and	clotted	 beneath	with	the	 black-green	moss	that
seemed	to	grow	everywhere	in	the	damp	air	 of	the	city.	Women	were	 dipping
water	there	and	gossiping,	their	skirts	hiked	 up	almost	to	their	thighs	but	 their
heads	modestly	covered	in	clumsy	wool	 veils	tied	 in	knots	under	their	 hair	to
keep	them	out	of	the	way.
       In	  the	mazes	 of	 stucco	 and	garish	 color	  of	 the	 Dock-market,	 John’s
outlandishness	hadn’t	drawn	 much	notice.	The	 sloping,	 cobbled	streets	were
crowded	with	sojourners	from	 three-fourths	of	the	Realm	and	all	 the	Southern
Lands:	sailors	with	 shorn	heads	and	beards	like	coconut	husks;	peddlers	from
the	garden	province	of	Istmark	in	 their	old-fashioned,	bundly	 clothes,	the	men

118
as	well	 as	the	women	wearing	 veils;	 moneychangers	in	 the	black	 gabardine
and	skullcaps	that	marked	them	out	 as	the	Wanderer’s	Children,	forbidden	 to
own	land;	whores	painted	to	within	 an	inch	of	 their	lives;	and	actors,	jugglers,
scarf	sellers,	rat	killers,	 pickpockets,	cripples,	and	tramps.	A	 few	women	 cast
looks	of	dismissive	 scorn	at	Jenny’s	uncovered	head,	and	she	was	annoyed	at
the	anger	she	felt	at	them.
       She	 asked,	“How	  much	 do	 you	  know	 about	 Zyerne?	 What	 was	 she
apprenticed	as	in	the	Deep?”
       Gareth	 shrugged.	“I	  don’t	 know.	 My	 guess	would	 be	 in	 the	Places	of
Healing.	That	was	 where	the	greatest	power	of	the	Deep	 was	supposed	to	lie
—among	their	healers.	People	used	to	journey	for	days	to	be	tended	there,	and
I	know	most	of	 the	mages	were	connected	with	them.”
       Jenny	 nodded.	Even	 in	 the	isolated	 north,	 among	the	 children	 of	 men
who	knew	virtually	  nothing	of	 the	ways	of	 the	gnomes,	Caerdinn	had	spoken
with	awe	of	 the	power	 that	dwelled	within	  the	Places	of	Healing	 in	the	heart
of	the	Deep	of	Ylferdun.
       Across	 the	square,	a	religious	 procession	came	into	 view,	the	 priests	of
Kantirith,	  Lord	  of	  the	 Sea,	 walking	   with	  their	  heads	muffled	   in	 their
ceremonial	hoods,	lest	an	unclean	sight	distract	them,	the	ritual	wailing	 of	 the
flutes	all	but	drowning	 out	their	 murmured	chants.	Like	all	 the	ceremonials	of
the	Twelve	Gods,	both	the	words	and	the	music	of	 the	flutes	had	been	handed
down	by	rote	from	 ancient	days;	the	words	were	unintelligible,	 the	music	 like
nothing	Jenny	had	heard	at	Court	or	elsewhere.
       “And	  when	did	Zyerne	come	to	Bel?”	 she	asked	Gareth,	as	the	muttering
train	filed	past.
       The	 muscles	of	the	boy’s	jaw	tightened.	 “After	 my	mother	 died,”	he	said
colorlessly.	“I—I	  suppose	I	shouldn’t	 have	been	angry	at	 Father	about	it.	 At
the	time	 I	 didn’t	  understand	the	 way	 Zyerne	 can	draw	 people,	 sometimes
against	their	will.”	  He	 concentrated	his	attention	 upon	smoothing	 the	ruffles
of	his	sleeve	for	 some	moments,	then	sighed.	“I	suppose	he	needed	someone.
I	wasn’t	particularly	 good	to	him	 about	Mother’s	death.”
       Jenny	 said	nothing,	 giving	 him	 room	to	 speak	or	hold	 his	 peace.	From

119
the	other	end	of	the	square,	another	religious	procession	made	its	appearance,
one	of	the	southern	cults	 that	spawned	in	 the	Dockmarket	 like	rabbits;	 dark-
complexioned	men	and	women	 were	clapping	their	 hands	and	singing,	while
skinny,	androgynous	priests	swung	their	 waist-length	hair	 and	danced	for	the
little	 idol	borne	 in	their	 midst	in	 a	carrying	 shrine	of	cheap,	pink	 chintz.	The
priests	of	Kantirith	  seemed	to	huddle	a	little	 more	 closely	in	 their	protecting
hoods,	and	the	wailing	of	the	flutes	 increased.	Gareth	spared	the	newcomers	a
disapproving	glance,	 and	Jenny	remembered	 that	the	King	  of	 Bel	 was	also
Pontifex	Maximus	 of	the	official	 cult;	 Gareth	had	no	doubt	been	brought	up	in
the	most	careful	orthodoxy.
       But	 the	din	 gave	them	 the	illusion	 of	 privacy.	 For	all	 any	of	 the	crowd
around	them	cared,	they	might	have	been	alone;	and	after	a	time	Gareth	spoke
again.
       “It	  was	 a	 hunting	 accident,”	  he	 explained.	 “Father	 and	 I	 both	 hunt,
although	Father	hasn’t	done	so	lately.	Mother	hated	it,	but	she	loved	my	father
and	would	 go	 with	 him	 when	he	 asked	her	to.	 He	 teased	her	about	it,	 and
made	little	 jokes	about	her	cowardice—but	 he	wasn’t	 really	joking.	 He	 can’t
stand	cowards.	  She’d	 follow	   him	 over	  terrible	  country,	 clinging	  to	  her
sidesaddle	and	staying	up	with	 the	 hunt;	after	 it	was	 over,	he’d	 hug	her	and
laugh	and	ask	her	if	it	wasn’t	worth	 it	that	she’d	plucked	 up	her	courage—that
sort	of	thing.	She	did	 it	for	 as	long	as	I	can	remember.	She	used	to	lie	and	tell
him	 she	was	 starting	 to	 learn	 to	 enjoy	  it;	 but	 when	 I	  was	about	 four,	  I
remember	her	in	her	hunting	habit—it	 was	peach-colored	velvet	with	gray	fur,
I	 remember—just	  before	  going	  out,	  throwing	  up	  because	she	 was	  so
frightened.”
       “She	 sounds	like	a	brave	lady,”	Jenny	said	quietly.
       Gareth’s	glance	flicked	 up	to	 her	face,	then	away	again.	“It	 wasn’t	really
Father’s	fault,”	 he	went	 on	after	a	moment.	 “But	 when	it	 finally	  did	happen,
he	felt	 that	 it	 was.	The	 horse	came	down	 with	  her	over	 some	rocks—in	 a
sidesaddle	you	can’t	fall	 clear.	She	died	four	or	 five	days	later.	That	 was	five
years	ago.	I—”	 He	hesitated,	the	words	 sticking	 in	his	 throat.	“I	 wasn’t	 very
good	to	him	about	it.”

120
       He	 adjusted	his	specs	in	an	awkward	and	unconvincing	cover	for	 wiping
his	eyes	on	his	sleeve	ruffle.	“Now	 that	I	look	back	on	it,	 I	think,	 if	she’d	been
braver,	she’d	probably	have	had	the	courage	to	tell	 him	she	didn’t	 want	to	 go
—the	courage	to	 risk	 his	 mockery.	Maybe	 that’s	 where	I	 get	it,”	  he	added,
with	 the	 shy	 flash	 of	 a	 grin.	 “Maybe	  I	 should	 have	 seen	that	 I	 couldn’t
possibly	blame	him	as	much	as	he	blamed	himself—that	I	 didn’t	 say	anything
to	him	 that	he	 hadn’t	already	 thought.”	 He	 shrugged	his	bony	 shoulders.	“I
understand	now.	But	 when	 I	 was	 thirteen,	I	  didn’t.	 And	 by	 the	 time	 I	 did
understand,	it	had	 been	too	long	 to	 say	anything	 to	him.	 And	 by	 that	time,
there	was	Zyerne.”
       The	 priests	of	Kantirith	  wound	their	 way	out	 of	sight	 up	a	crooked	lane
between	the	drunken	 lean	of	 crazy	 buildings.	 Children	 who	 had	stopped	to
gawk	after	the	 procession	took	up	 their	games	once	more;	John	resumed	his
cautious	way	across	the	moss-edged,	herringbone	pattern	 of	the	wet	 cobbles
toward	them,	stopping	every	few	 paces	to	stare	at	some	new	marvel—a	chair-
mender	pursuing	 his	 trade	 on	the	 curbstone,	 or	 the	actors	 within	  a	cheap
theater	gesticulating	wildly	 while	 a	crier	 outside	shouted	tidbits	of	 the	plot	to
the	passersby	around	the	door.	He	 would	 never,	Jenny	reflected	 with	 rueful
amusement,	learn	to	comport	himself	like	the	hero	of	legend	that	he	was.
       “It	 must	have	been	hard	for	you,”	 she	said.
       Gareth	sighed.	“It	 was	easier	a	few	years	ago,”	he	admitted.	“I	could	hate
her	cleanly	 then.	Later,	for	 a	while	  I—I	 couldn’t	 even	do	 that.”	 He	blushed
again.	“And	now...”
       A	 commotion	 in	the	square	flared	suddenly,	like	 the	noise	of	 a	dogfight;
a	woman’s	jeering	voice	yelled,	“Whore!”	  and	Jenny’s	head	snapped	around.
       But	 it	was	not	she	and	her	lack	of	veils	that	was	the	target.	A	little	 gnome
woman,	her	soft	 mane	of	hair	 like	 an	apricot	cloud	 in	 the	wan	sunlight,	 was
making	her	 hesitant	way	 toward	 the	 fountain.	 Her	 black	silk	  trousers	were
hitched	up	 over	 her	 knees	to	 keep	them	 out	 of	 the	puddles	 in	 the	 broken
pavement,	and	her	 white	 tunic,	with	  its	flowing	  embroideries	 and	carefully
mended	sleeves,	 proclaimed	 that	 she	 was	 living	  in	  poverty	 alien	  to	 her
upbringing.	She	paused,	peering	around	her	 with	 a	painful	 squint	in	 the	too-

121
bright	 daylight;	 then	her	 steps	resumed	in	the	 direction	 of	 the	fountain,	 her
tiny,	 round	hands	clutching	  nervously	 at	the	 handle	of	 the	 bucket	 that	she
inexpertly	bore.
       Somebody	 else	shouted,	“Come	 slumming,	 have	 we,	m’lady?	 Tired	 of
sitting	up	there	on	all	that	grain	you	got	 hid?	Too	cheap	to	hire	servants?”
       The	 woman	 stopped	again,	 swinging	 her	 head	from	 side	 to	side	 as	if
seeking	her	tormentors,	half-blind	  in	the	 outdoor	glare.	 Someone	caught	her
with	a	dog	turd	 on	the	arm.	She	hopped,	startled,	and	her	narrow	feet	 in	their
soft	leather	shoes	skidded	on	the	wet,	uneven	stones.	She	dropped	the	bucket
as	she	fell,	and	groped	about	for	it	on	hands	and	knees.	One	of	the	women	by
the	fountain,	with	 the	grinning	 approbation	of	 her	neighbors,	sprang	down	 to
kick	it	 beyond	her	reach.
       “That’ll	  learn	 you	to	hoard	the	bread	you’ve	 bought	out	of	 honest	folks’
mouths!”
       The	gnome	made	a	hasty	scrabble	around	her.	A	faded,	fat	woman	who’d
been	holding	 forth	 the	loudest	in	 the	 gossip	around	the	 fountain	 kicked	 the
pail	a	little	 further	from	the	searching	hands.
       “And	 to	 plot	against	the	King!”
       The	 gnome	woman	 raised	herself	 to	 her	knees,	peering	about	 her,	and
one	of	the	 children	darted	 out	of	 the	gathering	crowd	 behind	her	 and	pulled
the	long	wisps	of	 her	hair.	She	spun	around,	clutching,	but	 the	boy	had	gone.
Another	 took	  up	 the	 game	 and	 sprang	nimbly	  out	  to	 do	 the	 same,	 too
engrossed	in	the	prospect	of	fun	to	notice	John.
       At	 the	first	 sign	of	 trouble,	 the	Dragonsbane	had	turned	to	the	man	next
to	him,	a	blue-tattooed	easterner	in	a	metalsmith’s	leather	apron	and	not	much
else,	and	handed	him	the	three	waffles	 he	held	stacked	in	 his	hands.	“Would
you	ever	hold	 these?”	Then	he	made	his	 way	unhurriedly	  through	the	press,
with	a	courteous	string	of	“Excuse	 me...	pardon...”	in	time	 to	catch	the	second
boy	who’d	jumped	 out	to	take	up	the	baiting	where	the	first	had	begun	it.
       Gareth	could	 have	told	them	what	 to	expect—Zyerne’s	courtiers	 weren’t
the	only	 ones	deceived	 by	John’s	 appearance	of	harmless	friendliness.	 The
bully,	 caught	 completely	 offguard	  from	 behind,	 didn’t	  even	 have	time	  to

122
shriek	before	he	 hit	 the	waters	of	 the	fountain.	 A	 huge	splash	doused	every
woman	on	the	steps	and	most	of	the	surrounding	 idlers.	As	 the	boy	surfaced,
spitting	and	gasping,	Aversin	 turned	from	picking	 up	the	bucket	 and	said	in	a
friendly	 tone,	“Your	manners	are	as	filthy	as	your	clothes—I’m	 surprised	your
mother	lets	you	out	like	that.	They’ll	  be	a	bit	cleaner	now,	won’t	they?”
       He	 dipped	the	bucket	 full	 and	turned	back	to	 the	man	who	 was	holding
his	waffles.	For	an	instant	Jenny	thought	the	smith	 would	throw	 them	into	the
fountain,	but	 John	only	smiled	 at	him,	 bright	as	the	sun	on	a	knifeblade,	 and
sullenly	the	man	put	the	waffles	 into	his	free	 hand.	In	the	back	of	the	crowd	 a
woman	sneered,	“Gnome	lover!”
       “Thanks.”	  John	smiled,	still	 at	his	brass-faced	friendliest.	 “Sorry	 I	threw
offal	in	 the	fountain	and	all.”	 Balancing	the	waffles	 in	his	hand,	he	descended
the	few	 steps	and	walked	 beside	the	 little	 gnome	woman	 across	the	square
toward	the	 mouth	 of	the	 alley	 whence	she	had	 come.	Jenny,	hurrying	 after
him	with	 Gareth	at	her	heels,	noticed	that	none	followed	them	too	closely.
       “John,	 you	are	incorrigible,”	  she	said	severely.	“Are	you	 all	right?”	 This
last	was	 addressed	to	 the	gnome,	 who	 was	 hastening	along	 on	 her	 short,
bowed	legs,	clinging	to	the	Dragonsbane’s	shadow	for	protection.
       She	peered	up	at	Jenny	with	feeble,	colorless	eyes.	“Oh,	 yes.	My	thanks.
I	had	never—always	we	went	out	 to	the	fountain	at	night,	 or	sent	the	girl	who
worked	for	 us,	if	 we	 needed	water	during	 the	day.	Only	 she	left.”	 The	 wide
mouth	pinched	up	on	the	words,	at	the	taste	of	some	unpleasant	memory.
       “I	 bet	she	did,	if	 she	was	like	that	lot,”	 John	remarked,	jerking	 his	thumb
back	toward	the	square.	Behind	 them,	the	crowd	 trailed	 menacingly,	yelling,
“Traitors!	 Hoarders!	Ingrates!”	 and	fouler	 things	 besides.	Somebody	threw	a
fish	head	that	 flicked	 off	 Jenny’s	skirts	 and	shouted	something	about	an	old
whore	and	her	two	 pretty-boys;	 Jenny	felt	 the	bristles	 of	rage	rise	 along	her
spine.	Others	took	up	this	theme.	She	felt	 angry	enough	to	curse	them,	but	in
her	heart	she	knew	that	she	could	 lay	no	 greater	curse	upon	them	than	to	 be
what	they	already	were.
       “Have	 a	waffle?”	 John	offered	disarmingly,	 and	the	gnome	lady	took	 the
proffered	confection	with	 hands	that	shook.

123
       Gareth,	carmine	with	 embarrassment,	said	nothing.
       Around	  a	 mouthful	 of	  sugar,	John	 said,	 “Gie	 lucky	  for	 us	 fruit	  and
veggies	are	a	bit	too	dear	these	days	to	fling,	isn’t	it?	Here?”
       The	 gnome	 ducked	her	 head	quickly	 as	 she	entered	the	shadows	 of	 a
doorway	 to	  a	 huge,	  crumbling	  house	 wedged	 between	 two	  five-storey
tenements,	its	 rear	 wall	 dropping	 straight	  to	 the	dank	 brown	  waters	of	 a
stagnant	canal.	The	windows	were	tightly	 shuttered,	and	the	crumbling	stucco
was	written	 over	 with	 illiterate	 and	 filthy	 scrawls,	 splattered	with	 mud	 and
dung.	From	every	 shutter	Jenny	could	 sense	small,	weak	eyes	peering	down
in	apprehension.
       The	 door	 was	 opened	from	 within,	  the	 gnome	taking	 her	 bucket	 and
popping	through	like	 a	frightened	mole	 into	its	 hill.	 John	put	a	quick	hand	on
the	rotting	panels	to	 keep	them	from	 being	shut	in	his	 face,	then	braced	with
all	 his	 strength.	 The	 doorkeeper	 was	 determined	 and	had	 the	 prodigious
muscles	of	the	gnomes.
       “Wait!”	  John	pleaded,	as	his	feet	skidded	 on	the	wet	marble	 of	the	step.
“Listen!	 I	  need	your	 help!	 My	 name’s	 John	Aversin—I’ve	   come	from	 the
north	to	see	about	this	dragon	of	yours,	but	I	can’t	 do	it	without	 your	 aid.”	He
wedged	his	shoulder	into	the	narrow	slit	that	was	all	that	was	left.	 “Please.”
       The	 pressure	on	the	other	side	of	the	door	was	released	so	suddenly	that
he	staggered	inward	under	his	own	 momentum.	From	 the	darkness	beyond	a
soft,	high	voice	like	 a	child’s	 said	in	the	archaic	High	Speech	that	the	gnomes
used	at	Court,	“Come	 in,	thou	others.	It	 does	thee	no	good	to	be	thus	seen	at
the	door	of	the	house	of	the	gnomes.”
       As	 they	stepped	inside,	John	and	Gareth	blinked	against	the	dimness,	but
Jenny,	with	her	wizard’s	 sight,	saw	at	once	that	the	gnome	who	 had	admitted
them	was	old	Dromar,	ambassador	to	the	court	of	the	King.
       Beyond	 him,	 the	lower	 hall	 of	 the	house	stretched	in	 dense	shadow.	It
had	once	 been	grand	in	  the	severe	style	 of	 a	 hundred	years	 ago—the	 old
manor,	 she	guessed,	 upon	 whose	 walled	  grounds	 the	 crowded,	  stinking
tenements	of	 the	 neighborhood	 had	 later	 been	 erected.	 In	 places,	 rotting
frescoes	were	still	dimly	  visible	on	 the	stained	walls;	 and	the	vastness	of	the

124
hall	spoke	of	gracious	 furniture	now	 long	since	chopped	up	for	 firewood	 and
of	an	aristocratic	 carelessness	about	the	cost	of	 heating	fuel.	 The	 place	was
like	a	 cave	now,	tenebrous	and	damp,	its	 boarded	windows	 letting	 in	only	 a
few	chinks	of	watery	 light	to	outline	 stumpy	pillars	 and	the	dry	mosaics	of	the
impluvium.	 Above	 the	 sweeping	curve	 of	 the	old-fashioned,	 open	 stair	she
saw	movement	in	 the	gallery.	It	 was	crowded	 with	 gnomes,	watching	warily
these	intruders	from	the	hostile	world	of	 men.
       In	 the	gloom,	 the	soft,	 childlike	 voice	 said,	“Thy	 name	is	 not	unknown
among	us,	John	Aversin.”
       “Well,	  that	 makes	it	 easier,”	John	 admitted,	 dusting	off	  his	hands	and
looking	down	 at	the	round	head	of	the	gnome	who	 stood	before	him	 and	into
sharp,	pale	eyes	under	the	flowing	mane	of	snowy	hair.	“Be	a	bit	 awkward	if	 I
had	to	explain	it	all,	though	I	 imagine	Gar	here	could	sing	you	the	ballads.”
       A	 slight	 smile	tugged	at	the	gnome’s	 mouth—the	first,	 Jenny	suspected,
in	a	long	time—as	he	studied	the	incongruous,	bespectacled	reality	behind	the
glitter	of	 the	legends.	“Thou	art	the	first,”	 he	remarked,	ushering	them	into	the
huge,	chilly	  cavern	 of	 the	 room,	 his	 mended	silk	 robes	 whispering	 as	 he
moved.	“How	 many	hast	thy	father	sent	out,	Prince	Gareth?	Fifteen?	Twenty?
And	none	of	 them	came	here,	nor	asked	any	of	 the	gnomes	what	 they	might
know	of	the	dragon’s	coming—we,	 who	saw	it	best.”
       Gareth	looked	 disconcerted.	“Er—that	is—the	 wrath	of	the	King...”
       “And	  whose	fault	was	that,	Heir	 of	Uriens,	 when	rumor	had	been	noised
abroad	that	we	had	made	an	end	of	thee?”
       There	 was	an	uncomfortable	silence	as	Gareth	reddened	under	that	cool,
haughty	gaze.	Then	he	bent	his	head	and	said	in	 a	stifled	 voice,	“I	  am	sorry,
Dromar.	I	 never	thought	 of—of	 what	 might	 be	said,	or	 who	 would	 take	the
blame	for	it,	 if	 I	 disappeared.	Truly	I	 didn’t	 know.	I	 behaved	rashly—I	 seem
to	have	behaved	rashly	all	the	way	around.”
       The	 old	  gnome	sniffed.	  “So.”	  He	 folded	 his	 small	 hands	 before	 the
complicated	knot	 of	 his	sash,	his	gold	 eyes	studying	 Gareth	in	 silence	for	 a
time.	Then	 he	nodded,	and	 said,	“Well,	 better	 it	 is	that	 thou	fall	  over	thine
own	feet	in	 the	doing	 of	 good	than	sit	 upon	thy	 hands	and	let	it	 go	 undone,

125
Gareth	of	Magloshaldon.	Another	 time	thou	 shalt	do	better.”	He	turned	 away,
gesturing	toward	 the	inner	 end	 of	 the	shadowed	room,	 where	 a	blackwood
table	 could	 be	  distinguished	 in	  the	 gloom,	  no	 more	  than	 a	 foot	  high,
surrounded	by	burst	and	patched	cushions	set	on	the	floor	in	the	fashion	of	the
gnomes.	“Come.	Sit.	 What	is	 it	that	thou	 wish	to	 know,	Dragonsbane,	of	 the
coming	of	the	dragon	to	the	Deep?”
       “The	 size	 of	the	 thing,”	 John	said	promptly,	 as	they	 all	 settled	on	their
knees	around	the	table.	“I’ve	 only	heard	rumor	and	story—has	 anybody	got	a
good,	concrete	measurement?”
       From	 beside	Jenny,	the	high,	soft	voice	of	the	gnome	woman	piped,	“The
top	of	his	 haunch	lies	level	 with	 the	frieze	carved	 above	the	pillars	 on	either
side	of	the	 doorway	 arch,	which	 leads	from	 the	Market	 Hall	 into	 the	Grand
Passage	into	the	 Deep	itself.	  That	is	 twelve	  feet,	by	 the	 measurements	of
men.”
       There	 was	a	 moment’s	 silence,	as	Jenny	 digested	the	meaning	 of	 that
piece	of	 information.	  Then	she	said,	 “If	  the	proportions	 are	 the	same,	that
makes	it	nearly	forty	feet.”
       “Aye,”	  Dromar	 said.	 “The	 Market	 Hall—the	  first	 cavern	 of	the	 Deep,
that	lies	 just	behind	 the	Great	 Gates	that	lead	 into	 the	outer	 world—is	 one
hundred	and	fifty	 feet	from	the	Gates	to	the	inner	 doors	of	the	Grand	Passage
at	the	rear.	The	dragon	was	nearly	a	third	of	that	length.”
       John	folded	 his	hands	on	the	table	before	him.	Though	his	face	remained
expressionless,	Jenny	detected	the	slight	quickening	 of	his	 breath.	Forty	 feet
was	half	again	the	size	of	 the	dragon	that	had	come	so	close	to	killing	 him	 in
Wyr,	with	all	 the	dark	windings	of	 the	Deep	in	which	to	hide.
       “D’you	  have	a	map	of	the	Deep?”
       The	old	 gnome	looked	affronted,	as	if	 he	had	inquired	about	the	cost	of	a
night	with	  his	daughter.	Then	 his	face	darkened	with	  stubborn	anger.	“That
knowledge	is	forbidden	to	the	children	 of	men.”
       Patiently,	 John	said,	“After	  all	that’s	 been	done	you	here,	I	 don’t	 blame
you	for	not	 wanting	to	 give	out	the	secrets	of	the	Deep;	but	 I	need	to	know.	I
can’t	take	the	thing	 from	the	front.	 I	can’t	 fight	 something	that	big	 head-on.	I

126
need	to	have	some	idea	where	it	will	be	lairing.”
       “It	  will	 be	 lairing	 in	the	 Temple	of	 Sarmendes,	on	the	first	 level	 of	the
Deep.”	 Dromar	 spoke	 grudgingly,	  his	 pale	 eyes	narrow	 with	  the	 age-old
suspicion	 of	  a	 smaller,	 weaker	  race	 that	 had	 been	 driven	  underground
millennia	 ago	by	its	long-legged	 and	bloodthirsty	 cousins.	“It	 lies	just	off	 the
Grand	Passage	that	runs	back	from	the	Gates.	The	Lord	of	Light	 was	beloved
by	the	 men	who	 dwelt	 within	 the	 Deep—the	King’s	  ambassadors	and	their
households,	and	 those	who	  had	been	 apprenticed	among	 our	 people.	 His
Temple	is	close	to	the	surface,	for	the	folk	 of	men	do	not	 like	to	 penetrate	too
far	into	 the	bones	of	the	 Earth.	The	weight	 of	 the	stone	unnerves	them;	they
find	 the	darkness	disquieting.	The	 dragon	will	  lie	 there.	There	he	will	  bring
his	gold.”
       “Is	 there	a	back	way	 into	it?”	 John	asked.	“Through	 the	priests’	quarters
or	the	treasuries?”
       Dromar	  said,	“No,”	  but	 the	 little	  gnome	woman	 said,	 “Yes,	 but	 thou
would	never	find	 it,	Dragonsbane.”
       “By	  the	Stone!”	The	old	 gnome	whirled	upon	her,	smoldering	rage	in	 his
eyes.	“Be	 silent,	 Mab!	 The	 secrets	of	 the	 Deep	 are	not	 for	 his	 kind!”	  He
looked	viciously	 at	Jenny	and	added,	“Nor	for	hers.”
       John	held	up	his	hand	for	silence.	“Why	 wouldn’t	  I	find	it?”
       Mab	  shook	her	 head.	From	 beneath	a	 heavy	brow,	 her	 round,	 almost
colorless	blue	eyes	peered	up	at	him,	 kindly	 and	a	little	 sad.	“The	 ways	lead
through	the	warrens,”	 she	said	simply.	 “The	 caverns	and	tunnels	 there	are	a
maze	that	 we	 who	 dwell	  there	 can	learn,	 in	  twelve	 or	 fourteen	 years	 of
childhood.	 But	 even	were	 we	to	 tell	 thee	the	 turnings	 thou	 must	take,	 one
false	step	would	 condemn	thee	to	 a	death	by	 starvation	 and	to	the	 madness
that	falls	upon	 men	in	the	darkness	under	the	earth.	We	filled	 the	mazes	with
lamps,	but	those	lamps	are	quenched	now.”
       “Can	  you	 draw	 me	 a	map,	 then?”	 And,	  when	 the	two	  gnomes	only
looked	at	him	with	 stubborn	secrets	in	their	eyes,	he	said,	“Dammit,	I	can’t	 do
it	without	 your	 help!	 I’m	 sorry	it	 has	to	be	this	 way,	but	it’s	 trust	me	 or	lose
the	Deep	forever;	and	those	are	your	only	choices!”

127
       Dromar’s	  long,	 outward-curling	 eyebrows	 sank	lower	 over	 the	stub	 of
his	nose.	“So	be	it,	then,”	he	said.
       But	 Miss	 Mab	 turned	 resignedly	 and	began	to	 rise.	 The	ambassador’s
eyes	blazed.	“No!	By	 the	Stone,	is	it	not	enough	that	the	children	of	 men	seek
to	steal	the	secrets	of	the	Deep?	Must	thou	give	them	up	freely?”
       “Tut,”	  Mab	 said	 with	 a	 wrinkled	 smile.	 “This	  Dragonsbane	will	  have
problems	enow	 from	 the	dragon,	without	  going	 seeking	in	 the	darkness	for
others.”
       “A	  map	that	 is	drawn	 may	be	 stolen!”	 Dromar	 insisted.	“By	  the	Stone
that	lies	in	the	heart	of	the	Deep...”
       Mab	  got	  comfortably	  to	  her	 feet,	  shaking	 out	  her	 patched	  silken
garments,	and	pottered	over	to	the	scroll-rack	that	filled	 one	corner	of	the	dim
hall.	She	returned	with	a	reed	pen	and	several	sheets	of	tattered	papyrus	paper
in	her	hand.	“Those	 whom	you	 fear	would	 steal	it	know	 the	way	 to	the	heart
of	 the	Deep	 already,”	she	 pointed	 out	gently.	 “If	  this	 barbarian	knight	  has
ridden	all	  the	way	 from	 the	 Winterlands	 to	 be	our	 champion,	 it	 would	 be
paltry	not	to	offer	 him	a	shield.”
       “And	  her?”	Dromar	jabbed	one	stumpy	 finger,	laden	with	 old-fashioned,
smooth-polished	gems,	at	 Jenny.	“She	is	 a	witch.	 What	 surety	have	we	 that
she	will	 not	 go	snooping	 and	spying,	 delving	 out	 our	secrets,	turning	 them
against	us,	defiling	them,	poisoning	them,	as	others	have	done?”
       The	 gnome	 woman	 frowned	 down	 at	 Jenny	 for	 a	 moment,	 her	wide
mouth	pursed	up	 with	 thought.	Then	 she	knelt	 beside	her	again	and	pushed
the	writing	 things	 across	the	table	at	Dromar.	 “There,”	 she	said.	“Thou	 may
draw	the	maps,	and	put	upon	them	what	thou	will,	  and	leave	from	them	what
thou	will.”
       “And	  the	witch?”	There	was	suspicion	and	hatred	in	his	voice,	and	Jenny
reflected	that	she	was	getting	very	tired	of	being	mistaken	for	Zyerne.
       “Ah,”	   said	Miss	 Mab,	and	 reaching	out,	 took	Jenny’s	 small,	scratched,
boyish	brown	hands	in	her	own.	 For	a	long	moment	 she	looked	into	her	eyes.
As	if	  the	small,	 cold	 fingers	 clasping	 hers	stirred	 at	the	 jewel	 heap	of	 her
dreams,	Jenny	felt	the	gnome	woman’s	 mind	 probing	at	 her	thoughts,	as	she

128
had	probed	at	Gareth’s,	seeking	to	see	the	shape	of	her	essence.	She	realized
that	Miss	Mab	was	a	mage,	like	herself.
       Reflex	 made	her	stiffen.	 But	 Mab	smiled	 gently	 and	held	out	 to	her	the
depths	of	her	own	mind	 and	soul—gentle	and	clear	as	water,	and	stubborn	as
water,	too,	 containing	 none	 of	 the	bitterness,	 resentments,	and	doubts	 that
Jenny	knew	 clotted	 the	 corners	of	  her	own	 heart.	 She	relaxed,	 feeling	  as
ashamed	as	if	she	had	struck	out	at	an	inquiry	 kindly	 made,	and	felt	 some	of
her	 own	 angers	 dissolving	  under	 that	  wise	 scrutiny.	  She	felt	  the	  other
woman’s	power,	much	greater	than	her	own,	but	gentle	and	warm	as	sunlight.
       When	 Miss	Mab	spoke,	it	 was	not	to	Dromar,	but	to	her.	“Thou	 art	afraid
for	 him,”	 she	 said	softly.	 “And	  perhaps	thou	 should	 be.”	 She	put	 out	 one
round	little	 hand,	to	pat	Jenny’s	hair.	“But	remember	that	the	dragon	is	not	the
greatest	of	evils	in	this	 land,	nor	is	death	the	worst	that	 can	befall;	neither	for
him,	nor	for	thee.”

129
                                 CHAPTER	                    VII


IN	THE	WEEK	that	followed,	Jenny	returned	many	times	to	the	crumbling	house
in	the	Dockmarket.	Twice	John	accompanied	her,	but	John,	for	the	most	part,
spent	his	days	in	the	King’s	Gallery	with	Gareth,	waiting	for	a	sign	from	the
King.	His	evenings	he	spent	with	the	wild	young	courtiers	who	surrounded
Zyerne,	playing	dancing	bear,	as	he	called	it,	and	dealing	as	best	he	could
with	the	slow	torture	of	waiting	for	 a	combat	that	could	cost	his	life.	Being
John,	he	did	not	speak	of	it,	but	Jenny	felt	it	when	they	made	love	and	in	his
silences	when	they	were	alone	together,	this	gradual	twisting	of	the	nerves
that	was	driving	him	nearly	mad.
       She	herself	avoided	the	Court	for	the	most	part	and	spent	her	days	in	the
city	or	in	the	house	of	the	gnomes.	She	went	there	quietly,	wrapped	in	spells
to	conceal	her	from	the	folk	 in	the	streets,	for,	as	the	days	ground	by,	she
could	feel	the	ugly	miasma	of	hate	and	fear	spreading	through	the	streets	like
poisoned	fog.	On	her	way	through	the	Dockmarket	quarter,	she	would	pass
the	big	taverns—the	Lame	Ox,	the	Gallant	Rat,	the	Sheep	in	the	Mire—where
the	unemployed	men	and	women	who	had	come	in	 off	 the	ruined	 farms
gathered	daily,	hoping	for	a	few	hours’	hire.	Those	in	need	of	cheap	labor
knew	to	go	 there	to	 find	people	who	 would	move	furniture	 or	 clean	out
stables	for	a	few	coppers;	but	with	the	winter	 storms	making	the	shipping
scarce	and	the	high	price	of	bread	taking	all	the	spare	funds	to	be	had,	there
were	few	enough	who	could	afford	to	pay	even	that.	None	of	the	gnomes	still
living	in	the	city—and	there	were	many	of	them,	in	spite	of	the	hardships—
dared	go	by	the	Sheep	in	the	Mire	 after	noontime,	for	by	 that	hour	those
within	 would	  have	 given	 up	 hope	 of	  work	 that	 day	  and	 would	 be
concentrating	what	little	energy	they	had	on	getting	drunk.
       So	Jenny	moved	in	her	shadowy	secrets,	as	she	had	moved	through	the
lawless	Winterlands,	to	visit	the	Lady	Taseldwyn,	who	was	called	Miss	Mab
in	the	language	of	men.

130
       From	 the	first,	 she	had	been	aware	 that	the	gnome	woman	 was	a	more
powerful	 mage	than	 she.	But,	 rather	than	 jealousy	and	 resentment,	she	felt
only	gladness	that	she	had	found	someone	to	teach	her	after	all	those	years.
       In	  most	 things,	 Mab	 was	 a	willing	   teacher,	though	 the	 shape	of	 the
gnomes’	wizardry	was	strange	to	Jenny,	alien,	as	their	minds	were	alien.	They
had	no	Lines,	but	seemed	to	transmit	their	 power	and	knowledge	whole	 from
generation	 to	 generation	 of	  mages	 in	 some	 fashion	  that	 Jenny	 did	  not
understand.	Mab	 told	  her	 of	 the	 healing	 spells	 for	  which	 the	 Deep	 was
famous,	of	 the	 drugs	now	 sequestered	there,	lost	 to	 them	 as	surely	 as	the
dragon’s	gold	was	 lost,	of	 the	spells	that	 could	hold	 the	soul,	the	 essence	of
life,	to	 the	flesh,	or	of	 the	more	dangerous	spells	by	which	the	life-essence	of
one	person	could	be	 drawn	to	 strengthen	the	crumbling	 life	 of	 another.	The
gnome	woman	 taught	her	other	 spells	of	 the	 magic	underground—spells	 of
crystal	and	 stone	and	spiraling	  darkness,	whose	meaning	Jenny	 could	 only
dimly	 comprehend.	These	she	could	only	memorize	by	 rote,	hoping	that	with
later	meditation,	skill	  and	understanding	would	come.	Mab	 spoke	also	to	her
of	the	secrets	of	 the	earth,	the	movement	 of	 water,	and	how	 stones	thought;
and	she	spoke	of	the	dark	realms	of	the	Deep	itself,	 cavern	beneath	cavern	in
endless	succession	of	hidden	glories	that	had	never	seen	light.
       Once,	she	spoke	of	Zyerne.
       “Aye,	 she	was	apprenticed	among	us	Healers.”	She	sighed,	putting	aside
the	three-stringed	dulcimer	 upon	 which	she	had	 been	outlining	 to	Jenny	 the
song-spells	of	their	craft.	“She	 was	a	vain	little	girl,	 vain	 and	spoiled.	She	had
her	talent	for	 mockery	 even	then—she	would	 listen	 to	the	 Old	 Ones	among
us,	the	great	Healers,	who	had	more	 power	at	their	 command	than	she	could
ever	dream	of,	 nodding	that	 sleek	little	 head	of	 hers	in	 respect,	and	then	go
and	imitate	their	voices	to	her	friends	in	Deeping.”
       Jenny	remembered	the	silvery	chime	 of	the	sorceress’s	laughter	at	dinner
and	the	way	 she	had	 hurried	her	 steps	to	 make	Dromar	 run	 after	her	 if	 he
would	speak.
       It	 was	early	evening.	For	 all	its	cold,	 the	great	hall	of	 the	gnomes’	house
was	stuffy,	 the	air	 stagnant	beneath	its	 massive	arches	and	along	 the	faded

131
pavement	of	 its	checkered	corridors.	 The	 noises	of	 the	streets	had	fallen	 to
their	dinnertime	lull,	 save	for	the	chiming	 of	the	clock	 towers	all	over	 the	city
and	one	lone	kindling-peddler	crying	 his	wares.
       Mab	 shook	 her	 head,	her	voice	 low	  with	 remembrance	of	 times	 past.
“She	was	greedy	 for	secrets,	as	some	girls	 are	greedy	for	 sweets—covetous
for	the	power	they	could	give	 her.	She	studied	out	the	hidden	ways	around	the
Places	of	Healing	so	that	she	could	sneak	and	spy,	hiding	to	listen	in	darkness.
All	 power	must	be	paid	for,	 but	she	took	the	secrets	of	those	greater	than	she
and	defiled	them,	tainted	them—poisoned	them	as	she	poisoned	the	very	heart
of	the	Deep—yes,	she	did	poison	it!—and	turned	all	 our	strength	against	us.”
       Jenny	 shook	her	 head,	puzzled.	“Dromar	  said	something	 of	 the	kind,”
she	said.	“But	how	can	you	 taint	spells?	You	can	spoil	your	 own	magic,	for	 it
colors	 your	 soul	 as	you	 wield	  it,	 but	 you	 cannot	 spoil	 another’s.	 I	 don’t
understand.”
       Mab	  glanced	  sharply	 at	  her,	 as	 if	  remembering	 her	  presence	and
remembering	also	that	she	was	not	one	of	the	folk	of	the	gnomes.	“Nor	should
thou,”	 she	said	 in	 her	soft,	 high	 voice.	 “These	 are	things	 that	 concern	the
magic	of	gnomes	only.	They	are	not	human	things.”
       “Zyerne	  seems	to	 have	made	 them	 human	things.”	  Jenny	moved	 her
weight	 on	 her	heels,	 easing	her	 knees	on	 the	 hardness	of	 the	 stone	floor
through	the	shabby	cushion.	“If	  it	is,	 indeed,	from	 the	Places	of	Healing	 that
she	learned	the	arts	that	have	made	her	the	most	powerful	mage	in	the	land.”
       “Pah!”	  the	gnome	mage	said	in	 disgust.	“The	 Healers	of	the	Deep	were
more	powerful	than	she—by	the	Stone,	I	was	more	powerful!”
       “Was?”	 Jenny	 said,	perplexed.	“I	 know	 that	 most	of	 the	Healers	in	 the
Deep	were	 killed	  with	  the	coming	  of	 the	 dragon;	 I	 had	thought	  none	of
sufficient	 strength	 survived	 to	 defy	 her.	The	 magic	 of	 gnomes	is	 different
from	the	spells	of	 men,	but	power	is	power.	How	 could	Zyerne	 have	lessened
yours?”
       Mab	 only	 shook	 her	head	furiously,	  so	that	her	 pale,	web-colored	 hair
whipped	back	and	forth,	and	said,	“These	are	the	things	of	the	gnomes.”
       In	 those	days	Jenny	did	not	see	much	of	Zyerne,	but	the	enchantress	was

132
often	on	her	mind.	Zyerne’s	influence	 pervaded	the	court	like	the	faint	 waft	of
her	cinnamon	 perfume;	 when	 Jenny	 was	 in	 the	 Palace	confines,	 she	was
always	 conscious	 of	 her.	 However	  Zyerne	 had	 acquired	  her	 power	 and
whatever	she	had	done	with	 it	since,	 Jenny	never	forgot	that	 it	was	 so	much
greater	than	hers.	When	she	neglected	what	tomes	of	magic	John	was	able	to
pilfer	 from	the	Palace	library	 to	sit	 with	 her	scrying-stone,	watching	 the	tiny,
soundless	images	of	her	 sons	skylarking	 perilously	 along	 the	snow-covered
battlements	of	the	Hold,	 she	felt	 a	pang	of	 guilt.	 Zyerne	was	 young,	at	least
ten	years	younger	than	she;	her	power	shone	from	 her	like	 the	sun.	Jenny	no
longer	felt	 jealousy	and	she	could	not,	in	all	 honesty,	feel	anger	at	Zyerne	for
having	what	she	herself	did	not,	as	long	as	she	was	not	willing	to	do	what	 was
needful	to	obtain	that	power.	But	she	did	feel	 envy,	the	envy	of	a	traveler	on	a
cold	night	who	saw	into	 the	warmth	of	a	lighted	room.
       But	 when	she	asked	Mab	about	Zyerne—about	the	powers	that	had	once
been	less	than	 Mab’s,	 but	 now	  were	greater;	 about	 why	 the	 gnomes	 had
forbidden	her	 to	enter	the	Deep—the	 little	 mage	would	 only	 say	stubbornly,
“These	are	the	things	of	the	gnomes.	They	have	naught	to	do	with	men.”
       In	  the	 meantime	John	 went	 his	 own	 way,	 a	 favorite	  of	 the	 younger
courtiers	who	laughed	at	his	 extravagant	barbarism	and	called	him	their	 tame
savage,	while	he	held	forth	about	engineering	and	the	mating	customs	of	pigs,
or	quoted	 classical	authors	 in	 his	execrable	 north-country	 drawl.	 And	 still,
every	morning,	 the	King	 passed	them	by	in	 the	gallery,	turning	 his	dull	 eyes
aside	from	them,	and	the	etiquette	of	the	Court	forbade	Gareth	to	speak.
       “What’s	  his	delay?”	John	demanded	as	he	and	Gareth	emerged	from	the
arched	porticoes	of	 the	 gallery	 into	 the	 chill,	 fleet	 sunlight	 of	 the	 deserted
terrace	after	 yet	  another	futile	  day’s	  waiting.	 Jenny	 joined	  them	 quietly,
coming	up	 the	steps	from	the	 deserted	garden	below,	carrying	 her	harp.	She
had	been	playing	 it	 on	 the	rocks	 above	the	 sea	wall,	 waiting	 for	 them	 and
watching	the	rainclouds	 scud	far	out	over	 the	sea.	It	was	the	season	of	winds
and	sudden	gales,	and	in	the	north	the	weather	would	 be	sleety	and	cold,	 but
here	days	of	 high,	 heatless	sunlight	alternated	with	  fogs	and	blowing	  rains.
The	matte,	white	day-moon	was	visible,	 sinking	into	 the	cloud	wrack	over	 the

133
sea;	Jenny	wondered	what	 it	 was	that	 troubled	 her	about	its	 steady	waxing
toward	its	 half.	 Against	 the	loamy	 colors	of	 the	fallow	  earth,	the	clothes	 of
Zyerne	and	 her	 court	 stood	out	 brightly	  as	they	 passed	on	 down	 into	 the
garden,	and	Jenny	 could	 hear	the	 enchantress’s	voice	 lifted	  in	 a	wickedly
accurate	imitation	of	the	gnomes’	shrill	 speech.
       John	went	on,	 “Is	he	hoping	the	dragon	will	  fall	on	the	Citadel	 and	spare
him	the	trouble	of	the	siege?”
       Gareth	shook	his	 head.	“I	don’t	 think	 so.	I’m	 told	Polycarp	has	catapults
for	 slinging	  naphtha	set	 up	 on	 the	 highest	turrets.	 The	 dragon	 keeps	 his
distance.”	In	 spite	of	 the	 Master’s	treason,	Jenny	could	 hear	in	 the	Prince’s
voice	a	trace	of	pride	in	his	former	friend.
       Unlike	  John,	who	 had	rented	a	Court	 costume	from	 a	shop	outside	 the
palace	gates	which	  specialized	in	 such	 things	 for	 petitioners	 to	 the	 King,
Gareth	owned	at	least	a	 dozen	of	them—like	  all	 Court	costumes,	criminally
expensive.	The	one	he	wore	 today	was	 parakeet	green	and	primrose	and,	 in
the	uncertain	 light	 of	 the	afternoon,	 it	 turned	 his	rather	 sallow	 complexion
yellow.
       John	pushed	his	specs	a	little	further	 up	on	the	bridge	of	 his	nose.	“Well,
I	tell	 you,	 I’m	 not	 exactly	 ettling	 to	go	 on	kicking	  my	 heels	here	like	 a	rat
catcher	waiting	 for	the	 King	 to	decide	he	wants	 my	services.	I	 came	here	to
protect	my	lands	and	 my	people,	and	right	 now	 they’re	getting	 nothing	from
the	King	who’s	supposed	to	guard	them,	nor	from	me.”
       Gareth	 had	been	gazing	down	into	 the	garden	at	 the	little	 group	around
the	leaf-stained	marble	statue	of	the	god	Kantirith	 absently,	as	if	not	 aware	of
where	he	looked;	 now	 he	turned	 his	head	quickly.	 “You	  can’t	go,”	 he	 said,
worry	and	fear	in	his	voice.
       “And	 why	 not?”
       The	 boy	bit	 his	 lip	 and	did	not	 answer,	but	his	glance	 darted	nervously
back	down	to	the	garden.	As	if	she	felt	the	touch	of	it,	 Zyerne	turned	and	blew
him	a	playful	  kiss,	and	Gareth	looked	 away.	He	looked	 tired	 and	hagridden,
and	Jenny	suddenly	wondered	if	he	still	dreamed	of	Zyerne.
       The	uncomfortable	 silence	was	broken,	not	by	him,	but	by	 the	high	voice

134
of	Dromar.
       “My	  lord	Aversin...”	 The	gnome	stepped	out	onto	the	terrace	and	blinked
painfully	 in	the	wan,	overcast	light.	 His	words	 came	haltingly,	as	if	they	 were
unfamiliar	in	 his	mouth.	“Please—do	not	go.”
       John	glanced	down	at	him	 sharply.	“You	haven’t	 precisely	extended	your
all	in	welcome	and	help,	either,	have	you?”
       The	 old	ambassador’s	gaze	challenged	him.	“I	drew	 thee	the	maps	of	the
Deep.	By	the	Stone,	what	more	canst	thou	want?”
       “Maps	  that	don’t	 lie,”	 John	said	 coolly.	“You	 know	 as	well	 as	I	 do	the
maps	you	  drew	 have	 sections	of	  ’em	 left	  blank.	 And	  when	 I	 put	  them
together,	the	maps	of	the	various	levels	and	the	up-and-down	map,	damned	if
it	wasn’t	 the	 same	place	on	all	 of	 them.	I’m	  not	interested	in	 the	secrets	of
your	bloody	Deep,	but	 I	can’t	know	 what’s	going	 to	happen,	nor	where	I	may
end	up	playing	catch-me	in	the	dark	with	the	dragon,	and	I’d	 just	as	soon	have
an	accurate	map	to	do	it	with.”
       There	 was	 an	edge	of	  anger	on	 his	 level	 voice,	 and	an	 edge	of	 fear.
Dromar	must	 have	heard	both,	 for	 the	answering	blaze	 died	out	 of	his	 own
countenance,	and	he	looked	down	at	his	 hands,	clasped	over	the	knots	of	his
sash.	“This	is	 a	matter	that	has	nothing	 to	do	with	 the	 dragon,	nothing	to	 do
with	thee,”	he	said	quietly.	“The	 maps	are	accurate—I	swear	it	by	the	Stone	in
the	heart	of	 the	 Deep.	What	 is	left	 off	 is	 the	 affair	 of	the	 gnomes,	and	the
gnomes	only—the	 very	 secret	 of	 the	heart	 of	 the	 Deep.	Once,	 one	of	 the
children	 of	men	 spied	out	 that	 heart,	and	since	 then	we	 have	had	 cause	to
regret	it	bitterly.”
       He	 lifted	his	 head	again,	pale	eyes	somber	under	the	long	shelf	of	snowy
brow.	“I	 beg	that	thou	trust	me,	Dragonsbane.	It	goes	against	our	ways	to	 ask
the	aid	 of	 the	children	 of	 men.	But	 thou	 must	 help	us.	 We	are	miners	 and
traders;	we	are	 not	warriors,	 and	 it	 is	a	 warrior	 that	 we	need.	Day	 by	 day,
more	of	our	folk	 are	forced	 to	leave	this	city.	 If	the	Citadel	 falls,	 many	of	the
people	of	the	Deep	will	  be	slaughtered	with	 the	rebels	who	have	given	 them
not	only	 the	 shelter	of	 their	 walls,	 but	 the	very	 bread	of	 their	 rations.	 The
King’s	 troops	will	  not	 let	 them	leave	the	 Citadel,	 even	if	 they	 would—and

135
believe	me,	many	have	tried.	Here	in	Bel,	the	cost	of	 bread	rises,	and	soon	we
shall	be	starved	out,	if	we	are	not	murdered	by	the	mobs	from	the	taverns.	In	a
short	time	 we	shall	be	 too	few	 to	hold	 the	Deep,	even	should	 we	be	able	 to
pass	its	gates.”
       He	 held	out	 his	 hands,	small	as	a	child’s	 and	 grotesquely	knotted	 with
age,	pallidly	white	 against	the	soft	black	layerings	of	his	strangely	cut	sleeves.
“If	 thou	dost	not	help	us,	who	among	the	children	of	men	will?”
       “Oh,	 run	along,	Dromar,	 do.”	Clean	and	sweet	as	a	silver	knife,	 Zyerne’s
voice	cut	across	his	last	words.	She	came	mounting	the	steps	from	the	garden,
light	as	an	almond	blossom	floating	on	the	breeze,	her	pink-edged	veils	blown
back	over	the	dark	and	intricate	cascades	of	her	hair.	“Isn’t	 it	enough	that	you
try	to	foist	 your	way	 into	the	King’s	 presence	day	after	day,	without	troubling
these	poor	people	with	politics	 out	of	season?	Gnomes	may	be	vulgar	enough
to	talk	 business	and	buttonhole	their	 betters	in	the	evening,	 but	here	we	feel
that	once	 the	day	 is	 done,	 it	 should	 be	a	 time	 for	 enjoyment.”	  She	made
shooing	gestures	with	 her	well-kept	  hands	and	pouted	in	 impatience.	 “Now
run	along,”	she	added	in	a	teasing	tone,	“or	I	shall	call	the	guards.”
       The	 old	gnome	stood	for	a	moment,	his	eyes	upon	hers,	his	cloudy	white
hair	 drifting	  like	 cobwebs	 around	his	 wrinkled	  face	 in	 the	stir	  of	 the	sea
winds.	Zyerne	wore	an	expression	of	childlike	 pertness,	like	a	well-loved	little
girl	  demanding	 her	 own	 way.	  But	 Jenny,	 standing	 behind	 her,	  saw	 the
delighted	arrogance	of	her	triumph	 in	every	line	 and	muscle	of	her	slim	 back.
She	had	no	doubt	that	Zyerne	would,	in	fact,	call	the	guards.
       Evidently	  Dromar	  hadn’t,	 either.	 Ambassador	 from	 the	 court	 of	  one
monarch	to	another	 for	thirty	  years,	he	turned	and	departed	at	 the	behest	of
the	 King’s	  leman.	 Jenny	 watched	 him	  stump	 away	 down	  the	 gray	 and
lavender	stonework	of	 the	 path	across	the	garden,	with	 Bond	 Clerlock,	 pale
and	brittle-looking,	 imitating	 his	walk	behind	his	back.
       Ignoring	  Jenny	 as	 she	generally	  did,	 Zyerne	 slid	  one	 hand	 through
Gareth’s	arm	and	smiled	up	at	him.	“Backbiting	  old	plotter,”	 she	remarked.	“I
must	present	myself	to	your	 father	at	supper	in	an	hour,	but	there’s	time	 for	a
stroll	along	the	sea	wall,	surely?	The	rains	won’t	 start	until	then.”

136
       She	could	say	it	 with	surety,	thought	Jenny;	at	the	touch	of	her	spells,	the
clouds	would	come	and	depart	like	lapdogs	waiting	to	 be	fed.
       Still	 holding	 Gareth’s	arm	and	leaning	 her	suppleness	against	his	height,
she	drew	him	 toward	 the	 steps	leading	down	 into	 the	 garden;	the	courtiers
there	were	 already	 dispersing,	and	 its	 walks	 were	 empty	 under	 the	wind-
driven	scurry	of	 fugitive	 leaves.	Gareth	cast	a	despairing	glance	back	at	John
and	Jenny,	standing	together	on	 the	terrace,	she	in	 the	plaids	 and	sheepskin
jacket	of	 the	north,	 and	he	in	the	 ornate	blue-and-cream	satins	of	 the	Court,
his	schoolboy	spectacles	balanced	on	his	nose.
       Jenny	nudged	John	gently.	“Go	after	them.”
       He	 looked	 down	 at	her	 with	 a	half-grin.	  “So	from	  a	dancing	bear	 I’m
being	promoted	to	a	chaperon	for	our	hero’s	virtue?”
       “No,”	   Jenny	said,	her	 voice	 low.	 “A	 bodyguard	 for	 his	 safety.	I	 don’t
know	what	it	is	 about	Zyerne,	but	he	feels	it,	too.	Go	after	them.”
       John	sighed	and	bent	to	kiss	 her	lips.	“The	 King	 had	better	pay	me	extra
for	this.”	 His	 hug	was	like	 being	embraced	by	 a	satin	lion.	 Then	he	was	off,
trotting	 down	the	steps	and	calling	 to	them	in	 horrible	 north-country	 brogue,
the	wind	 billowing	  his	 mantlings	 and	giving	 him	 the	 appearance	of	a	huge
orchid	in	the	gray	garden.
       In	 all,	it	 was	just	over	a	week,	before	the	King	finally	 sent	for	his	son.


“He	 asked	me	 where	I’d	  been,”	 Gareth	said	 quietly.	 “He	 asked	me	 why	 I
hadn’t	presented	myself	to	him	 before.”	Turning,	 he	struck	the	side	of	 his	fist
against	the	 bedpost,	his	 teeth	gritted	  to	 fight	 tears	of	  rage	and	 confusion.
“Jenny,	in	all	these	days	he	hasn’t	even	seen	me!”
       He	 swung	 angrily	 around.	The	 faded	evening	light,	  falling	 through	 the
diamond-shaped	panes	of	the	window	where	 Jenny	sat,	brushed	softly	across
the	citron-and-white	 satins	of	 his	Court	 mantlings	and	flickered	 eerily	 in	 the
round,	facetless	old	jewels	on	his	hands.	His	hair	had	been	carefully	curled	for
the	audience	with	his	father	and,	as	was	the	nature	of	fine	hair,	hung	perfectly
straight	around	his	face	again,	except	for	 a	stray	lock	or	 two.	He’d	 put	on	his
spectacles	after	the	audience,	cracked	and	bent	and	unlikely-looking	 with	 his

137
finery;	 the	lenses	were	 speckled	with	 the	 fine	 blowing	 rain	 that	chilled	  the
windowglass.
       “I	 don’t	 know	 what	to	do,”	 he	said	in	a	strangulated	voice.	“He	 said—he
said	we’d	talk	 about	the	dragon	the	 next	time	 he	saw	me.	I	don’t	 understand
what’s	going	on...”
       “Was	 Zyerne	there?”	 John	inquired.	 He	was	sitting	 at	 the	spindly	 desk,
which,	 like	 the	rest	of	 the	 upper	floor	  of	his	 and	Jenny’s	 guest	house,	was
heaped	with	books.	The	whole	room,	after	eight	days,	had	the	appearance	of	a
ransacked	library;	volumes	 were	propped	against	one	another,	places	marked
by	pages	of	 John’s	notes	or	 odd	articles	of	 clothing	 or	 other	books—and	 in
one	case	a	dagger—slipped	between	the	leaves.
       Gareth	nodded	miserably.	“Half	  the	time	when	I	 asked	him	things,	she’d
answer.	Jenny,	could	she	be	holding	him	under	some	kind	of	spell?”
       Jenny	started	to	say,	“Possibly...”
       “Well,	 of	 course	she	is,”	John	said,	tipping	back	his	high	stool	to	 lean	the
small	 of	 his	 back	 against	 the	 desk.	 “And	  if	  you	 hadn’t	 been	 so	 bloody
determined	to	 do	that	 slick	 little	 baggage	justice,	 Jen,	you’d	 have	seen	it	 a
week	ago.	Come!”	he	added,	as	a	soft	tapping	sounded	at	the	door.
       It	  opened	wide	 enough	for	  Trey	 Clerlock	 to	 put	 her	head	 around	the
doorframe.	She	hesitated	a	moment;	 then,	when	John	gestured,	she	came	in,
carrying	a	pearwood	hurdy-gurdy	with	 ivory	 stars	scattered	at	random	over	its
stubby	neck	box	 and	playing	 pegs.	John	 beamed	with	 delight	 as	he	took	 it,
and	Jenny	groaned.
       “You’re	  not	going	 to	play	 that	thing,	 are	you?	You’ll	  frighten	 the	cattle
for	miles	around,	you	know.”
       “I’ll	   not,”	John	retorted.	“And	 besides,	there’s	a	trick	to	making	 it	louder
or	softer...”
       “Do	 you	know	 it?”
       “I	  can	 learn.	 Thank	  you,	 Trey,	 love—some	 people	 just	 haven’t	  any
appreciation	for	the	sound	of	fine	music.”
       “Some	 people	haven’t	 any	appreciation	for	 the	sound	of	 a	cat	being	run
through	a	mangle,”	 Jenny	replied.	She	turned	 back	to	Gareth.	“Zyerne	 could

138
be	holding	 him	 under	a	 spell,	 yes—but	from	 what	 you’ve	 told	 me	 of	 your
father’s	 stubbornness	and	 strength	 of	 will,	  I’m	  a	 little	  surprised	 that	 her
influence	is	that	great.”
       Gareth	 shook	his	 head.	“It	  isn’t	 only	 that,”	 he	 said.	“I—I	  don’t	  know
how	to	put	 this,	and	I	 can’t	 be	sure,	because	I	wasn’t	wearing	 my	spectacles
during	the	interview,	 but	it	almost	seems	that	he’s	faded	since	I’ve	been	gone.
That’s	a	stupid	idea,”	he	recanted	at	once,	seeing	Jenny’s	puzzled	frown.
       “No,”	   said	Trey	 unexpectedly.	The	 other	 three	looked	 at	 her,	and	 she
blushed	a	little,	like	 a	flustered	doll.	 “I	 don’t	think	 it’s	 stupid.	I	think	 it’s	 true,
and	faded	 is	 a	 good	 word	  for	  it.	 Because	 I—I	  think	 the	 same	 thing	  is
happening	to	Bond.”
       “Bond?”	  Jenny	said,	and	the	 memory	of	 the	King’s	  face	flashed	across
her	mind;	how	hollow	 and	brittle	 he	had	looked,	and	how,	like	Bond,	the	paint
on	his	face	had	seemed	to	stand	out	from	the	waxiness	beneath.
       Trey	 appeared	to	concentrate	for	a	moment	on	carefully	straightening	the
lace	on	her	left	 cuff.	 An	 opal	flickered	 softly	 in	 the	particolored	 coils	of	 her
hair	as	she	looked	up.	“I	 thought	it	was	just	 me,”	she	said	in	a	small	voice.	 “I
know	he’s	gotten	heavier-handed,	and	less	funny	about	his	jests,	the	way	he	is
when	his	mind	is	 on	something	else.	Except	that	his	mind	 doesn’t	seem	to	be
on	 anything	 else;	 it	  just	 isn’t	  on	 what	  he’s	 doing,	 these	 days.	 He’s	 so
absentminded,	the	 way	 your	  father’s	 gotten.”	  Her	 gaze	 went	 to	 Jenny’s,
imploring.	 “But	  why	 would	 Zyerne	put	 a	spell	 on	my	 brother?	 She’s	never
needed	to	hold	him	to	her.	He’s	always	squired	her	around.	He	was	one	of	the
first	 friends	 she	had	at	 Court.	 He—he	 loved	 her.	He	 used	to	 dream	 about
her...”
       “Dream	 about	her	how?”	Gareth	demanded	sharply.
       Trey	 shook	her	head.	“He	wouldn’t	 tell	me.”
       “Did	  he	sleepwalk?”
       The	 surprise	in	 the	girl’s	 eyes	answered	the	question	 before	she	spoke.
“How	 did	you	know?”
       The	 fitful	 rain	 outside	had	ceased;	in	the	long	 silence,	the	voices	 of	the
palace	guards	in	 the	court	 below	 the	 guest	house	windows	 could	 be	 heard

139
clearly,	telling	  a	story	 about	a	gnome	 and	a	whore	 in	 town.	 Even	the	 hazy
light	of	 the	afternoon	was	failing,	and	the	room	was	cold	and	slate	gray.	Jenny
asked,	“Do	you	dream	about	her	still,	Gareth?”
       The	 boy	 turned	red	 as	if	 scalded.	He	 stammered,	shook	 his	head,	and
finally	 said,	“I—I	 don’t	 love	her.	I	 truly	 don’t.	I	 try—I	 don’t	 want	to	be	alone
with	her.	But...”	 He	gestured	helplessly,	unable	to	fight	the	traitor	dreams,
       Jenny	said	softly,	 “But	 she	is	calling	 you.	She	called	 you	that	first	 night
we	were	in	her	hunting	lodge.	Had	she	done	so	before?”
       “I—I	  don’t	 know.”	 He	 looked	shaken	and	ill	 and	very	 frightened,	 as	he
had	when	Jenny	had	probed	at	his	mind,	as	if	looking	 at	things	that	he	did	not
want	to	see.	Trey,	who	had	gone	to	take	a	spill	 from	the	 fire	and	was	lighting
the	small	ivory	 lamps	 on	the	edge	of	 John’s	desk,	shook	out	 her	taper,	went
quietly	 over	to	 him,	 and	got	 him	to	 sit	 down	beside	her	 on	the	 edge	of	 the
curtained	bed.
       At	 length	Gareth	said,	“She	might	 have.	A	few	months	ago	she	asked	me
to	dine	with	  her	and	my	 father	in	 her	wing	 of	 the	palace.	I	 didn’t	 go.	I	 was
afraid	Father	 would	 be	 angry	at	 me	 for	 slighting	 her,	 but	later	 on	 he	said
something	 that	 made	 me	 wonder	  whether	 he’d	 even	 known	  about	 it.	  I
wondered	then.	I	 thought...”	 He	 blushed	still	 more	 hotly.	 “That	 was	when	I
thought	she	might	have	been	in	love	with	me.”
       “I’ve	  seen	loves	 like	 that	between	 wolves	 and	sheep,	but	the	 romance
tends	to	 be	 a	 bit	 one-sided,”	 John	 remarked,	 scratching	 his	 nose.	 “What
prevented	you	from	going?”
       “Polycarp.”	  He	toyed	with	 the	folds	of	his	mantlings,	which	 caught	a	soft
edge	of	 brightness	 where	the	 angle	 of	 the	 lamplight	  came	down	 past	 the
curtains	of	the	bed.	“He	was	always	telling	 me	to	beware	of	her.	He	found	out
about	the	dinner	and	talked	me	out	of	going.”
       “Well,	  I	don’t	 know	much	about	magic	and	all	 that,	but	just	offhand,	lad,
I’d	 say	 he	might	 have	 saved	your	 life.”	  John	 braced	his	 back	 against	the
desk’s	edge	and	fingered	a	silent	run	of	melody	up	the	hurdy-gurdy’s	keys.
       Gareth	 shook	his	head,	puzzled.	 “But	 why?	 It	 wasn’t	a	week	 before	he
tried	to	kill	 us—me	and	my	father	both.”

140
       “If	  that	was	him.”
       The	 boy	stared	at	him,	slowly-growing	  horror	and	realization	in	 his	face.
He	whispered,	“But	I	 saw	him.”
       “If	  she	could	take	the	shape	of	a	cat	or	a	bird,	putting	 on	the	form	 of	the
Master	of	  Halnath	 wouldn’t	  be	beyond	 her—Jen?”	 He	 glanced	across	 the
room	to	 where	she	sat	silent,	her	arm	 resting	across	one	up-drawn	 knee,	her
chin	upon	her	wrist.
       “She	 wouldn’t	  have	 taken	on	 his	 actual	being,”	 she	 said	quietly.	 “An
illusion	 would	  have	served.	 Shape-shifting	 requires	 enormous	power—but
then,	Zyerne	has	enormous	power.	However	she	did	it,	the	act	itself	is	logical.
If	 Polycarp	 had	 begun	 to	 suspect	her	 intentions	 toward	  Gareth,	it	  would
dispose	of	and	 discredit	 him	at	 once.	By	 making	 you	 the	witness,	 Gar,	she
removed	all	chance	of	 your	helping	 him.	 She	must	have	known	 how	bitter	 a
betrayal	it	would	be.”
       Numbly,	  Gareth	whispered,	“No!”	  struck	 by	 the	horror	 of	 what	he	had
done.
       Trey’s	  voice	 was	soft	 in	 the	 stillness.	 “But	 what	 does	 she	want	 with
Gareth?	I	can	understand	her	holding	 the	 King,	 because	without	his	 support
she’d—she	wouldn’t	 exactly	be	nothing,	but	 she	certainly	wouldn’t	 be	able	to
live	as	she	does	now.	But	why	entrap	Gareth	as	well?	And	what	does	she	want
with	Bond?	He’s	 no	good	to	her...	We’re	really	 only	 a	very	minor	 family,	you
know.	I	 mean,	we	haven’t	any	political	  power,	and	not	that	 much	money.”	A
rueful	smile	 touched	one	corner	of	her	lips	as	she	fingered	the	rose-point	lace
of	her	cuff.	 “All	 this...	 One	must	keep	up	appearances,	of	course,	and	Bond	is
trying	 to	marry	 me	 off	 well.	 But	 we	 really	 haven’t	 anything	 Zyerne	would
want.”
       “And	  why	destroy	them?”	 Gareth	asked,	desperate	concern	for	his	father
in	his	voice.	“Do	 all	spells	do	that?”
       “No,”	   Jenny	 said.	“That’s	  what	 surprises	 me	 about	 this—I’ve	  never
heard	of	 a	spell	 of	 influence	that	 would	 waste	the	 body	 of	the	 victim	 as	it
holds	the	mind.	 But	 neither	have	I	 heard	of	 one	holding	 as	close	as	the	one
which	she	has	upon	your	father,	Gareth;	nor	 of	one	that	lasts	so	long.	But	 her

141
magic	is	the	magic	of	the	gnomes	and	unlike	 the	spells	of	men.	It	may	be	that
among	their	secrets	is	one	that	will	 hold	 the	very	essence	of	another,	twining
around	 it	 like	  the	 tendrils	  of	 a	 morning-glory	   vine,	 which	  can	 tear	 the
foundations	of	a	 stone	house	asunder.	But	then,”	she	went	on,	her	voice	 low,
“it	 is	almost	certain	that	to	have	that	kind	 of	control	 over	him,	 at	the	first,	she
had	to	obtain	his	consent.”
       “His	  consent?”	 Trey	 cried,	horrified.	  “But	  how	 could	 he?	How	 could
anyone?”
       Gareth,	 Jenny	was	interested	to	note,	said	 nothing	to	 this.	He	 had	seen,
however	briefly,	 on	the	road	in	the	 north,	the	mirror	 of	his	 own	soul—and	he
also	knew	Zyerne.
       Jenny	 explained,	“To	 tamper	that	 deeply	with	 another’s	essence	always
requires	the	consent	of	 the	victim.	 Zyerne	is	 a	shapeshifter—the	principle	 is
the	same.”
       Trey	 shook	her	head.	“I	don’t	understand.”
       Jenny	 sighed	and,	 rising	 to	 her	feet,	 crossed	to	 where	 the	two	 young
people	 sat	 side-by-side.	  She	 put	  her	  hand	 on	  the	 girl’s	   shoulder.	 “A
shapeshifter	can	change	someone	else’s	essence,	even	as	she	can	change	her
own.	It	 requires	enormous	power—and	first	 she	must	in	some	fashion	 obtain
the	victim’s	 consent.	 The	victim	  can	resist,	unless	the	 shapeshifter	can	find
some	chink	 of	  consenting,	some	 hidden	 demon	within—some	  part	 of	 the
essence	that	wills	to	be	changed.”
       The	 deepening	darkness	outside	made	the	lamplight	 even	more	 golden,
like	honey	 where	it	 lay	 over	the	girl’s	  face.	Under	the	 shadows	of	the	 long,
thick	  lashes,	 Jenny	  could	  read	  both	  fear	  and	  fascination,	  that	  half-
understanding	that	is	the	first	whisper	of	consent.
       “I	 think	 you	would	 resist	me	if	I	tried	 to	transform	you	into	 a	lapdog,	had
I	the	 power	 to	 do	so.	 There	is	 very	 little	 of	 the	 lapdog	in	 your	 soul,	 Trey
Clerlock.	But	 if	I	 were	to	transform	you	into	 a	horse—a	yearling	filly,	 smoke-
gray	and	sister	to	the	sea	winds—I	think	I	could	 obtain	your	consent	to	that.”
       Trey	 jerked	 her	eyes	away,	hiding	 them	 against	Gareth’s	shoulder,	 and
the	 young	 man	  put	 a	 protective	  arm	 around	 her	  as	 well	  as	he	  could,

142
considering	that	he	was	sitting	on	the	trailing	ends	of	his	extravagant	sleeves.
       “It	  is	the	power	 of	 shapeshifting	and	the	danger,”	 Jenny	said,	her	voice
low	in	 the	silence	 of	the	room.	 “If	  I	transformed	 you	into	 a	filly,	  Trey,	your
essence	would	be	the	essence	of	a	horse.	 Your	thoughts	 would	 be	a	horse’s
thoughts,	your	body	a	mare’s	body;	 your	loves	and	desires	would	 be	those	of
a	young,	swift	 beast.	You	might	remember	for	 a	time	what	you	 were,	but	you
could	not	find	 your	way	 back	to	be	it	once	again.	I	think	 you	would	 be	happy
as	a	filly.”
       “Stop	 it,”	 Trey	 whispered,	and	covered	her	ears.	Gareth’s	hold	about	her
tightened.	Jenny	was	silent.	After	a	moment	the	girl	 looked	up	again,	her	eyes
dark	with	 the	 stirred	depths	of	 her	 dreams.	“I’m	  sorry,”	 she	said,	her	 voice
small.	“It’s	 not	you	I’m	 afraid	of.	 It’s	me.”
       “I	  know,”	 Jenny	 replied	 softly.	 “But	 do	 you	understand	 now?	Do	 you
understand	what	she	might	have	done	to	your	 father,	Gareth?	It	is	 sometimes
less	painful	  to	 give	 over	 striving	 and	 let	 another	 mind	 rule	 yours.	 When
Zyerne	first	 came	to	power	she	couldn’t	 have	acquired	that	kind	of	 hold	over
you,	because	you	would	not	come	near	enough	for	her	to	do	it.	You	hated	her,
and	you	were	 only	 a	boy—she	 could	 not	draw	 you	 as	she	draws	men.	 But
when	you	became	a	man...”
       “I	  think	 that’s	 loathsome.”	 It	 was	 Trey’s	 turn	 to	 put	a	 protective	 arm
around	Gareth’s	satin	shoulders.
       “But	  a	damn	 good	way	 to	 keep	her	power,”	 John	 pointed	out,	 leaning
one	arm	across	the	hurdy-gurdy	resting	upon	his	knees.
       “I	  still	 can’t	 be	sure	that	this	 is	what	 she	did,”	 Jenny	said.	“And	 it	 still
wouldn’t	 explain	why	 she	did	 the	same	thing	to	Bond.	 I	would	 not	 know	for
certain	until	I	 could	see	the	King,	speak	to	him...”
       “God’s	 Grandmother,	he’ll	 scarcely	speak	to	his	own	 son,	love,	let	alone
me	or	 thee.”	 John	paused,	listening	 to	 his	own	 words.	 “Which	  might	 be	a
good	reason	for	not	speaking	to	me	or	 thee,	come	to	that.”	His	 eyes	flickered
to	Gareth.	“You	 know,	Gar,	the	more	I	see	of	this,	 the	more	I	think	 I’d	 like	 to
have	a	few	words	with	your	dad.”

143
                                CHAPTER	                   VIII


IN	THE	DEATHLY	hush	that	hung	over	the	gardens,	Gareth’s	descent	from	the
wall	sounded	like	the	mating	of	oxen	in	dry	brush.	Jenny	winced	as	the	boy
crashed	down	the	last	few	feet	into	the	shrubbery;	from	the	shadows	of	the
ivy	on	the	wall	top	at	her	side	she	saw	the	dim	flash	of	spectacle	lenses	and
heard	a	voice	breathe,	“You	forgot	to	shout	‘eleven	o’clock	and	all’s	well,’	my
hero!”
       A	 faint	slur	of	 ivy	 followed.	She	felt	 John	land	on	the	ground	below
more	than	she	heard	him.	After	a	last	check	of	the	dark	garden	half-visible
through	the	woven	branches	of	the	bare	trees,	she	slipped	down	to	join	them.
In	the	darkness,	Gareth	was	a	gawky	shadow	in	rust-colored	velvet,	John
barely	to	be	seen	at	all,	the	random	pattern	of	his	plaids	blending	into	the
colors	of	the	night.
       “Over	 there,”	Gareth	whispered,	nodding	toward	the	 far	side	 of	 the
garden	where	a	light	  burned	in	 a	 niche	between	two	 trefoil	 arches.	Its
brightness	spangled	the	wet	grass	like	pennies	thrown	by	a	careless	hand.
       He	started	to	lead	the	way,	but	John	touched	his	arm	and	breathed,	“I
think	we’d	better	send	a	scout,	if	it’s	burglary	and	all	we’re	after.	I’ll	 work
round	the	three	sides	through	the	shadows	of	the	wall;	when	I	get	there,	I’ll
whistle	once	like	a	nightjar.	Right?”
       Gareth	caught	his	sleeve	as	he	started	to	move	off.	“But	what	if	a	real
nightjar	whistles?”
       “What,	 at	this	 time	of	 the	year?”	And	 he	melted	like	 a	 cat	into	the
darkness.	Jenny	could	see	him,	 shifting	 his	way	 through	 the	checkered
shadows	of	the	bare	topiary	 that	decorated	the	three	sides	of	the	 King’s
private	court;	by	the	way	Gareth	moved	his	head,	she	could	tell	he	had	lost
sight	of	him	almost	at	once.
       Near	the	archways	there	was	a	slither	of	rosy	lamplight	on	a	spectacle
frame,	the	glint	of	spikes,	and	the	brief	outline	of	brightness	on	the	end	of	a

144
long	 nose.	Gareth,	seeing	 him	 safe,	started	 to	move,	 and	 Jenny	drew	 him
soundlessly	back	again.	John	had	not	yet	whistled.
       An	 instant	later,	Zyerne	appeared	in	the	doorway	arch.
       Though	 John	stood	 less	than	six	 feet	 from	 her,	she	did	 not	at	 first	 see
him,	for	he	settled	into	 stillness	like	a	snake	in	leaves.	The	enchantress’s	face,
illuminated	 in	 the	warm	 apricot	 light,	 wore	that	 same	sated	look	 Jenny	had
seen	in	the	upstairs	room	at	the	hunting	lodge	near	the	Wildspae—the	look	 of
deep	content	with	 some	wholly	  private	pleasure.	Now,	 as	then,	it	 raised	the
hackles	on	Jenny’s	neck,	and	at	the	same	time	she	felt	a	cold	shudder	of	fear.
       Then	 Zyerne	 turned	her	 head.	She	startled,	 seeing	John	motionless	 so
near	to	her;	then	she	smiled.	“Well.	An	 enterprising	barbarian.”	She	shook	out
her	unbound,	unveiled	hair,	 straying	tendrils	 of	it	 lying	 against	the	hollow	 of
her	cheek,	like	an	invitation	to	 a	caress.	“A	little	late,	surely,	to	be	paying	calls
on	the	King.”
       “A	  few	 weeks	late,	by	 all	 I’ve	 heard.”	 Aversin	scratched	his	 nose	self-
consciously.	“But	better	late	than	never,	as	Dad	said	at	Granddad’s	wedding.”
       Zyerne	 giggled,	a	sweet	and	throaty	sound.	Beside	her,	Jenny	felt	Gareth
shiver,	as	if	the	seductive	laughter	brought	memories	of	evil	dreams.
       “And	  impudent	  as	well.	  Did	 your	 mistress	 send	you	 along	 to	 see	if
Uriens	had	been	entangled	in	spells	other	than	his	own	stupidity	and	lust?”
       Jenny	 heard	the	 hiss	of	 Gareth’s	 breath	and	 sensed	his	anger	 and	his
shock	at	hearing	the	 guttersnipe	words	fall	 so	 casually	from	 those	pink	 lips.
Jenny	wondered	why	she	herself	was	not	surprised.
       John	 only	 shrugged	and	said	mildly,	  “No.	 It’s	 just	 I’m	 no	 dab	hand	at
waiting.”
       “Ah.”	  Her	 smile	widened,	lazy	 and	alluring.	 She	seemed	half-drunk,	but
not	sleepy	as	drunkards	are;	she	glowed,	 as	she	had	on	that	first	 morning	 in
the	King’s	 Gallery,	 bursting	with	 life	 and	filled	  with	 the	casual	arrogance	of
utter	well-being.	 The	lamp	in	 its	tiled	niche	 edged	her	profile	in	 amber	as	she
stepped	toward	John,	and	Jenny	 felt	 again	the	grip	 of	 fear,	as	if	 John	stood
unknowingly	 in	deadly	danger.	“The	 barbarian	who	eats	with	 his	hands—and
doubtless	makes	love	in	his	boots.”

145
       Her	 hands	touched	his	shoulders	 caressingly,	shaping	themselves	to	the
muscle	and	bone	beneath	the	 leather	and	plaid.	 But	 Aversin	stepped	back	 a
pace,	putting	distance	between	them,	rather	as	she	had	done	in	the	gallery	 to
Dromar.	Like	 Dromar,	 she	would	 not	 relax	 her	self-consequence	enough	to
pursue.
       In	 a	deliberately	 deepened	north-country	 drawl,	 he	said,	“Aye,	 my	 lack
of	manners	does	give	me	sleepless	nights.	But	it	weren’t	to	eat	prettily	 nor	yet
to	make	love	 that	I	 came	south.	I	 was	told	 you	had	 this	dragon	eating	 folks
hereabouts.”
       She	giggled	 again,	an	evil	 trickle	 of	sound	in	 the	night.	 “You	shall	 have
your	 chance	 to	 slay	 it	 when	  all	 is	 ready.	 Timing	  is	 a	 civilized	  art,	 my
barbarian.”
       “Aye,”	  John’s	voice	agreed,	from	the	dark	cutout	of	his	silhouette	against
the	golden	light.	“And	 I’ve	 had	buckets	of	time	to	 study	it	here,	along	with	 all
them	other	 civilized	  arts,	 like	 courtesy	 and	 kindness	to	 suppliants,	 not	 to
speak	of	honor,	and	 keeping	one’s	faith	 with	 one’s	lover,	 instead	of	 rubbing
up	against	his	son.”
       There	 were	perhaps	three	heartbeats	of	silence	 before	she	spoke.	Jenny
saw	her	back	stiffen;	when	she	spoke	again,	her	voice,	though	still	 sweet,	had
a	note	to	it	like	 a	harp	string	 taken	a	half-turn	above	its	 true	note.	“What	 is	it
to	you,	John	Aversin?	 It	is	 how	things	 are	done	here	in	the	south.	None	 of	it
shall	interfere	with	 your	chance	of	glory.	That	is	 all	that	should	concern	you.	I
shall	tell	you	when	it	 is	right	for	 you	to	go.”
       “Listen	  to	me,	 Aversin,	 and	believe	me.	 I	 know	this	 dragon.	You	 have
slain	one	worm—you	 have	not	 met	Morkeleb	 the	Black,	 the	Dragon	 of	Nast
Wall.	He	 is	mightier	 than	 the	worm	 you	slew	 before,	mightier	 than	 you	can
ever	know.”
       “I’d	  guessed	that.”	John	pushed	up	his	specs,	the	rosy	light	 glancing	 off
the	spikes	of	 his	armbands	as	 from	 spear-points.	“I’ll	  just	 have	to	 slay	him
how	I	can,	seemingly.”
       “No.”	   Acid	 burned	 through	 the	 sweetness	of	her	 voice	 like	  poisoned
candy.	“You	 can	not.	I	 know	 it,	 if	 you	 and	that	slut	 of	 yours	don’t.	 Do	 you

146
think	I	 don’t	 know	 that	those	stinking	 offal-eaters,	 the	gnomes,	have	lied	 to
you?	That	they	refused	to	give	 you	true	maps	of	 the	Deep?	I	know	 the	Deep,
John	Aversin—I	  know	 every	 tunnel	 and	 passage.	I	know	  the	heart	 of	 the
Deep.	Likewise	I	 know	every	spell	 of	illusion	 and	protection,	and	believe	me,
you	will	 need	them	against	the	dragon’s	 wrath.	You	 will	 need	my	aid,	 if	 you
are	to	 have	victory—you	  will	  need	my	 aid	 if	 you	 are	to	 come	 out	of	 that
combat	with	your	 life.	 Wait,	I	say,	and	you	shall	 have	that	aid;	and	afterward,
from	 the	spoils	 of	 the	Deep,	 I	shall	 reward	 you	 beyond	the	 dreams	of	 any
man’s	avarice.”
       John	tilted	 his	head	a	little	to	one	side.	“You’ll	 reward	me?”
       In	 the	 silence	of	 the	sea-scented	night,	Jenny	heard	 the	other	woman’s
breath	catch.
       “How	  is	 it	 you’ll	  be	the	one	 to	divvy	  up	the	 gnomes’	treasure?”	 John
asked.	“Are	 you	anticipating	 taking	 over	the	 Deep,	once	the	dragon’s	out	 of
the	way?”
       “No,”	   she	  said,	 too	  quickly.	  “That	  is—surely	  you	  know	  that	  the
insolence	of	the	gnomes	has	led	them	to	plot	against	his	Majesty?	They	are	no
longer	the	strong	 folk	 they	were	before	 the	coming	 of	Morkeleb.	 Those	 that
were	not	slain	 are	divided	and	weak.	 Many	have	left	 this	 town,	forfeiting	  all
their	rights,	and	good	riddance	to	them.”
       “Were	 I	 treated	as	I’ve	 seen	them	treated,”	John	 remarked,	leaning	one
shoulder	against	the	blue-and-yellow	tiles	of	the	archway,	“I’d	 leave,	myself.”
       “They	 deserved	it.”	 Her	words	stung	with	 sudden	venom.	“They	kept	me
from...”	 She	stopped	herself,	 then	added,	more	reasonably,	“You	 know	 they
are	openly	in	 league	with	  the	rebels	of	 Halnath—or	 you	 should	 know	 it.	 It
would	be	foolish	 to	dispose	of	 the	dragon	before	their	 plots	are	uncovered.	It
would	only	 give	them	 a	strong	place	and	a	treasure	to	return	to,	 to	engage	in
plotting	further	 treason.”
       “I	 know	 the	King	and	the	people	have	heard	nothing	but	how	the	gnomes
are	plotting,”	  Aversin	 replied	 in	 a	 matter-of-fact	 voice.	 “And	  from	 what	 I
hear,	the	gnomes	up	 at	 the	Citadel	 haven’t	 much	 choice	 about	whose	 side
they’re	on.	 Gar’s	being	 gone	must	have	been	a	real	 boon	to	 you	there;	with

147
the	King	half-distracted,	 he’d	have	been	about	ready	to	believe	anything.	And
I	suppose	it	would	 be	foolish	 to	 get	rid	 of	the	 dragon	before	so	many	 of	the
gnomes	have	left	the	Realm—or	 some	reason	can	be	found	for	 getting	rid	 of
the	 rest	 of	 ’em—that	   they	 can’t	  reoccupy	 their	  stronghold,	 if	  so	 be	 it
happened	someone	else	wanted	the	place,	that	is.”
       There	 was	a	moment’s	silence.	Jenny	 could	see	the	light	 slither	 quickly
along	the	silk	 facing	of	 Zyerne’s	sleeve,	where	her	 small	hand	clenched	it	 in
anger,	leaving	a	print	 of	wrinkles	 like	 the	track	 of	invisible	  thoughts.	“These
are	matters	of	high	 polity,	 Dragonsbane.	It	 is	nothing	 to	 you,	after	 all.	I	 tell
you,	be	patient	and	wait	until	 I	 tell	you	 it	is	time	 for	us	to	ride	 together	to	the
Deep,	you	and	I.	I	promise	that	you	shall	not	be	cheated	of	this	slaying.”
       She	 stepped	close	to	him	 again,	 and	the	diamonds	 on	her	hands	threw
little	spits	of	 fire	against	the	dullness	of	leather	and	plaid.
       “No,”	   Aversin	 said,	 his	voice	 low.	  “Nor	 shall	 you	 be	 cheated	of	 the
Deep,	after	 I’ve	 done	your	 butchering	 for	 you.	 You	summoned	the	 dragon,
didn’t	you?”
       “No.”	  The	word	 was	brittle	as	the	snap	of	a	frost-killed	 twig.	 “Of	 course
not.”
       “Didn’t	   you,	love?	 Then	 it’s	 gie	lucky	  for	 you	that	 it	 came	along	 just
when	it	did,	when	you	 were	wanting	a	power	base	free	of	the	King,	 in	case	he
tired	of	you	or	died;	 not	to	speak	of	all	that	gold.”
       Jenny	felt	 the	scorch	 of	her	wrath	 like	 an	invisible	 explosion	 across	the
garden,	even	as	Zyerne	raised	her	hand.	Jenny’s	throat	closed	on	a	cry	of	fear
and	warning,	knowing	 she	could	never	have	moved	in	time	 to	help	and	could
not	have	stood	against	 the	younger	woman’s	 magic,	 if	 she	did;	Aversin,	 his
back	to	the	stone	of	the	arch,	could	 only	throw	 his	arm	before	his	 eyes	as	the
white	fire	 snaked	from	Zyerne’s	hand.	The	hissing	 crackle	of	it	 in	the	air	 was
like	lightning;	  the	blaze	of	it,	 so	white	 it	seemed	edged	in	violet,	 seared	over
every	stone	chink	 and	moss	tuft	in	 the	pavement	and	outlined	 each	separate,
waxy	 petal	of	  the	winter	  roses	in	 colorless	 glare.	In	 its	 aftermath,	 the	 air
burned	with	the	smell	of	ozone	and	scorched	leaves.
       After	  a	 long	 moment,	 John	raised	 his	 face	from	  his	protecting	  arms.

148
Even	across	the	garden,	Jenny	could	see	he	was	shaking;	her	own	knees	were
so	weak	from	shock	and	fear	she	felt	she	could	have	collapsed,	except	for	her
greater	fear	of	Zyerne;	and	she	cursed	her	own	 lack	of	 power.	John,	standing
before	Zyerne,	did	not	move.
       It	  was	Zyerne	 who	 spoke,	her	 voice	 dripping	 with	  triumph.	 “You	 get
above	yourself,	 Dragonsbane.	I’m	  not	 that	snaggle-haired	trollop	  of	 yours,
that	you	can	speak	to	me	with	impunity.	I	am	a	true	sorceress.”
       Aversin	 said	nothing,	but	carefully	 removed	his	spectacles	and	wiped	his
eyes.	Then	he	replaced	them	and	regarded	her	silently	in	 the	dim	light	 of	 the
garden	lamp.
       “I	  am	a	 true	sorceress,”	she	repeated	softly.	 She	held	out	 her	hands	to
him,	the	small	fingers	 plucking	 at	his	sleeves,	and	a	husky	note	crept	into	her
sweet	voice.	“And	 who	says	our	alliance	 must	be	so	truculent,	Dragonsbane?
You	need	not	spend	your	time	here	tugging	with	 impatience	 to	be	gone.	I	can
make	the	wait	pleasant.”
       As	  her	delicate	 hands	touched	 his	 face,	 however,	Aversin	 caught	 the
fragile	wrists,	 forcing	 her	away	at	arm’s	 length.	For	 an	instant	they	stood	so,
facing	one	another,	the	silence	absolute	but	for	the	racing	draw	of	their	breath.
Her	eyes	were	fixed	upon	his,	probing	at	his	mind,	 Jenny	knew,	the	same	way
she	had	probed	at	Gareth’s	earlier,	seeking	some	key	of	consent.
       With	  a	curse	she	 twisted	 free	of	 his	 grip.	 “So,”	  she	whispered.	“That
raddled	bitch	can	at	least	get	her	rutting-spells	right,	 can	she?	With	her	looks,
she’d	have	to.	But	 let	me	tell	 you	 this,	Dragonsbane.	When	you	ride	 to	meet
the	dragon,	like	it	 or	not,	it	 will	 be	me	who	 rides	with	 you,	not	her.	You	shall
need	my	aid,	and	you	 shall	ride	 forth	 when	I	 say	so,	when	I	 tell	the	 King	 to
give	you	leave,	and	not	before.	So	learn	a	little	of	 the	civilized	 art	of	patience,
my	barbarian—for	without	 my	 aid	against	Morkeleb,	you	shall	surely	die.”
       She	stepped	away	from	him	 and	passed	under	the	lamp-lit	arch,	reaching
out	to	take	the	 light	 with	 her	as	she	went.	In	 its	honeyed	brightness	her	face
looked	as	gentle	and	guileless	as	that	of	a	girl	of	seventeen,	unmarked	by	rage
or	perversion,	pettiness	or	 spite.	John	remained	where	 he	was,	watching	 her
go,	sweat	beading	his	face	like	a	mist	of	 diamonds,	motionless	save	where	he

149
rubbed	the	thin,	sharp	flashburns	on	his	hands.
       A	 moment	later,	 the	window	 behind	him	 glowed	 into	soft	 life.	 Through
the	fretted	screen	of	 scented	shrubs	and	vine	that	twined	 its	 filigreed	 lattice,
Jenny	got	a	glimpse	of	 the	room	beyond.	She	had	an	impression	of	 half-seen
frescoes	on	the	walls,	of	expensive	vessels	of	gold	and	silver,	 and	of	the	glint
of	bullion	  embroidery	thickly	  edging	the	hangings	 of	the	 bed.	A	man	 lay	in
the	bed,	 moving	  feebly	 in	 some	 restless	dream,	 his	 gold	  hair	 faded	 and
colorless	where	it	lay	 in	disorder	 over	the	embroidered	pillows.	 His	 face	was
sunken	and	devoid	of	life,	like	 the	face	of	a	man	whom	a	vampire	has	kissed.


“It	 would	 serve	her	 right	 if	 you	 left	 tonight!”	  Gareth	 stormed.	“Rode	 back
north	and	left	 her	to	 deal	with	 her	own	 miserable	worm,	 if	 she	wanted	it	 so
badly!”
       He	 swung	around	to	 pace	the	big	 chamber	of	the	guest	house	again,	so
furious	he	could	barely	 splutter.	In	his	 anger,	he	seemed	to	have	forgotten	his
own	fear	of	Zyerne	and	his	desire	for	protection	against	her,	forgotten	his	long
quest	to	the	Winterlands	and	his	desperation	to	have	it	succeed.	From	her	seat
in	the	 window,	 Jenny	watched	him	 fulminate,	 her	own	 face	outwardly	 calm
but	her	mind	racing.
       John	 looked	 up	 from	 tinkering	  with	 the	 keys	 of	 the	 hurdy-gurdy.	 “It
wouldn’t	 do,	 my	hero,”	 he	said	 quietly.	 “However	 and	whyever	 it	 got	 here,
the	dragon’s	here	now.	As	Zyerne	 said,	the	people	hereabouts	are	no	concern
of	mine,	but	I	 can’t	be	riding	 off	 and	leaving	them	to	the	dragon.	Leaving	 out
the	gnomes,	there’s	the	spring	planting	to	be	thought	of.”
       The	boy	 stopped	in	his	pacing,	staring	at	him.	“Hunh?”
       John	shrugged,	his	fingers	 stilling	 on	the	pegs.	“The	 harvest’s	gone,”	he
pointed	out.	“If	  the	dragon’s	still	 abroad	in	 the	land	in	 the	spring,	there’ll	 be
no	crop,	and	then,	my	hero,	you’ll	 see	real	starvation	in	this	town.”
       Gareth	 was	 silent.	 It	 was	 something	 he	 had	never	 thought	 of,	 Jenny
guessed.	He	had	clearly	never	gone	short	of	food	in	his	life.
       “Besides,”	  John	went	 on,	 “unless	 the	gnomes	 can	reoccupy	 the	 Deep
pretty	quick,	 Zyerne	will	 destroy	 them	here,	as	Dromar	said,	and	your	 friend

150
Polycarp	in	 the	Citadel	 as	well.	 For	 all	Dromar’s	  hedging	about	keeping	 us
out	of	the	heart	of	 the	Deep,	the	gnomes	have	done	for	us	what	they	can;	and
the	way	I	see	it,	Polycarp	 saved	your	life,	or	 at	least	kept	you	from	 ending	up
like	your	father,	so	deep	under	Zyerne’s	spells	he	can’t	tell	 one	week	from	the
next.	No,	the	dragon’s	got	to	be	killed.”
       “But	  that’s	just	it,”	 Gareth	 argued.	“If	 you	kill	 the	 dragon,	she’ll	 be	free
to	take	over	the	Deep,	and	then	the	Citadel	will	 fall	 because	they’ll	 be	able	to
attack	it	from	 the	rear.”	 He	looked	 worriedly	 over	at	Jenny.	“Could	 she	have
summoned	the	dragon?”
       Jenny	 was	silent,	 thinking	 about	that	 terrible	 power	she	had	 felt	 in	 the
garden,	and	the	dreadful,	perverted	lour	 of	 it	in	 the	lamplit	 room	 at	Zyerne’s
hunting	lodge.	She	said,	“I	 don’t	know.	 It’s	the	first	 time	I’ve	 heard	of	human
magic	being	able	to	touch	a	dragon—but	then,	Zyerne	derives	her	magic	from
the	gnomes.	I	have	never	heard	of	such	a	thing...”
       “Cock	  by	its	 feet,	 horse	by	 its	 hame...”	 repeated	John.	“Could	  she	be
holding	the	dragon	by	his	name?	She	knows	it,	right	enough.”
       Jenny	shook	her	 head.	“Morkeleb	 is	only	 the	name	men	give	it,	 the	way
they	call	 Azwylcartusherands	Dromar,	 and	Taseldwyn	Mab.	 If	 she’d	had	his
true	name,	his	 essence,	she	could	send	him	 away	again;	 and	she	obviously
can’t,	or	she	would	have	killed	 you	in	the	garden	tonight.”
       She	 hitched	  her	 shawl	 up	 over	 her	 shoulders,	 a	 thin	  and	 glittering
spiderweb	of	South	Islands	silk,	 the	thick	masses	of	her	hair	lying	 over	it	 like
a	second	shawl.	Cold	seemed	to	breathe	through	the	window	at	her	back.
       Gareth	 went	back	to	 pacing,	his	 hands	shoved	in	the	pockets	of	 the	old
leather	hunting	breeches	he’d	put	on	to	go	burgling.
       “But	 she	didn’t	 know	its	name,	did	she?”
       “No,”	   replied	 Jenny.	“And	  in	 that	 case...”	She	 paused,	then	frowned,
dismissing	the	thought.
       “What?”	  John	wanted	to	know,	catching	the	doubt	in	her	voice.
       “No,”	   she	repeated.	“It’s	 inconceivable	 that	 at	 her	level	 of	 power	 she
wouldn’t	 have	been	taught	Limitations.	It’s	the	first	 thing	anyone	learns.”	And
seeing	Gareth’s	incomprehension,	she	explained.	 “It’s	 one	of	 the	things	 that

151
takes	me	so	long	 when	 I	 weave	spells.	 You	have	to	 limit	  the	effect	 of	 any
spell.	If	 you	call	rain,	 you	must	specify	a	certain	heaviness,	so	as	not	to	flood
the	 countryside.	  If	  you	  call	  a	 curse	  of	  destruction	 upon	  someone	 or
something,	you	have	to	set	Limitations	 so	that	 their	destruction	doesn’t	 come
in	a	generalized	catastrophe	that	wipes	out	your	own	house	and	goods.	Magic
is	very	prodigal	in	 its	effects.	Limitations	 are	among	the	earliest	things	a	mage
is	taught.”
       “Even	  among	 the	 gnomes?”	 Gareth	 asked.	“You	  said	their	  magic	 is
different.”
       “It	  is	 taught	differently—transmitted	  differently.	  There	are	 things	Mab
has	said	that	I	do	 not	understand	and	things	that	she	refuses	to	tell	 me	about
how	their	power	is	formed.	 But	it	 is	still	magic.	 Mab	knows	the	Limitations—
from	 what	 she	has	told	 me,	 I	 gather	they	 are	more	 important	 in	 the	 night
below	the	 ground.	If	 she	studied	 among	the	gnomes,	Zyerne	 would	 have	to
have	learned	about	them.”
       John	 threw	back	 his	head	and	laughed	in	 genuine	amusement.	“Gaw,	 it
must	be	rotting	 her!”	 He	chuckled.	 “Think	 of	 it,	Jen.	She	wants	to	 get	rid	 of
the	gnomes,	so	she	calls	down	a	generalized	every-worst-curse	she	can	think
of	upon	them—and	gets	a	dragon	she	can’t	get	rid	of!	It’s	gie	beautiful!”
       “It’s	  ‘gie’	frivolous,”	  Jenny	retorted.
       “No	  wonder	she	threw	fire	 at	me!	She	must	be	that	furious	 just	thinking
about	it!”	 His	eyes	were	dancing	under	his	singed	brows.
       “It	  just	isn’t	 possible,”	 Jenny	insisted,	in	 the	cool	voice	 she	used	to	call
their	sons	back	from	skylarking.	 Then,	more	seriously,	“She	can’t	 have	gotten
to	that	 degree	of	power	 untaught,	 John.	It’s	 impossible.	 All	 power	 must	 be
paid	for,	somehow.”
       “But	 it’s	 the	sort	of	thing	that	would	 happen	if	it	hadn’t	 been,	isn’t	it?”
       Jenny	didn’t	 reply.	For	 a	long	time	she	stared	out	the	window	 at	the	dark
shape	of	 the	battlements,	 visible	 beneath	the	 chilly	  autumn	 stars.	“I	 don’t
know,”	 she	said	at	 last,	stroking	 the	 spiderweb	fringes	 of	 her	gauze	 shawl.
“She	has	so	much	power.	It’s	inconceivable	that	she	hasn’t	paid	for	 it	in	 some
fashion.	The	 key	to	 magic	 is	magic.	 She	has	had	all	 time	 and	all	 power	 to

152
study	it	 fully.	  And	 yet...”	  She	paused,	identifying	  at	last	 her	 own	 feelings
toward	what	Zyerne	 was	and	did.	“I	 thought	 that	someone	who	had	achieved
that	level	of	power	would	 be	different.”
       “Ah,”	  John	said	softly.	Across	the	room,	 their	eyes	met.	“But	 don’t	think
that	what	she’s	done	 with	 her	achievement	has	betrayed	your	 striving,	 love.
For	it	hasn’t.	It’s	 only	betrayed	her	own.”
       Jenny	 sighed,	reflecting	 once	again	 on	John’s	uncanny	 ability	 to	 touch
the	heart	of	any	problem,	then	smiled	 a	little	at	herself;	 and	they	traded	a	kiss
in	a	glance.
       Gareth	said	quietly,	 “But	 what	are	we	going	 to	do?	The	dragon	has	to	be
destroyed;	and,	if	you	destroy	it,	you’ll	 be	playing	 right	into	 her	hands.”
       A	  smile	  flicked	  across	 John’s	 face,	 a	 glimpse	  of	  the	 bespectacled
schoolboy	 peeking	out	 from	  behind	 the	 complex	 barricades	raised	 by	 the
hardships	of	 the	Winterlands	 and	his	 father’s	 embittered	domination.	 Jenny
felt	his	eyes	on	her	again—the	tip	 of	one	thick	 reddish	brow	and	the	question
in	the	bright	glance.	After	 ten	years,	they	had	grown	used	to	speaking	without
words.
       A	 qualm	of	 fear	passed	over	her,	though	she	knew	he	was	right.	 After	 a
moment,	she	drew	her	breath	in	another	sigh	and	nodded.
       “Good.”	  John’s	impish	smile	 widened,	like	 that	of	a	boy	 intent	on	doing
mischief,	 and	he	rubbed	 his	hands	briskly.	  He	turned	 to	 Gareth.	“Get	 your
socks	packed,	my	hero.	We	leave	for	the	Deep	tonight.”

153
                                  CHAPTER	                    IX


“STOP.”
       Puzzled,	Gareth	and	John	drew	rein	on	either	side	of	Jenny,	who	sat
Moon	Horse	where	she	had	halted	her	in	the	middle	of	the	leaf-drifted	track.
All	 around	them	the	foothills	of	Nast	Wall	were	deathly	silent,	save	for	the
trickle	of	wind	 through	the	charred	trunks	of	what	had	once	been	woods	to
either	side	of	the	road	and	the	faint	jingle	of	brass	as	Osprey	tugged	at	his
leading-rein	and	Clivy	began	foraging	prosaically	in	the	sedges	of	the	ditch-
side.	Lower	down	the	hills,	the	woods	were	still	whole,	denuded	by	coming
winter	rather	than	fire;	under	the	pewter-gray	trunks	of	the	beeches,	the	rust-
colored	underbrush	lay	thick.	Here	it	was	only	a	tangle	of	brittle	stems,	ready
to	crumble	at	a	touch.	Half-hidden	in	 the	weeds	near	the	scorched	paving
stones	of	the	road	were	the	blackened	bones	of	fugitives	from	the	dragon’s
first	attack,	mixed	with	shattered	cooking	vessels	and	the	silver	coins	that	had
been	dropped	in	flight.	The	coins	lay	in	the	mud	still.	No	one	had	ventured
this	close	to	the	ruined	town	to	retrieve	them.
       Up	ahead	in	the	weak	sunlight	of	winter,	the	remains	of	the	first	houses
of	Deeping	could	be	seen.	According	to	Gareth	the	place	had	never	been
walled.	The	road	ran	into	the	town	under	the	archway	below	the	broken	clock
tower.
       For	a	long	while	Jenny	sat	listening	in	silence,	turning	her	head	this	way
and	that.	Neither	of	the	men	spoke—	indeed,	ever	since	they	had	slipped	out
of	 the	Palace	in	 the	 small	hours	 before	dawn,	Jenny	 had	been	acutely
conscious	of	John’s	growing	silence.	She	glanced	across	at	him	now,	where
he	sat	withdrawn	into	himself	on	his	riding	horse	Cow,	and	remembered	for
the	dozenth	time	 that	 day	Zyerne’s	 words—that	without	 her	 assistance,
neither	he	nor	Jenny	would	be	capable	of	meeting	the	dragon	Morkeleb.
       Beyond	a	doubt	John	was	remembering	them,	too.
       “Gareth,”	Jenny	said	at	last,	her	voice	 little	 more	than	a	whisper,	“is

154
there	another	way	into	 the	town?	Some	place	in	the	town	 that	is	 farther	from
the	Gates	of	the	Deep	than	we	are	now?”
       Gareth	frowned.	 “Why?”
       Jenny	 shook	 her	 head,	not	 certain	 herself	 why	  she	had	 spoken.	 But
something	whispered	across	her	nerves,	as	it	had	 all	those	weeks	ago	by	 the
ruins	of	the	nameless	town	in	the	Winterlands—a	 sense	of	danger	that	caused
her	to	look	 for	 the	 signs	of	 it.	 Under	 Mab’s	tutelage	 she	had	become	more
certain	of	trusting	 her	instincts,	 and	something	in	 her	hated	to	go	closer	than
the	ruined	clock	tower	into	 the	sunlight	that	fell	 across	Deeping	Vale.
       After	   a	 moment’s	 consideration	 Gareth	 said,	 “The	  farthest	 point	  in
Deeping	from	 the	Great	Gates	would	be	the	Tanner’s	Rise.	 It’s	at	the	 bottom
of	that	 spur	over	there	that	 bounds	the	town	 to	the	 west.	I	 think	 it’s	about	 a
half-mile	 from	the	Gates.	The	whole	 town	isn’t—wasn’t—	  much	more	than	a
quarter-mile	across.”
       “Will	  we	have	a	clear	view	of	the	Gates	from	there?”
       Confused	by	 this	bizarre	stipulation,	 he	nodded.	“The	ground’s	high,	 and
most	of	the	buildings	 were	flattened	in	the	attack.	But	 if	 we	wanted	a	lookout
on	the	gates,	you	can	see	there’s	enough	of	the	clock	tower	left	for	a...”
       “No,”	  Jenny	murmured.	“I	 don’t	think	 we	can	go	that	near.”
       John’s	 head	came	sharply	 around	at	 that.	Gareth	 faltered,	 “It	 can’t—it
can’t	hear	us,	can	it?”
       “Yes,”	  Jenny	said,	not	 knowing	 why	 she	said	it.	 “No—it	  isn’t	 hearing,
exactly.	I	don’t	 know.	But	I	feel	 something,	on	the	fringes	of	my	 mind.	I	don’t
think	it	 knows	we’re	here—not	yet.	 But	if	 we	rode	closer,	it	might.	It	 is	an	old
dragon,	Gareth;	it	 must	be,	for	 its	name	to	be	 in	the	Lines.	 In	one	of	 the	old
books	from	 the	 Palace	library,	 it	 says	that	 dragons	change	their	 skins	 with
their	 souls,	that	 the	 young	 are	 simply	 colored	 and	 bright;	 the	 mature	 are
complex	of	 pattern	 and	the	old	 become	simpler	 and	 simpler	 again,	as	their
power	deepens	and	grows.	Morkeleb	is	black.	 I	don’t	 know	 what	that	means,
but	I	 don’t	 like	 what	 I	think	 it	 implies—great	 age,	great	 power—his	 senses
must	fill	 the	Vale	of	Deeping	like	still	 water,	sensitive	to	the	slightest	ripple.”
       “He	  pox-sure	 heard	 your	  father’s	 knights	 coming,	  didn’t	  he?”	 John

155
added	cynically.
       Gareth	looked	 unhappy.	Jenny	nudged	her	mare	gently	and	took	a	step	or
two	 closer	 to	 the	clock	  tower,	 casting	her	 senses	wide	 over	 all	 the	 Vale.
Through	the	broken	 webs	of	branches	overhead,	the	massive	darkness	of	the
westward-facing	 cliffs	  of	  Nast	 Wall	  could	 be	  seen.	Their	  dizzy	 heights
towered	like	 rusted	metal,	streaked	with	 purple	 where	shadows	hit;	 boulders
flashed	white	upon	it	 like	outcroppings	 of	broken	bone.	Above	 the	line	of	 the
dragon’s	burning,	 the	timber	 grew	on	 the	flanks	 of	the	 mountain	around	the
cliffs,	 up	toward	 the	mossed	rocks	of	the	 cirques	and	snowfields	 above.	The
ice-gouged	horns	 of	the	 Wall’s	 bare	and	 ragged	crest	were	 veiled	 in	 cloud
now,	but	beyond	its	hunched	shoulder	to	 the	east	a	thin	track	of	 smoke	could
be	seen,	marking	the	Citadel	of	Halnath	and	the	siege	camps	beneath	it.
       Below	  that	wall	 of	 stone	and	 trees,	the	open	 spaces	of	the	Vale	 lay,	a
huge	well	of	air,	a	gulf	 filled	 with	 pale,	sparkly	sunlight—and	 with	something
else.	 Jenny’s	  mind	   touched	  it	   briefly	   and	  shrank	  from	   that	  living
consciousness	that	she	sensed,	coiled	like	a	snake	in	its	dark	lair.
       Behind	 her,	she	heard	Gareth	argue,	“But	the	dragon	you	killed	 up	in	the
gully	 in	Wyr	 didn’t	 know	 you	were	coming.”	 The	 very	loudness	of	his	 voice
scraped	her	nerves	and	made	her	 want	 to	cuff	 him	 into	 silence.	 “You	 were
able	to	get	around	behind	it	and	take	it	by	surprise.	I	don’t	see	how...”
       “Neither	 do	 I,	my	hero,”	 John	cut	in	softly,	 collecting	 Cow’s	reins	in	one
hand	and	the	charger	Osprey’s	lead	in	the	other.	“But	  if	you’re	 willing	  to	bet
your	life	 Jen’s	wrong,	I’m	not.	Lead	us	on	to	the	famous	Rise.”
       On	 the	night	 of	 the	dragon,	many	 had	taken	refuge	 in	the	 buildings	 on
Tanner’s	Rise;	  their	 bones	 lay	 everywhere	 among	 the	 blackened	 ruin	 of
crumbled	 stone.	 From	  the	  open	 space	 in	 front	  of	  what	  had	 been	 the
warehouses,	it	had	 once	been	possible	to	 overlook	 the	 whole	 thriving	 little
town	of	 Deeping,	 under	its	 perpetual	haze	 of	smoke	 from	 the	smelters	 and
forges	down	 below.	 That	 haze	 was	gone	 now,	 burned	off	  in	 the	 dragon’s
greater	fire;	the	whole	town	 lay	open	to	the	mild,	 heatless	glitter	of	the	winter
sunlight,	a	checkerwork	of	rubble	 and	bones.
       Looking	  about	 her	 at	the	 buildings	  of	 the	Rise,	 Jenny	 felt	 cold	 with

156
shock,	as	if	she	had	been	struck	in	the	pit	of	the	stomach;	then,	as	she	realized
why	she	recognized	the	place,	the	shock	was	replaced	by	horror	and	despair.
       It	  was	the	 place	where	 she	had	seen	John	 dying,	 in	 her	vision	  in	 the
water	bowl.
       She	 had	done	 divination	  before,	 but	never	 so	 accurately	as	 this.	 The
precision	of	it	 appalled	her—every	stone	and	puddle	and	broken	wall	 was	the
same;	she	remembered	the	 way	 the	looming	  line	 of	 the	dark	 cliffs	  looked
against	the	sky	and	the	very	patterns	of	the	bones	of	 the	town	below.	She	felt
overwhelmed	by	a	despairing	urge	to	change	something—to	 shatter	a	wall,	to
dig	a	 hole,	to	 clear	away	 the	brush	 at	the	 gravelly	 lip	 of	 the	Rise	 where	it
sloped	down	to	 the	town—anything	 to	make	 it	not	 as	it	had	been.	Yet	in	 her
soul	she	knew	 doing	so	would	 change	nothing	 and	she	feared	lest	 whatever
she	did	would	make	the	picture	she	had	seen	more,	rather	than	less,	exact.
       Her	 lips	felt	 stiff	 as	she	spoke.	“Is	this	the	only	point	 in	the	town	 this	far
from	the	Gates?”	She	knew	already	what	Gareth	would	reply.
       “It	  had	to	be,	because	of	the	smell	of	the	tanneries.	You	see	how	nothing
was	built	 near	it.	 Even	 the	water	 tanks	and	reservoirs	were	 put	 up	in	 those
rocks	to	the	north,	rather	than	here	where	the	better	springs	were.”
       Jenny	nodded	dully,	looking	 out	toward	 the	high	rocks	to	the	north	of	 the
town	where	he	was	pointing.	Her	whole	soul	 was	crying	No!	No...
       She	felt	 suddenly	hopeless	and	stupid,	overmatched	and	unprepared	and
incredibly	 naive.	We	were	fools,	 she	thought	bitterly.	 The	slaying	 of	the	 first
worm	was	a	fluke.	 We	should	never	 have	been	so	stupid	as	to	presume	upon
it,	never	 have	thought	 we	could	 do	 it	 again.	Zyerne	 was	right.	 Zyerne	 was
right.
       She	 looked	 over	  at	 John,	who	  had	 dismounted	 from	 Cow	  and	 was
standing	on	the	rocky	lip	 of	the	Rise	where	the	ground	fell	 sharply	to	the	dale
below,	looking	 across	toward	the	opposite	 rise	of	 the	Gates.	Cold	seemed	to
cover	her	bones	like	a	vast,	winged	 shadow	blocking	 the	sun,	and	she	heeled
Moon	Horse	gently	over	beside	him.
       Without	  looking	 up	 at	 her,	he	 said,	“I	  figure	 I	 can	 just	 make	it.	 The
Temple	of	 Sarmendes	is	 about	 a	quarter-mile	 along	 the	 Grand	Passage,	if

157
Dromar	 was	telling	  the	truth.	 If	  Osprey	and	 I	 go	 full-pelt,	  we	should	 just
about	be	able	to	 catch	the	dragon	 in	the	 Market	Hall,	  just	within	 the	 Gates.
Saying	he’s	able	to	hear	me	the	minute	I	 start	down	the	Rise,	I	should	 still	 be
able	to	catch	him	before	he	can	get	out	into	the	air.	I’ll	 have	room	to	fight	 him
in	the	Market	Hall.	 That	will	 be	my	only	 chance.”
       “No,”	  Jenny	said	quietly.	 He	looked	 up	at	her,	eyebrows	quirking.	 “You
have	another	chance,	if	we	ride	back	now	to	Bel.	Zyerne	can	help	you	take	the
thing	from	 behind,	 deeper	in	 the	caves.	Her	 spells	will	  protect	 you,	too,	 as
mine	can	not.”
       “Jen.”	  The	 closed	 wariness	of	  his	 expression	split	  suddenly	into	  the
white	flash	of	 teeth.	He	held	up	his	 hands	to	help	her	down,	shaking	his	head
reprovingly.
       She	made	no	move.	“At	  least	it	is	to	her	 advantage	to	preserve	you	safe,
if	she	wants	the	dragon	slain.	The	rest	is	none	of	your	affair.”
       His	 smile	 widened	 still	 further.	 “You	 have	a	 point,	 love,”	 he	assented.
“But	 she	doesn’t	look	to	me	like	 she	can	cook	worth	a	row	of	 beans.”	And	he
helped	her	down	from	her	horse.
       The	 foreboding	that	weighed	 on	Jenny’s	heart	did	not	decrease;	rather,	it
grew	upon	her	through	the	 short	afternoon.	She	told	herself,	 again	and	again,
as	she	paced	out	the	magic	circles	 and	set	up	her	fire	 in	 their	 midst	to	 brew
her	poisons,	that	water	 was	a	liar;	 that	 it	 divined	 the	future	 as	crystal	could
not,	but	that	its	 divinations	 were	less	reliable	even	than	fire’s.	 But	 a	sense	of
impending	doom	weighed	upon	her	heart,	and,	as	the	daylight	dimmed,	 in	the
fire	 under	her	 simmering	 kettle	 she	seemed	to	see	again	 the	same	picture:
John’s	shirt	of	 chain	 mail	 rent	open	by	 claws	in	 a	dozen	 places,	the	broken
links	all	glittering	 with	 dark	blood.
       Jenny	had	set	up	her	fire	at	the	far	end	of	the	Rise,	where	the	wind	would
carry	the	smoke	and	 the	vapors	away	from	 both	 the	camp	and	the	Vale,	 and
worked	throughout	 the	afternoon	spelling	 the	ingredients	and	the	steel	of	 the
harpoons	themselves.	Miss	  Mab	 had	 advised	her	 about	 the	 more	virulent
poisons	that	would	 work	  upon	dragons,	and	 such	ingredients	 as	the	gnome
wizard	 had	not	 had	among	 her	 slender	stocks	 Jenny	had	 purchased	in	 the

158
Street	of	the	Apothecaries	 in	the	 Dockmarket	in	 Bel.	 While	 she	worked,	the
two	men	prowled	 the	 Rise,	fetching	 water	for	 the	horses	from	 the	little	 well
some	distance	into	 the	woods,	 since	the	fountain	 house	that	 had	served	the
tanneries	had	been	crushed	like	an	eggshell,	and	setting	up	a	camp.	John	had
very	little	 to	say	since	she	had	spoken	to	him	on	 the	edge	of	the	Rise;	Gareth
seemed	to	shiver	all	over	with	a	mingling	 of	excitement	and	terror.
       Jenny	 had	been	 a	little	  surprised	at	 John’s	 invitation	 that	 Gareth	 join
them,	though	 she	had	 planned	to	 ask	 John	to	 extend	 it.	 She	had	 her	own
reasons	for	 wanting	  the	 boy	 with	  them,	 which	 had	 little	  to	 do	 with	  his
expressed	 desire—though	  he	  had	  not	   expressed	 it	   lately—to	   see	 a
dragonslaying	close	at	hand.	She—and	undoubtedly	John	as	well—knew	 that
their	departure	would	have	left	Gareth	unprotected	in	Bel.
       Perhaps	Mab	had	been	right,	she	thought,	as	she	turned	her	face	from	the
ghastly	choke	of	 the	 steam	and	wiped	 it	with	  one	gloved	 hand.	There	were
worse	evils	than	the	dragon	in	the	land—to	 be	slain	by	it	 might,	under	certain
circumstances,	be	construed	as	a	lesser	fate.
       The	 voices	of	 the	men	 came	to	her	 from	 the	other	side	of	 the	 camp	as
they	moved	about	 preparing	supper;	she	had	noticed	 that	neither	spoke	very
loudly	when	they	were	anywhere	near	the	edge	of	the	Rise.	John	said,	“I’ll	 get
this	right	 yet,”	 as	he	dropped	 a	mealcake	onto	the	 griddle	 and	looked	 up	at
Gareth.	“What’s	the	Market	 Hall	like?	 Anything	 I’ll	 be	likely	 to	trip	over?”
       “I	  don’t	 think	 so,	if	 the	 dragon’s	been	in	 and	out,”	 Gareth	 said	after	 a
moment.	“It’s	 a	huge	hall,	as	Dromar	said;	over	a	hundred	feet	deep	and	even
wider	side	to	 side.	The	ceiling’s	 very	high,	 with	 fangs	of	rock	 hanging	down
from	it—chains,	 too,	 that	used	to	 support	hundreds	of	 lamps.	The	floor	  was
leveled,	 and	 used	to	 be	 covered	 with	  all	 kinds	  of	 booths,	 awnings,	 and
vegetable	stands;	all	 the	 produce	 from	 the	 Realm	was	 traded	to	 the	 Deep
there.	I	 don’t	 think	 there	 was	anything	 there	 solid	 enough	to	 resist	dragon
fire.”
       Aversin	 dropped	 a	 final	 mealcake	on	 the	 griddle	 and	straightened	 up,
wiping	 his	 fingers	on	 the	end	 of	his	 plaid.	 Blue	 darkness	was	settling	 over
Tanner’s	Rise.	From	her	small	 fire,	Jenny	could	 see	the	two	of	them	 outlined

159
in	gold	against	a	background	of	 azure	and	black.	They	did	not	come	near	her,
partly	because	of	the	stench	of	the	poisons,	partly	 because	of	the	spell-circles
glimmering	 faintly	 in	the	sandy	earth	about	her.	The	key	to	magic	 is	magic—
Jenny	felt	 that	she	 looked	out	 at	 them	from	 an	 isolated	enclave	 of	 another
world,	 alone	with	 the	 oven-heat	of	 the	fire,	 the	 biting	 stench	of	 the	 poison
fumes,	and	the	grinding	weight	of	the	death-spells	in	her	heart.
       John	 walked	 to	 the	 edge	of	 the	 Rise	 for	 perhaps	the	 tenth	 time	 that
evening.	Across	 the	shattered	bones	of	 Deeping,	 the	black	 skull-eye	 of	 the
Gates	looked	back	at	him.	Slabs	of	steel	and	splintered	shards	of	burned	wood
lay	 scattered	over	 the	 broad,	 shallow	 flight	  of	 granite	 steps	 below	 them,
faintly	 visible	in	 the	watery	light	 of	the	waxing	moon.	 The	town	itself	 lay	in	a
pool	of	impenetrable	dark.
       “It	  isn’t	so	far,”	 said	Gareth	hopefully.	 “Even	if	 he	hears	you	coming	the
minute	you	ride	 into	 the	Vale,	you	should	 reach	the	Market	Hall	 in	 plenty	of
time.”
       John	sighed.	“I’m	  not	so	sure	of	that,	 my	hero.	Dragons	move	fast,	even
afoot.	 And	 the	 ground	 down	 there’s	 bad.	 Even	 full-tilt,	  Osprey	 won’t	  be
making	much	speed	of	it,	 when	all’s	 said.	I	would	 have	liked	 to	scout	for	 the
clearest	route,	but	that	 isn’t	 possible,	either.	The	 most	I	 can	hope	for	 is	that
there’s	no	uncovered	cellar	doors	or	privy	pits	between	here	and	the	Gates.”
       Gareth	 laughed	softly.	“It’s	  funny,	but	 I	never	thought	 about	that.	In	 the
ballads,	the	hero’s	horse	never	trips	 on	the	way	 to	do	battle	with	 the	 dragon,
though	they	do	it	from	 time	to	 time	even	in	tourneys,	where	the	ground	of	 the
lists	has	been	smoothed	beforehand.	I	thought	it	 would	be—oh,	 like	a	ballad.
Very	straight.	I	thought	 you’d	 ride	out	of	 Bel,	straight	up	here	and	on	into	 the
Deep...”
       “Without	  resting	 my	 horse	 after	the	 journey,	 even	on	 a	lead-rein,	 nor
scouting	the	 lay	 of	  the	land?”	  John’s	eyes	 danced	behind	 his	 specs.	“No
wonder	the	King’s	  knights	were	 killed	 at	it.”	  He	sighed.	“My	  only	 worry	 is
that	if	I	 miss	my	 timing	 by	even	a	little,	 I’m	 going	 to	be	spot	under	the	thing
when	it	comes	out	of	the	Gates...”
       Then	 he	 coughed,	fanning	 at	 the	air,	 and	said,	 “Pox	 blister	 it!”	  as	he

160
dashed	back	to	pick	 the	flaming	  meal-cakes	off	 the	griddle.	 Around	 burned
fingers,	he	said,	“And	the	damn	thing	is,	even	Adric	 cooks	better	than	I	do...”
       Jenny	 turned	 away	 from	 their	 voices	 and	 the	 sweetness	of	 the	 night
beyond	the	 blazing	 heat	 of	 her	fire.	  As	 she	dipped	 the	 harpoons	into	  the
thickening	seethe	of	brew	in	her	kettle,	the	sweat	plastered	her	long	hair	to	her
cheeks,	running	down	her	bare	arms	from	the	turned-up	sleeves	of	her	shift	to
the	cuffs	of	the	gloves	she	wore;	the	heat	lay	 like	a	red	film	 over	her	toes	and
the	tops	of	her	feet,	bare	as	they	often	were	when	she	worked	magic.
       Like	 John,	she	felt	withdrawn	 into	herself,	curiously	 separated	from	what
she	did.	The	death-spells	hung	like	 a	stench	in	the	air	 all	around	her,	and	her
head	and	bones	were	beginning	 to	 ache	from	 the	heat	and	 the	effort	 of	 the
magic	she	had	wrought.	Even	when	the	powers	she	called	were	for	good,	they
tired	her;	 she	felt	 weighed	down	 by	them	 now,	exhausted	and	knowing	 that
she	had	wrought	nothing	good	from	that	weariness.
       The	 Golden	  Dragon	 came	to	 her	 mind	  again,	the	 first	  heartstopping
instant	she	had	seen	it	 dropping	 from	 the	sky	 like	 amber	lightning	  and	had
thought,	This	 is	beauty.	She	remembered,	also,	the	butchered	ruin	 left	 in	the
gorge,	the	 stinking	  puddles	of	  acid	 and	 poison	 and	blood,	 and	 the	 faint,
silvery	 singing	 dying	 out	 of	 the	shivering	 air.	 It	 might	 have	been	only	  the
fumes	she	inhaled,	but	she	felt	herself	turn	suddenly	sick	at	the	thought.
       She	 had	slaughtered	Meewinks,	 or	 mutilated	 them	and	 left	 them	to	 be
eaten	by	  their	 brothers;	 she	 remembered	 the	 crawling	  greasiness	of	  the
bandit’s	hair	under	her	fingers	 as	she	had	touched	his	temples.	But	they	were
not	like	the	dragon.	They	had	chosen	to	be	what	they	were.
       Even	as	I	have.
       And	what	 are	you,	Jenny	Waynest?
       But	 she	could	find	no	answer	that	fitted.
       Gareth’s	 voice	 drifted	 over	 to	 her	from	 the	 other	fire.	 “That’s	  another
thing	they	 never	mention	in	 the	ballads	that	 I’ve	 been	meaning	to	ask	you.	 I
know	this	 sounds	silly,	 but—how	 do	 you	keep	your	 spectacles	from	 getting
broken	in	battle?”
       “Don’t	   wear	 ’em,”	 John’s	 voice	 replied	 promptly.	  “If	  you	 can	 see	it

161
coming,	it’s	 too	late	anyway.	And	 then,	I	had	Jen	lay	a	spell	on	 them,	so	they
wouldn’t	 get	knocked	off	or	broken	by	chance	when	I	do	wear	them.”
       She	looked	over	 at	the	two	of	them,	 out	of	the	condensing	aura	of	death-
spells	and	the	slaughter	of	beauty	that	surrounded	her	and	her	kettle	of	poison.
Firelight	caught	in	 the	metal	of	John’s	jerkin;	 against	the	blueness	of	the	night
it	gleamed	 like	 a	maker’s	 mark	stamped	in	 gold	 upon	a	 bolt	 of	velvet.	 She
could	almost	hear	the	 cheerful	grin	 in	 his	voice,	 “I	 figured	 if	 I	was	going	 to
break	my	heart	loving	a	mage	wife,	I	 might	as	well	get	some	good	from	it.”
       Over	 the	shoulder	 of	Nast	 Wall	 the	moon	hung,	 a	half-open	 white	eye,
waxing	toward	 its	 third	quarter.	With	 a	 stab	like	a	 shard	of	metal	 embedded
somewhere	in	her	 heart,	Jenny	remembered	then	that	 it	 had	been	so,	in	 her
vision	in	the	water.
       Silently,	 she	pulled	 herself	back	into	 her	private	 circle	 of	death,	closing
out	that	 outer	world	  of	 friendship	 and	love	 and	silliness,	 closing	 herself	 in
with	 spells	of	 ruin	 and	 despair	and	the	 cold	 failing	 of	 strength.	 It	 was	her
power	to	deal	death	in	this	way,	and	she	hated	herself	for	it;	though,	like	John,
she	knew	she	had	no	choice.


“Do	you	 think	you’ll	  make	it?”	 Gareth	nattered.	Before	them,	the	ruins	of	 the
broken	town	 were	purple	 and	slate	with	 shadow	 in	the	 early	light.	  The	war
horse	Osprey’s	breath	was	warm	over	Jenny’s	hand	where	she	held	the	reins.
       “I’ll	   have	to,	 won’t	 I?”	 John	checked	the	 girths	and	swung	 up	into	 the
saddle.	The	cool	reflection	 of	the	morning	 sky	gleamed	slimily	  on	the	grease
Jenny	had	made	for	him	late	 last	night	to	 smear	on	his	face	against	the	worst
scorching	of	the	dragon’s	fire.	 Frost	crackled	in	the	weeds	as	Osprey	fidgeted
his	feet.	The	last	thing	Jenny	had	done,	shortly	before	dawn,	had	been	to	send
away	the	 mists	 that	seeped	up	 from	 the	 woods	 to	 cloak	 the	Vale,	 and	all
around	them	the	air	was	brilliantly	  clear,	the	fallow	 winter	 colors	warming	 to
life.	Jenny	herself	 felt	cold,	 empty,	and	overstretched;	she	had	poured	all	 her
powers	into	  the	 poisons.	 Her	 head	ached	 violently	  and	 she	felt	  unclean,
strange,	and	divided	in	her	mind,	 as	if	she	were	two	 separate	people.	She	had
felt	 so,	she	recalled,	when	 John	had	ridden	 against	the	 first	 dragon,	though

162
then	she	had	not	known	why.	 Then	she	had	not	known	 what	the	 slaughter	of
that	beauty	would	 be	like.	She	feared	for	 him	 and	felt	despair	like	 a	stain	on
her	heart;	she	only	wanted	the	day	to	be	over,	one	way	or	the	other.
       The	 mail	rings	on	the	back	of	 John’s	gloves	rattled	sharply	as	he	reached
down,	and	 she	handed	him	 up	 his	harpoons.	 There	were	 six	 of	 them,	in	 a
quiver	on	his	back;	the	steel	of	their	 barbed	shafts	caught	a	slither	of	the	early
light,	save	for	the	ugly	 black	that	covered	their	points.	The	leather	of	the	grips
was	firm	 and	tough	 under	her	 palms.	Over	 his	 metal-patched	doublet,	John
had	pulled	a	chain	 mail	 shirt,	and	his	 face	was	framed	 in	a	coif	 of	 the	same
stuff.	Without	 his	 spectacles	and	with	 his	shaggy	hair	 hidden	beneath	it,	 the
bones	of	his	face	were	 suddenly	prominent,	showing	 what	his	 features	could
look	like	 in	an	old	age	he	might	never	reach.
       Jenny	felt	 she	wanted	to	 speak	to	him,	 but	there	was	nothing	 she	could
think	of	to	say.
       He	 gathered	 the	reins	 in	 hand.	“If	  the	 dragon	 comes	out	 of	 the	Gate
before	I	reach	it,	I	want	the	pair	 of	you	to	leg	it,”	 he	said,	his	voice	calm.	“Get
into	cover	as	deep	as	you	can,	the	higher	up	the	ridge	the	better.	Let	the	horses
go	if	 you	can—there’s	 a	chance	the	dragon	will	  go	after	them	 first.”	 He	 did
not	add	that	by	that	time	he	would	already	be	dead.
       There	 was	 a	 momentary	 silence.	 Then	 he	 bent	 from	 the	 saddle	 and
touched	Jenny’s	lips	 with	 his	own.	 His	felt,	 as	they	 always	did,	 surprisingly
soft.	They	had	spoken	little,	even	last	night;	 each	had	already	been	drawn	into
an	armor	of	silence.	It	was	something	they	both	understood.
       He	 reined	away,	 looking	 across	the	Vale	to	 the	black	 eye	of	 the	Deep,
and	to	the	 black	 thing	 waiting	 within.	  Osprey	fiddle-footed	  again,	catching
John’s	battle	nerves;	the	open	ground	of	 Deeping	seemed	suddenly	to	stretch
away	into	 miles	 of	 enormous,	broken	plain.	 To	 Jenny’s	eye,	every	 tumbled
wall	 looked	as	tall	 as	the	 house	it	 had	once	been,	every	 uncovered	cellar	 a
gaping	chasm.	He	would	never	cross	in	time,	she	thought.
       Beside	 her,	John	leaned	down	 again,	this	 time	 to	pat	Osprey’s	 dappled
neck	encouragingly.	“Osprey,	 old	friend,”	 he	said	 softly,	“don’t	  spook	on	me
now.”

163
       He	 drove	in	 his	 spurs,	and	the	sharp	crack	of	 iron-shod	 hooves	as	they
shot	forward	was	 like	the	 chip	of	 distant	lightning	 on	a	summer	 noon.	Jenny
took	two	steps	down	the	loose,	rocky	slope	after	him,	 watching	the	gray	horse
and	the	pewter-dark	shape	of	the	man	as	they	plunged	through	the	labyrinth	of
gaping	 foundations,	 broken	 beams,	standing	 water	  who	 knew	 how	  deep,
slipping	down	 drifts	 of	charred	wood	chips	 and	racing	toward	the	open	black
mouth	 of	 the	 Gates.	 Her	 heart	 hammering	  achingly	 in	  her	 chest,	 Jenny
stretched	her	mageborn	senses	toward	the	Gate,	 straining	to	 hear.	The	cold,
tingling	 air	 seemed	to	 breathe	with	 the	 dragon’s	 mind.	 Somewhere	in	 that
darkness	was	the	slithery	drag	of	metallic	scales	on	stone...
       There	 was	no	way	 to	call	 the	image	of	 the	dragon	in	 her	scrying-stone,
but	she	sat	down	suddenly	where	she	was	on	the	loose,	charred	rubble	of	 the
slope	and	pulled	the	slip	 of	dirty-white	  crystal	upon	its	 chain	from	 her	jacket
pocket.	She	heard	 Gareth	call	 her	name	 from	 the	top	 of	 the	slope,	 but	she
vouchsafed	neither	 answer	nor	 glance.	Across	 the	 Vale,	Osprey	 leaped	the
split	 ruin	 of	 the	demolished	 Gates	on	the	 granite	 steps,	cool	blue	 shadows
falling	over	 him	and	his	rider	like	 a	cloak	as	the	Gate	swallowed	them	up.
       There	was	a	flick	 and	a	gleam,	as	the	wan	sunlight	caught	in	the	facets	of
the	jewel.	Then	Jenny	caught	a	confused	impression	of	 hewn	stone	walls	that
could	have	 encompassed	the	entire	palace	of	 Bel,	 a	cavern-ceiling	 bristling
with	 stone	teeth	 from	 which	 old	 lamp-chains	 hung	 down	 into	 vast,	 cobalt
spaces	of	air...	black	 doorways	 piercing	 the	walls,	 and	the	 greatest	of	them
opening	opposite...
       Jenny	 cupped	her	hands	around	the	 jewel,	trying	  to	see	into	 its	depths,
straining	past	the	curtains	 of	illusion	 that	 covered	the	dragon	from	 her	sight.
She	thought	 she	saw	 the	 flash	of	  diffuse	 sunlight	 on	 chain	 mail	 and	 saw
Osprey	trip	 on	the	 charred	debris	of	 blackened	bones	and	 spilled	 coins	and
half-burned	 poles	that	 littered	 the	floor.	  She	saw	John	 pull	 him	 out	 of	 the
stumble	and	 saw	the	 gleam	 of	 the	harpoon	 in	 his	 hand...	Then	 something
spurted	from	 the	inner	 doors,	like	 a	drench	of	 thrown	 bathwater,	splattering
viscously	into	the	dry	 ash	of	the	floor,	searing	upward	in	a	curtain	of	fire.
       There	 was	a	 darkness	in	the	 crystal	 and	in	 that	darkness,	two	 burning

164
silver	lamps.
       Nothing	 existed	around	her,	not	the	cool	 shift	of	 the	morning	air,	 nor	the
sunlight	warming	 her	ankles	in	 her	buckskin	boots	 where	her	heels	rested	on
the	chopped-up	slope	of	gravel	 and	weeds,	not	the	wintry	 smell	of	 water	and
stone	from	below,	nor	the	small	noises	of	the	restless	horses	above.	Cupped	in
her	hands,	the	edges	of	the	crystal	seemed	to	burn	in	white	light,	 but	its	 heart
was	dark;	through	 that	darkness	only	 fragmentary	 images	came—a	sense	of
something	moving	that	 was	vast	and	dark,	the	swinging	curve	 of	John’s	body
as	he	flung	a	harpoon,	and	the	cloudy	swirls	of	blinding	 fumes.
       In	 some	way	she	knew	 Osprey	had	gone	down,	smitten	 by	the	stroke	of
the	dragon’s	tail.	She	had	a	brief	impression	of	John	on	his	knees,	his	eyes	red
and	swollen	 from	  the	acrid	 vapors	 that	 filled	 the	 hall,	 aiming	  for	 another
throw.	Something	like	 a	wing	 of	darkness	covered	him.	 She	saw	flame	again
and,	 as	 a	  queer,	 detached	 image,	  three	 harpoons	  lying	  like	  scattered
jackstraws	 in	 the	 middle	  of	 a	 puddle	 of	  blackened	 and	 steaming	 slime.
Something	within	 her	turned	to	ice;	there	was	only	darkness	and	movement	in
the	darkness,	and	then	John	again,	blood	pouring	through	 the	rips	in	 his	mail
shirt,	staring	 up	 at	a	 towering	 shape	of	 glittering	 shadow,	his	 sword	 in	 his
hand.
       Blackness	 swallowed	the	 crystal.	Jenny	was	 aware	that	her	 hands	were
shaking,	her	whole	body	hurting	 with	 a	pain	that	radiated	from	 a	seed	of	cold
under	her	 breast-bone,	her	 throat	 a	 bundle	 of	 twisted	  wires.	 She	thought
blindly,	  John,	 remembering	  him	 striding	  with	  graceful	  insouciance	 into
Zyerne’s	 dining	  room,	 his	 armor	 of	  outrageousness	protecting	 him	  from
Zyerne’s	claws;	she	remembered	the	flash	of	autumn	daylight	 on	his	 specs	as
he	stood	ankle-deep	in	 pig	muck	 at	the	Hold,	 reaching	 up	his	 hands	to	help
her	dismount.
       She	could	 not	conceive	of	 what	life	 would	 be	like	 without	 that	fleeting,
triangular	grin.
       Then	somewhere	in	her	mind	 she	heard	him	call	out	to	her:	Jenny...


She	found	him	 lying	 just	 beyond	the	 edge	of	the	 trapezoid	of	 light	 that	 fell

165
through	 the	 vast	square	 of	 the	 Gates.	She	 had	 left	 Moon	  Horse	 outside,
tossing	her	head	in	fear	 at	the	acrid	reek	of	 the	dragon	that	 pervaded	all	that
end	of	the	Vale.	Jenny’s	own	heart	was	pounding,	so	that	it	 almost	turned	her
sick;	all	the	way	across	the	ruins	of	Deeping	she	had	been	waiting	for	the	dark
shape	of	the	dragon	to	emerge	from	the	Gates.
       But	 nothing	 had	come	forth.	 The	silence	within	 the	darkness	was	worse
than	any	sound	could	have	been.
       After	  the	 brightness	 of	 the	 Vale,	 the	blue	 vaults	 of	  the	Market	  Hall
seemed	almost	black.	The	air	was	murky	 with	vapors	that	 diffused	what	little
light	 there	was.	 The	 trapped	fumes	 burned	her	 eyes	and	 turned	 her	dizzy,
mixed	with	 the	smoke	of	 burning	 and	the	heavy	reek	of	 poisoned	slag.	Even
with	a	wizard’s	 sight,	it	 took	Jenny’s	eyes	a	moment	to	accustom	themselves.
Then	sickness	came	over	her,	as	if	 the	blood	that	lay	 spread	everywhere	had
come	from	her	body,	rather	than	John’s.
       He	 lay	 with	 his	face	hidden	 by	his	 outflung	 arm,	the	mail	 coif	 dragged
back	and	the	hair	beneath	it	 matted	with	 blood	where	 it	had	not	 been	singed
away.	Blood	 lay	  in	 a	long,	 inky	  trail	 behind	 him,	 showing	  where	he	 had
crawled	after	the	fight	 was	over,	past	the	carcass	of	the	horse	Osprey,	leading
like	a	sticky	path	to	the	vast,	dark	bulk	 of	the	dragon.
       The	 dragon	lay	still,	 like	 a	shining	 mound	of	obsidian	 knives.	Supine,	it
was	a	little	  higher	 than	her	 waist,	 a	glittering	  blacksnake	nearly	 forty	  feet
long,	veiled	 in	the	white	 smoke	of	 its	poisons	and	the	 darkness	of	its	magic,
harpoons	sticking	 from	  it	 like	 darts.	 One	foreleg	 lay	 stretched	 out	 toward
John,	as	if	with	 its	last	strength	it	had	reached	to	tear	him,	and	the	great	talon
lay	like	 a	skeleton	hand	in	 a	pool	 of	leaked	black	 blood.	The	 atmosphere	all
about	it	 seemed	heavy,	filled	 with	 a	sweet,	clear	 singing	that	 Jenny	thought
was	as	much	within	 her	 skull	 as	outside	of	it.	 It	 was	a	song	with	  words	she
could	 not	 understand;	a	 song	 about	 stars	and	 cold	 and	 the	long,	  ecstatic
plunge	through	 darkness.	The	tune	 was	half-familiar,	  as	if	 she	had	 heard	a
phrase	of	it	once,	long	ago,	and	had	carried	it	since	in	her	dreams.
       Then	the	dragon	Morkeleb	 raised	his	head,	and	for	a	time	she	looked	into
his	eyes.

166
       They	 were	like	 lamps,	 a	crystalline	 white	 kaleidoscope,	cold	and	sweet
and	burning	as	the	core	of	a	flame.	It	struck	her	with	 a	sense	of	overwhelming
shock	that	 she	looked	into	 the	 eyes	of	 a	mage	like	  herself.	It	 was	 an	alien
intelligence,	clean	and	cutting	as	a	sliver	of	 black	glass.	There	was	something
terrible	and	fascinating	 about	those	eyes;	the	singing	 in	 her	mind	 was	like	 a
voice	 speaking	to	 her	 in	 words	 she	 almost	understood.	 She	felt	  a	calling
within	her	to	the	hungers	that	had	all	of	her	life	 consumed	her.
       With	 a	desperate	wrench,	she	pulled	her	thoughts	from	 it	 and	turned	her
eyes	aside.
       She	 knew	then	 why	 the	legends	 warned	never	 to	look	 into	 a	 dragon’s
eyes.	It	was	not	 only	 because	the	dragon	could	snag	some	part	of	 your	 soul
and	paralyze	you	with	indecision	while	 it	struck.
       It	 was	because,	in	pulling	 away,	you	left	 some	shred	of	yourself	 behind,
snared	in	those	ice-crystal	depths.
       She	turned	to	flee,	 to	leave	that	place	and	those	too-knowing	eyes,	to	run
from	 the	singing	 that	 whispered	to	 the	harmonics	 of	 her	bones.	She	would
have	run,	but	her	booted	foot	brushed	something	as	she	turned.	Looking	down
to	the	man	who	lay	 at	her	feet,	she	saw	for	the	first	 time	that	 his	wounds	still
bled.

167
                                    CHAPTER	                    X


“HE	CAN’T	BE	dying!”	Gareth	finished	laying	a	heap	of	fresh-cut	branches
beside	the	low	fire	and	turned	to	Jenny,	his	eyes	pleading	with	her.	As	if,
Jenny	thought,	with	what	power	was	left	 in	her	 numbed	mind,	his	saying
could	make	it	so.
       Without	speaking,	she	leaned	across	to	touch	the	ice-cold	face	of	the
man	who	lay	covered	with	plaids	and	bearskins,	so	close	to	the	flickering
blaze.
       Her	mind	 felt	blunted,	like	 a	traveler	lost	in	 the	woods	who	returned
again	and	again	to	the	same	place,	unable	to	struggle	clear.
       She	had	known	that	it	would	come	to	this,	when	first	she	had	taken	him
into	her	life.	She	should	never	have	yielded	to	the	mischief	in	those	brown
eyes.	She	should	have	sent	him	away	and	not	given	in	to	that	weak	part	of
herself	that	whispered:	I	want	a	friend.
       She	stood	up	and	shook	out	her	skirts,	pulling	 her	plaid	more	tightly
around	her	sheepskin	jacket.	Gareth	was	watching	her	with	frightened	dog
eyes,	hurt	and	pleading;	he	followed	her	over	to	the	heap	of	the	packs	on	the
other	side	of	the	fire.
       She	could	have	had	her	fill	  of	lovers.	 There	were	always	those	who
would	lie	with	a	witch	for	the	novelty	of	it	or	for	the	luck	it	was	said	to	bring.
Why	had	she	let	him	stay	until	morning	and	talked	to	him	as	if	he	were	not	a
man	and	an	enemy	whom	she	knew	even	then	would	fetter	her	soul?	Why	had
she	let	him	touch	her	heart	as	well	as	her	body?
       The	night	 was	dead-still,	the	sky	dark	save	for	 the	white	disc	of	 the
waxing	moon.	Its	ghostly	light	barely	outlined	the	broken	bones	of	the	empty
town	below.	A	 log	 settled	in	the	 dying	fire;	 the	spurt	 of	light	 touched	a
spangle	of	red	on	the	twisted	links	of	John’s	mail	shirt	and	glimmered	stickily
on	the	upturned	palm	of	one	blistered	hand.	Jenny	felt	her	whole	body	one
open	wound	of	grief.

168
       We	 change	what	 we	touch,	 she	thought.	 Why	 had	she	 let	him	 change
her?	She	had	been	happy,	alone	with	her	magic.	The	key	to	magic	is	magic—
she	should	have	held	to	that	from	 the	start.	She	had	known	 even	then	that	he
was	a	man	who	would	give	his	life	 to	help	others,	even	others	not	his	own.
       If	 he	had	waited	for	Zyerne...
       She	 pushed	the	 thought	 away	 with	 bitter	 violence,	 knowing	  Zyerne’s
magic	could	have	saved	him.	 All	 day	she	had	wanted	to	weep,	not	 only	with
grief,	but	with	 anger	at	herself	for	all	the	choices	of	the	past.
       Thin	  and	plaintive	 as	a	child’s,	  Gareth’s	voice	 broke	into	 her	 circle	 of
stumbling	self-hate.	“Isn’t	 there	anything	that	you	can	do?”
       “I	  have	 done	 what	 I	  can,”	 she	 replied	 wearily.	  “I	 have	 washed	 his
wounds	 and	 stitched	 them	 shut,	  laid	 spells	 of	  healing	  upon	 them.	 The
dragon’s	blood	is	a	poison	in	 his	veins,	and	he	has	lost	too	much	blood	 of	his
own.”
       “But	  surely	there’s	something...”	In	 the	brief	gleam	of	 the	fire,	she	could
see	that	he	had	 been	weeping.	 Her	own	 soul	 felt	 cold	 now	 and	drained	 as
John’s	flesh.
       “You	 have	asked	me	that	seven	times	since	it	grew	dark,”	she	said.	“This
is	beyond	my	skills—beyond	 the	medicines	that	I	have—beyond	my	magic.”
       She	tried	 to	 tell	herself	 that,	even	had	she	not	 loved	him,	 even	had	she
not	given	up	the	 time	she	could	have	spent	studying,	it	 would	 still	 have	been
so.
       Would	 she	have	been	able	to	save	him,	if	she	had	not	given	him	all	those
hours;	if	 she	had	spent	all	those	early	mornings	 meditating	among	the	stones
in	the	solitude	of	the	hilltop	 instead	of	lying	 talking	in	 his	bed?
       Or	 would	 she	 only	 have	been	a	 little	 bleaker,	 a	little	 madder—a	 little
more	like	the	worst	side	of	herself—a	little	 more	like	 Caerdinn?
       She	did	 not	know,	 and	the	hurt	 of	that	was	 almost	as	bad	as	the	hurt	of
suspecting	that	she	did	know.
       But	 she	had	 only	 her	own	 small	 powers—spells	worked	 one	rune	 at	a
time,	patiently,	in	 the	smallest	increments	of	thought.	 She	slowed	and	calmed
her	mind,	as	she	did	when	she	worked	magic,	and	realized	she	could	not	cure

169
him.	What	 then	 could	 she	do	for	 him?	 What	 had	Mab	 said,	 when	she	had
spoken	of	healing?
       She	ran	 her	hands	through	 her	long	 hair,	shifting	 the	 weight	 of	it	 from
her	face	and	neck.	 Her	shoulders	hurt	 with	 cramp;	 she	had	not	slept	 in	 two
nights,	and	her	body	ached.
       “The	 most	we	can	do	now	is	keep	heating	stones	in	the	fire	to	put	around
him,”	she	said	at	last.	“We	must	keep	him	warm.”
       Gareth	swallowed	 and	wiped	his	nose.	“Just	that?”
       “For	  now,	yes.	If	 he	seems	a	little	 stronger	 in	the	 morning,	we	 may	be
able	to	 move	him.”	  But	 she	knew	in	 her	 heart	that	 he	would	 not	 live	 until
morning.	Like	 a	whispering	echo,	the	vision	in	 the	water	bowl	returned	to	her,
a	bitter	nightmare	of	failed	 hope.
       Hesitantly,	   Gareth	 offered,	   “There	  are	  physicians	 up	  at	  Halnath.
Polycarp,	for	one.”
       “And	  an	army	around	its	walls.”	 Her	voice	sounded	very	cold	to	her	own
ears.	“If	 he’s	 still	 alive	 in	 the	 morning...	 I	 didn’t	  want	you	 to	 risk	 putting
yourself	 once	again	 where	Zyerne	 might	 reach	 you,	 but	 in	 the	morning,	 I
think	you	should	take	Battlehammer	and	ride	back	to	Bel.”
       Gareth	 looked	 frightened	 at	 the	mention	 of	 Zyerne’s	 name	and	 at	the
thought	of	 possibly	facing	 her	alone,	but	 he	nodded.	Jenny	was	interested	to
note,	in	some	detached	portion	of	her	tired	soul,	that,	having	sought	all	his	life
for	heroism,	while	 Gareth	might	now	flinch	 from	 it,	he	did	not	flee.
       She	went	 on,	“Go	 to	the	house	of	the	gnomes	and	fetch	 Miss	Mab	 here.
The	medicines	of	 the	 gnomes	may	be	locked	 away	in	 the	 Deep,	but...”	 Her
voice	trailed	off.	 Then	she	repeated	softly,	“The	medicines	of	the	gnomes.”
       Like	 pins	 and	needles	in	a	numbed	limb,	 the	 hurt	of	 hope	renewed	as	a
sudden	wash	of	agony.	She	whispered,	“Gareth,	where	are	John’s	maps?”
       Gareth	  blinked	  at	 her	 uncomprehendingly,	  too	  preoccupied	 for	  the
moment	with	his	own	 fears	of	Zyerne	to	realize	what	she	was	getting	at.	Then
he	gave	a	start,	and	hope	 flooded	into	 his	 face,	and	he	let	 out	a	 whoop	that
could	have	been	heard	in	 Bel.	“The	 Places	of	 Healing!”	 he	 cried,	and	threw
his	arms	around	her,	sweeping	her	off	 her	feet.	“I	 knew	 it!”	 he	shouted,	with

170
all	 his	old	 forlorn	  cockiness.	 “I	 knew	 you	 could	 think	 of	  something!	 You
can...”
       “You	 don’t	 know	anything	 of	the	kind.”	 She	fought	 free	of	him,	 angry	at
him	for	 expressing	what	was	already	surging	through	her	veins	like	 a	swig	 of
cheap	brandy.	She	 brushed	past	 him	 and	almost	 ran	 to	 John’s	side,	 while
Gareth,	gamboling	 like	  a	large	 puppy,	 began	to	 ransack	the	 camp	 for	 the
maps.
       If	 there	was	anything	 worse	than	the	pain	of	 despair,	she	thought,	it	was
the	pain	of	hope.	At	 least	despair	is	restful.	Her	own	 heart	was	hammering	as
she	brushed	aside	the	russet	hair	from	John’s	forehead,	almost	 black-looking
now	against	the	 bloodless	flesh.	Her	 mind	 was	racing	ahead,	ticking	 off	 the
remedies	Mab	had	spoken	of:	distillations	 to	 slow	and	strengthen	the	thready
heartbeat;	salves	to	promote	the	healing	of	the	flesh;	and	philters	to	counteract
poison	and	give	him	 back	the	blood	he	had	lost.	There	would	 be	spell-books,
too,	she	thought,	hidden	 in	the	 Places	of	Healing,	 words	with	 which	 to	 bind
the	soul	to	the	flesh,	 until	the	 flesh	itself	 could	recover.	She	could	find	 them,
she	told	herself	desperately,	she	must.	But	the	knowledge	of	what	was	at	stake
lay	on	 her	heart	like	 stones.	For	 a	moment	 she	felt	 so	tired	 that	she	almost
wished	for	his	death,	because	it	would	require	no	further	striving	 from	her	and
threaten	her	with	no	further	failure.
       Holding	 his	 icy	hands,	she	slid	for	a	moment	into	 the	outer	fringes	of	the
healing	trance	and	whispered	to	 him	 by	his	 inner	name.	But	 it	 was	as	if	 she
called	at	the	head	of	a	descending	trail	 along	which	 he	had	long	since	passed
—there	was	no	answer.
       But	 there	was	something	else.	In	 her	trance	she	heard	it,	a	soft	 touch	of
sound	that	twisted	her	heart	with	fright—	 the	slur	of	 scales	on	rock,	the	shiver
of	alien	music.
       Her	 eyes	opened;	she	found	herself	shaking	and	cold.
       The	dragon	was	alive.
       “Jenny?”	  Gareth	 came	 nattering	 over	 to	  her	 side,	his	  hands	full	  of
creased	bits	of	dirty	 papyrus.	“I	  found	them,	 but—but	the	 Places	of	Healing
aren’t	on	 them.”	 His	 eyes	were	filled	 with	  worry	 behind	the	 cracked,	crazy

171
specs.	“I’ve	looked...”
       Jenny	 took	them	 from	 his	hand	with	 fingers	 that	shook.	 In	the	firelight
she	could	make	out	passages,	caverns,	rivers,	all	marked	in	Dromar’s	 strong,
runic	hand,	 and	the	blank	 spots,	unmarked	 and	unlabeled.	The	 affair	 of	 the
gnomes.
       Anger	  wrenched	 at	 her,	 and	 she	 threw	 the	 maps	 from	  her.	 “Damn
Dromar	and	 his	secrets,”	 she	whispered	viciously.	 “Of	  course	the	Places	of
Healing	are	the	heart	of	the	Deep	that	they	all	swear	by!”
       “But—”	    Gareth	 stammered	 weakly.	 “Can	  you—can	  you	 find	  them
anyway?”
       Fury	 welled	 up	 in	her,	 of	hope	 thwarted,	first	 by	 fear	and	 now	by	 one
gnome’s	 stubbornness,	 like	  molten	 rock	  pouring	  through	  the	 cracks	 of
exhaustion	in	 her	 soul.	 “In	 those	warrens?”	 she	 demanded.	For	 a	moment
anger,	weariness,	and	the	knowledge	of	the	dragon	claimed	her,	tearing	at	her
so	that	she	could	have	 screamed	and	called	down	the	 lightning	 to	 rive	apart
the	earth.
       As	 Zyerne	 did,	she	told	 herself,	fighting	  for	 calm.	She	closed	her	 fists,
one	around	the	other,	and	pressed	her	lips	against	them,	willing	  the	rage	and
the	fear	to	pass;	and	when	they	passed,	there	was	nothing	left.	It	was	as	if	the
unvoiced	scream	had	burned	everything	out	of	her	and	left	only	 a	well	of	dark
and	unnatural	calm,	a	universe	deep.
       Gareth	 was	 still	  looking	  at	 her,	his	 eyes	 pleading.	 She	 said	 quietly,
“Maybe.	Mab	 spoke	of	the	way.	I	may	be	able	to	reason	it	out.”	 Mab	had	also
said	 that	 one	 false	  step	 would	  condemn	 her	 to	  a	 death	 by	 starvation,
wandering	in	darkness.
       Like	 an	 answer,	she	knew	at	once	what	John	would	 have	said	 to	that—
God’s	Grandmother,	 Jen,	the	dragon’ll	  eat	 you	before	 you	get	 a	 chance	to
starve.
       Trust	 John,	she	thought,	to	make	me	laugh	at	a	time	like	this.
       She	got	 to	her	feet,	chilled	 to	 the	bone	and	feeling	 a	hundred	years	old,
and	walked	to	the	packs	once	more.	Gareth	trailed	along	after	her,	hugging	his
crimson	cloak	 about	 himself	 for	 warmth	 and	chattering	 on	about	 one	thing

172
and	another;	locked	in	that	strange	stasis	of	calm,	Jenny	scarcely	heard.
       It	 was	only	as	she	slung	her	big	satchel	about	her	shoulder	and	picked	up
her	halberd	that	 he	seemed	to	 feel	her	 silence.	“Jenny,”	  he	said	doubtfully,
catching	the	edge	of	 her	plaid.	 “Jenny—the	dragon	 is	dead,	isn’t	 it?	I	 mean,
the	poison	did	work,	 didn’t	 it?	 It	must	have,	if	 you	 were	able	to	get	John	out
of	there...”
       “No,”	   Jenny	said	 quietly.	  She	wondered	 a	 little	 at	 the	 weird	 silence
within	her;	she	had	felt	more	fear	listening	 for	the	Whisperers	in	the	Woods	of
Wyr	 than	she	did	 now.	She	 started	to	move	 off	 toward	 the	darkness	of	 the
shadow-drowned	ruins.	Gareth	 ran	around	in	 front	 of	 her	and	caught	her	 by
the	arms.
       “But—that	  is—how	long...”
       She	shook	 her	head.	“Too	 long,	 almost	certainly.”	 She	put	 her	hand	on
his	wrist	to	move	 him	aside.	Having	made	up	her	mind	what	 she	must	do,	she
wanted	it	over	with,	 though	she	knew	she	would	never	succeed.
       Gareth	swallowed	 hard,	his	thin	face	working	 in	the	low	 ruby	light	 of	the
fire.	“I—I’ll	   go,”	 he	volunteered	shakily.	“Tell	 me	what	I	should	look	 for,	and
I...”
       For	 an	instant,	 laughter	threatened	to	 crack	all	 her	hard-won	 resolve—
not	laughter	at	him,	 but	at	 the	wan	gallantry	 that	impelled	 him,	 like	the	 hero
of	a	 ballad,	 to	take	 her	place.	 But	 he	would	 not	 have	understood	 how	 she
loved	him	for	 the	offer,	absurd	as	it	was;	and	if	 she	began	to	laugh	she	would
cry,	and	that	weakness	she	knew	she	could	not	now	afford.	So	she	only	 stood
on	her	toes	and	pulled	his	shoulders	down	so	that	she	could	kiss	his	 soft,	thin
cheek.	“Thank	 you,	Gareth,”	 she	murmured.	 “But	 I	 can	see	in	the	darkness,
and	you	cannot,	and	I	know	what	I	seek.”
       “Really,”	   he	  persisted,	 torn	  visibly	   between	 relief	   at	 her	  refusal,
awareness	that	she	was	in	fact	far	better	suited	than	he	for	the	task,	a	lifetime
of	chivalric	 precept,	and	a	very	real	desire	to	protect	her	from	harm.
       “No,”	  she	said	 gently.	“Just	 see	that	John	stays	 warm.	If	 I	 don’t	 come
back...”	Her	voice	faltered	 at	the	knowledge	of	what	lay	before	her—the	death
by	the	 dragon,	 or	the	 death	within	  the	 maze.	She	forced	 strength	 into	 her

173
words.	“Do	what	 seems	best	to	you,	but	don’t	try	to	move	him	too	soon.”
       The	 admonition	  was	 futile,	 and	 she	 knew	 it.	 She	 tried	 to	 remember
Mab’s	words	regarding	the	lightless	 labyrinths	of	 the	Deep	and	they	slid	from
her	mind	 like	 a	fistful	  of	water,	 leaving	only	 the	 recollection	 of	the	 shining
wheels	of	 diamond	 that	 were	 the	dragon’s	 watching	 eyes.	 But	 she	had	 to
reassure	Gareth;	and	while	  John	breathed,	she	knew	 she	 could	never	 have
remained	in	camp.
       She	squeezed	Gareth’s	hand	and	withdrew	from	him.	 Hitching	 her	plaids
higher	on	her	shoulder,	she	turned	toward	the	shadowy	trails	through	the	Vale
and	the	dark	bulk	 of	 Nast	Wall	 that	loomed	 against	a	sullen	 and	pitchy	 sky.
Her	final	 glimpse	of	 John	was	of	the	last	 glow	of	 the	dying	 fire	that	 outlined
the	shape	of	his	nose	and	lips	against	the	darkness.


Long	before	she	reached	the	Great	Gates	of	the	Deep,	Jenny	was	aware	of	the
singing.	As	she	crossed	the	frost-skimmed	stones	of	the	ruins,	bled	of	all	 their
daytime	color	 by	 the	feeble	 wash	of	 the	moonlight,	 she	felt	 it—a	 hunger,	a
yearning,	and	a	terrifying	  beauty,	far	beyond	 her	comprehension.	It	 intruded
into	 her	careful	 piecing-together	 of	  those	fragmentary	 memories	 of	 Mab’s
remarks	about	the	 Places	of	Healing,	 broke	 even	into	 her	 fears	for	 John.	It
seemed	to	float	around	her	 in	the	air,	 and	yet	she	knew	that	 it	could	 only	 be
heard	by	her;	it	shivered	in	her	bones,	down	to	her	very	finger	ends.	When	she
stood	in	the	Gates	with	the	blackness	of	the	Market	 Hall	 lying	 before	her	and
her	own	shadow	a	diffuse	smudge	on	the	scuffed	and	blood-gummed	refuse	of
the	floor,	it	was	almost	overwhelming.
       There	 was	 no	 sound	 to	 it,	 but	 its	  rhythm	 called	 her	 blood.	 Braided
images	that	she	could	neither	completely	sense	nor	wholly	understand	twisted
through	her	consciousness—knots	of	memory,	of	starry	darkness	that	sunlight
had	never	seen,	of	the	joyous	 exhaustion	of	 physical	love	 whose	modes	and
motives	were	 strange	to	 her,	and	 of	 mathematics	and	 curious	 relationships
between	things	that	she	had	never	known	were	akin.	It	 was	stronger	and	very
different	from	 the	singing	that	had	filled	 the	gully	when	the	Golden	Dragon	 of
Wyr	lay	 gasping	its	last.	 There	was	a	piled	 strength	in	 it	of	 years	lived	 fully

174
and	of	patterns	comprehended	across	unknowable	gulfs	of	time.
       The	dragon	was	invisible	 in	the	darkness.	She	heard	the	soft	scrape	of	his
scales	and	guessed	him	to	be	lying	across	the	inner	doors	of	the	Market	 Hall,
that	led	to	the	 Grand	Passage	and	so	into	the	Deep.	Then	the	silver	 lamps	of
his	eyes	opened	and	seemed	to	glow	softly	in	 the	reflected	moonlight,	 and	in
her	mind	 the	 singing	 flowed	 and	intensified	  its	colors	 into	 the	 vortex	 of	 a
white	core.	In	that	core	words	formed.
       Have	 you	 come	seeking	medicines,	wizard	 woman?	Or	 is	 that	 weapon
you	carry	 simply	 what	 you	have	deluded	 yourself	into	 thinking	 sufficient	 to
finish	what	your	poisons	do	too	slowly	 for	your	convenience?
       The	 words	were	almost	 pictures,	music	and	patterns	shaped	as	much	by
her	own	soul	 as	by	his.	They	 would	hurt,	 she	thought,	if	 allowed	 to	sink	 too
deeply.
       “I	  have	come	 seeking	medicines,”	 she	replied,	 her	voice	 reverberating
against	the	fluted	dripstone	of	the	toothed	ceiling.	“The	 power	of	the	Places	of
Healing	was	everywhere	renowned.”
       This	 I	knew.	There	was	a	knot	of	gnomes	that	held	out	in	the	place	where
they	took	all	the	wounded.	The	door	was	low,	but	I	 could	reach	through	it	 like
a	wolf	 raiding	 a	 bury	 of	rabbits.	 I	 fed	upon	 them	for	 many	days,	until	 they
were	all	 gone.	 They	had	the	 wherewithal	 to	 make	poisons	there,	 too.	 They
poisoned	the	carrion,	 as	if	 they	did	 not	think	 that	 I	 could	see	the	death	that
tainted	the	meat.	This	will	be	the	place	that	you	seek.
       Because	he	spoke	partially	 in	 pictures,	she	glimpsed	also	the	 dark	ways
into	the	 place,	like	 a	half-remembered	dream	 in	her	 mind.	Her	 hope	stirred,
and	she	 fixed	  the	 pictures	 in	 her	 thoughts—tiny	   fragments,	 but	 perhaps
enough	to	serve.
       With	 her	 wizard’s	sight	 she	could	distinguish	 him	now,	 stretched	before
her	across	the	doors	in	the	darkness.	He	had	dislodged	the	harpoons	from	his
throat	and	belly,	and	 they	lay	blackened	with	 his	 blood	in	 the	muck	 of	slime
and	ash	on	the	floor.	 The	thorny	 scales	of	his	 back	and	sides	lay	 sleek	now,
their	edges	shining	faintly	in	 the	dim	reflection	 of	the	moon.	The	heavy	ridges
of	spikes	that	guarded	his	backbone	and	the	joints	of	his	legs	still	 bristled	like

175
weapons.	The	enormous	 wings	 lay	 folded	 neatly	along	 his	 sides,	and	their
joints,	too,	 she	saw,	were	armored	and	spined.	His	head	fascinated	her	most,
long	 and	narrow	 and	 birdlike,	  its	 shape	concealed	under	 a	 mask	of	  bony
plates.	From	those	plates	grew	a	vast	mane	of	ribbonlike	scales,	mingled	with
tufts	 of	 fur	 and	what	 looked	 like	  growths	 of	 ferns	 and	feathers;	 his	long,
delicate	antennae	with	 their	 glittering	 bobs	of	 jet	 lay	 limp	 upon	the	 ground
around	his	head.	He	 lay	 like	 a	dog,	 his	chin	 between	his	 forepaws;	but	 the
eyes	that	burned	into	hers	were	the	eyes	of	a	mage	who	is	also	a	beast.
       I	 will	 bargain	with	 you,	wizard	woman.
       She	knew,	with	 chill	 premonition	 but	no	surprise	what	his	bargain	would
be,	and	her	heart	quickened,	though	whether	with	dread	or	some	strange	hope
she	did	not	know.	She	said,	“No,”	 but	 within	 herself	she	felt,	like	 a	forbidden
longing,	the	 unwillingness	 to	let	something	 this	beautiful,	 this	 powerful,	 die.
He	was	evil,	she	told	 herself,	knowing	 and	believing	 it	in	 her	heart.	Yet	there
was	something	 in	those	 silver	 eyes	that	drew	 her,	 some	song	of	 black	 and
latent	fire	whose	music	she	understood.
       The	 dragon	moved	 his	head	a	little	  on	the	 powerful	 curve	of	 his	 neck.
Blood	dripped	down	from	 the	tattered	ribbons	of	his	mane.
       Do	 you	think	 that	 even	you,	a	wizard	 who	sees	in	darkness,	can	search
out	the	ways	of	the	gnomes?
       The	 pictures	that	 filled	 her	 mind	 were	of	 the	darkness,	of	 clammy	 and
endless	mazes	of	the	 world	 underground.	 Her	heart	 sank	with	  dread	at	the
awareness	of	 them;	 those	few	  small	 images	of	  the	 way	 to	 the	 Places	of
Healing,	 those	 fragmentary	 words	  of	 Mab’s,	  turned	 in	 her	 hands	 to	 the
pebbles	with	which	a	child	 thinks	it	can	slaughter	lions.
       Still	 she	said,	“I	 have	spoken	to	one	of	them	of	these	ways.”
       And	 did	 she	tell	 the	truth?	 The	gnomes	are	not	 famed	for	 it	 in	 matters
concerning	the	heart	of	the	Deep.
       Jenny	  remembered	 the	 empty	  places	 on	  Dromar’s	  maps.	 But	  she
retorted,	“Nor	are	dragons.”
       Beneath	  the	 exhaustion	  and	  pain,	 she	  felt	  in	  the	  dragon’s	 mind
amusement	at	her	reply,	like	a	thin	spurt	of	cold	water	in	hot.

176
       What	 is	truth,	wizard	 woman?	The	truth	that	 dragons	see	is	not	pleasant
to	the	human	eyes,	however	uncomfortably	comprehensible	it	 may	be	to	their
hearts.	You	know	this.
       She	 saw	that	he	 had	felt	 her	fascination.	 The	silver	 eyes	drew	 her;	his
mind	touched	hers,	as	a	seducer	would	have	touched	her	hand.	She	saw,	also,
that	he	understood	that	she	would	not	 draw	back	from	 that	touch.	She	forced
her	thoughts	away	 from	 him,	 holding	 to	the	 memories	of	 John	and	of	 their
sons,	against	the	power	that	called	to	her	like	a	whisper	of	amorphous	night.
       With	 effort,	 she	tore	her	eyes	from	his	and	turned	to	leave.
       Wizard	 woman,	do	 you	think	 this	 man	for	 whom	 you	risk	 the	bones	of
your	body	will	 live	longer	than	 I?
       She	 stopped,	the	 toes	of	 her	 boots	touching	 the	 hem	of	 the	 carpet	of
moonlight	 which	lay	 upon	the	flagstoned	floor.	 Then	she	turned	back	to	 face
him,	despairing	and	torn.	 The	wan	light	 showed	 her	the	pools	of	 acrid	blood
drying	over	 so	much	of	 the	floor,	 the	sunken	look	 to	 the	dragon’s	flesh;	 and
she	realized	that	his	question	had	struck	at	her	weakness	and	despair	to	cover
his	own.
       She	said	calmly,	“There	 is	the	chance	that	he	will.”
       She	felt	 the	anger	in	 the	movement	of	 his	head,	and	the	pain	that	 sliced
through	him	 with	 it.	 And	will	 you	 wager	on	 that?	Will	 you	wager	 that,	even
did	the	 gnomes	speak	the	truth,	 you	 will	 be	 able	to	 sort	 your	 way	through
their	warrens,	spiral	 within	 spiral,	 dark	within	 dark,	 to	find	 what	you	need	in
time?	Heal	me,	wizard	 woman,	and	I	 will	 guide	 you	with	 my	mind	and	show
you	the	place	that	you	seek.
       For	 a	time	she	only	 gazed	up	at	that	long	 bulk	of	 shining	blackness,	the
dark	mane	of	 bloody	 ribbons,	 and	the	 eyes	like	 oiled	 metal	 ringing	 eternal
darkness.	He	was	a	wonder	such	as	she	had	never	seen,	a	spined	and	supple
shadow	from	 the	thorned	tips	 of	his	 backswept	wings	 to	the	horned	 beak	of
his	nose.	The	Golden	 Dragon	John	had	 slain	on	the	 windswept	 hills	 of	Wyr
had	been	a	being	of	sun	and	fire,	but	 this	was	a	smoke-wraith	 of	night,	 black
and	strong	and	old	as	time.	The	spines	of	his	head	grew	into	 fantastic	twisted
horns,	icy-smooth	as	steel;	his	forepaws	had	the	shape	of	hands,	save	that	they

177
had	two	thumbs	instead	of	one.	The	 voice	that	spoke	in	her	 mind	was	steady,
but	she	could	see	the	weakness	dragging	at	every	line	 of	that	 great	body	and
feel	the	faint	 shiver	 of	the	last	 taut	strength	that	fought	 to	 continue	the	bluff
against	her.
       Unwillingly,	  she	said,	“I	 know	nothing	of	 the	healing	of	dragons.”
       The	 silver	eyes	narrowed,	as	if	 she	had	asked	him	for	 something	he	had
not	thought	 to	 give.	 For	 a	moment	 they	 faced	one	 another,	cloaked	in	 the
cave’s	 darkness.	 She	 was	  aware	 of	  John	  and	 of	  time—distantly,	   like
something	urgent	in	a	dream.	But	she	kept	her	thoughts	concentrated	upon	the
creature	that	lay	 before	her	and	 the	diamond-prickled	 darkness	of	 that	alien
mind	that	struggled	with	 hers.
       Then	 suddenly	the	gleaming	body	convulsed.	She	felt,	 through	the	silver
eyes,	the	pain	like	a	scream	through	the	steel	ropes	of	his	muscles.	The	wings
stretched	out	uncontrollably,	  the	claws	 extending	in	 a	 terrible	 spasm	as	the
poison	shifted	in	his	veins.	The	voice	in	 her	mind	whispered,	Go.
       At	 the	 same	moment	memories	flooded	her	 thoughts	of	a	place	 she	had
never	been	before.	Vague	images	crowded	to	her	mind	of	blackness	as	vast	as
the	night	outdoors,	columned	 with	a	forest	 of	stone	trees	that	whispered	back
the	echo	of	 every	 breath,	of	 rock	 seams	a	few	 yards	across	whose	ceilings
were	lost	 in	distant	 darkness,	and	of	 the	murmuring	 of	 endless	water	 under
stone.	She	felt	a	vertigo	 of	terror	 as	in	a	nightmare,	but	also	a	queer	sense	of
déjà	vu,	as	if	she	had	passed	that	way	before.
       It	 came	to	her	that	it	was	Morkeleb	and	not	she	who	had	passed	that	way;
the	images	were	the	way	to	the	Places	of	Healing,	the	very	heart	of	the	Deep.
       The	 spined	 black	 body	 before	 her	 twisted	 with	  another	paroxysm	 of
anguish,	the	huge	tail	 slashing	like	 a	whip	 against	the	 rock	of	 the	wall.	 The
pain	was	 visible	 now	 in	the	 silver	 eyes	as	the	poison	 ate	into	 the	 dragon’s
blood.	Then	his	 body	dropped	 slack,	a	dry	 clatter	of	 horns	and	spines	like	 a
skeleton	falling	  on	 a	stone	 floor,	 and	 from	 a	great	 distance	off	  she	heard
again,	Go.
       His	 scales	had	all	 risen	in	a	blanket	 of	 razors	at	his	agony;	 quiveringly,
they	smoothed	 themselves	flat	 along	 the	 sunken	sides.	Jenny	 gathered	her

178
courage	and	strode	forward;	without	 giving	 herself	 time	to	 think	of	 what	she
was	doing,	 she	scrambled	 over	 the	waist-high	 hill	  of	 the	 ebony	flank	  that
blocked	the	 doorway	 of	 the	Grand	 Tunnel.	 The	backbone	ridge	 was	 like	 a
hedge	of	  spears,	thrusting	 stiffly	   from	 the	 unsteady	 footing	  of	 the	 hide.
Kilting	 up	her	skirt,	 she	put	a	hand	to	steady	herself	on	the	carved	stone	pillar
of	the	doorjamb	and	leaped	over	the	spines	awkwardly,	fearing	 to	the	last	that
some	renewed	convulsion	would	thrust	them	into	her	thighs.
       But	 the	dragon	lay	 quiet.	Jenny	could	sense	only	the	echoes	of	his	mind
within	  hers,	like	  a	 faint	 gleam	  of	 far-off	  light.	  Before	 her	 stretched	 the
darkness	of	the	Deep.


If	she	thought	about	them,	the	visions	she	had	seen	retreated	from	her.	But	she
found	 that	 if	 she	simply	  walked	 forward,	  as	if	  she	had	 trodden	this	 way
before,	her	feet	would	lead	her.	Dream	memories	whispered	through	her	mind
of	things	 she	had	seen,	but	sometimes	the	angle	of	 sight	 was	different,	 as	if
she	had	looked	down	upon	them	from	above.
       The	 upper	levels	of	the	Deep	were	 dry,	wrought	by	 the	gnomes	after	the
fashion	of	the	 tastes	of	men.	The	Grand	Passage,	thirty	feet	broad	and	paved
in	black	 granite,	worn	 and	runnelled	with	 the	track	 of	uncounted	generations
of	feet,	had	been	walled	 with	 blocks	of	 cut	stone	to	 hide	the	irregularities	 of
its	shape;	broken	 statues	lying	 like	 scattered	bones	in	 the	 dark	attested	the
classical	 appearance	of	 the	  place	 in	 its	  heyday.	 Among	 the	  fragmented
whiteness	of	 the	 marble	 limbs	 lay	  real	bones,	 and	with	  them	 the	 twisted
bronze	frames	and	shattered	glass	of	the	huge	lamps	that	had	once	depended
from	 the	high	 ceiling,	 all	 scraped	together	along	 the	walls,	 like	 leaves	in	 a
gutter,	by	 the	passage	of	 the	dragon’s	 body.	Even	 in	 the	darkness,	Jenny’s
wizard’s	sight	 showed	her	the	fire-blackening	 where	 the	spilled	 oil	had	been
ignited	by	the	dragon’s	breath.
       Deeper	 down,	 the	place	 had	the	 look	 of	 the	 gnomes.	Stalagmites	and
columns	ceased	to	be	carved	into	the	straight	pillars	favored	by	the	children	of
men,	and	 were	 wrought	 into	 the	 semblance	of	 trees	 in	 leaf,	 or	 beasts,	or
grotesque	things	that	could	have	been	either;	 more	and	more	frequently	 they

179
had	simply	 been	left	 to	keep	the	original	  shape	of	pouring	 water	which	 had
been	their	own.	The	straight,	handsomely	finished	water	 courses	of	the	higher
levels	gave	place	to	tumbling	 streams	in	the	 lower	deeps;	in	some	places	the
water	fell	 straight,	 fifty	 or	 a	hundred	feet	from	 distant	 ceilings,	like	 a	 living
pillar,	or	gushed	away	into	darkness	through	conduits	shaped	like	the	skulls	of
gargoyles.	Jenny	passed	through	caverns	and	systems	of	caves	that	had	been
transformed	into	 the	vast,	 interconnected	dwelling	  places	of	 the	great	clans
and	families	 of	 the	gnomes,	but	 elsewhere	she	found	 halls	and	rooms	 large
enough	to	contain	 all	the	 village	 of	 Deeping,	where	houses	and	palaces	had
been	built	 freestanding,	 their	 bizarre	 spires	 and	catwalks	 indistinguishable
from	the	groves	of	stalagmites	that	clustered	in	strange	forests	on	the	banks	of
pools	and	rivers	like	polished	onyx.
       And	  through	 these	silent	 realms	 of	 wonder	  she	saw	 nothing	 but	 the
evidences	of	ruin	 and	decay	and	the	scraping	 track	of	 the	dragon.	White	 ur-
toads	were	 everywhere,	 squabbling	 with	  rats	 over	 the	 rotting	 remains	 of
stored	food	or	month-old	 carrion;	in	 some	places,	the	putrescent	fetor	of	what
had	been	hoards	of	cheese,	meat,	or	vegetables	was	nearly	unbreathable.	The
white,	eyeless	vermin	of	the	deeper	pits,	whose	names	she	could	only	guess	at
from	Mab’s	 accounts,	slipped	away	at	her	approach,	or	hid	themselves	behind
the	fire-marked	 skulls	 and	dropped	vessels	of	chased	silver	 that	everywhere
scattered	the	halls.
       As	  she	went	 deeper,	 the	air	  became	cold	 and	 very	 damp,	 the	 stone
increasingly	 slimy	   beneath	 her	 boots;	 the	  weight	  of	  the	 darkness	 was
crushing.	As	 she	walked	 the	 lightless	mazes,	she	 understood	that	Mab	 had
been	right;	 without	 guidance,	 even	she,	whose	 eyes	could	 pierce	that	 utter
darkness,	would	never	have	found	her	way	to	the	heart	of	the	Deep.
       But	 find	 it	 she	did.	The	 echo	of	it	 was	in	 the	dragon’s	mind,	 setting	up
queer	resonances	in	her	soul,	a	 lamination	 of	feelings	 and	awareness	whose
alien	nature	she	shrank	from,	uncomprehending.	Beside	its	doors,	she	felt	 the
aura	of	 healing	that	 lingered	 still	 in	 the	air,	 and	the	 faint	 breath	of	 ancient
power.
       All	  through	 that	series	of	 caverns,	the	air	 was	warm,	 smelling	 of	dried

180
camphor	and	spices;	the	putrid	stench	of	decay	and	the	crawling	 vermin	were
absent.	Stepping	 through	 the	 doors	into	  the	 domed	central	 cavern,	 where
ghost-pale	stalactites	regarded	themselves	in	the	oiled	 blackness	of	 a	central
pool,	 she	wondered	 how	 great	 a	spell	  it	 would	 take	 to	 hold	 that	 healing
warmth,	not	only	 against	the	cold	 in	the	abysses	of	the	earth,	but	 for	so	 long
after	those	who	had	wrought	the	spell	had	perished.
       The	magic	 here	was	great	indeed.
       It	  pervaded	the	 place;	as	 she	passed	cautiously	 through	 the	rooms	 of
meditation,	 of	 dreaming,	 or	of	  rest,	Jenny	was	 conscious	 of	 it	 as	a	 living
presence,	rather	than	the	 stasis	of	 dead	spells.	 At	 times	 the	sensation	of	 it
grew	so	strong	 that	she	looked	back	 over	her	 shoulder	and	called	out	 to	the
darkness,	“Is	someone	there?”	though	 in	her	reason	she	knew	there	was	 not.
But	 as	with	  the	 Whisperers	 in	 the	 north,	 her	 feelings	 argued	against	 her
reason,	and	again	and	again	she	extended	her	senses	through	that	dark	place,
her	heart	pounding	in	hope	or	fear—she	could	not	tell	 which.	But	 she	touched
nothing,	nothing	 but	darkness	and	the	drip	of	 water	falling	 eternally	 from	the
hanging	teeth	of	the	stones.
       There	 was	living	 magic	there,	whispering	 to	itself	 in	darkness—and	like
the	touch	of	some	foul	thing	upon	her	flesh,	she	felt	the	sense	of	evil.
       She	 shivered	and	glanced	 around	her	nervously	 once	 more.	In	 a	small
room,	she	found	the	medicines	 she	sought,	row	after	 row	of	 glass	phials	and
stoppered	jars	of	the	green-and-white	marbled	ware	the	gnomes	made	in	such
quantity.	She	read	their	labels	in	the	darkness	and	stowed	them	in	her	satchel,
working	  quickly,	  partly	 from	  a	 growing	  sense	of	  uneasiness	and	 partly
because	she	felt	time	leaking	 away	and	John’s	life	 ebbing	 like	 the	going-out
of	the	tide.
       He	 can’t	die,	 she	told	herself	desperately,	not	after	all	 this—but	 she	had
come	too	late	 to	too	 many	bedsides	in	 her	years	as	a	healer	 to	believe	 that.
Still,	  she	knew	  that	 the	 medicines	 alone	 might	  not	 be	 enough.	 Hastily,
glancing	back	over	 her	shoulder	as	she	moved	from	 room	 to	dark	 and	silent
room,	she	began	searching	for	the	 inner	places	of	 power,	the	libraries	 where
they	would	 store	the	books	 and	scrolls	of	 magic	 that,	she	guessed,	made	up

181
the	true	heart	of	the	Deep.
       Her	 boots	swished	 softly	 on	the	sleek	 floors,	 but	even	that	 small	noise
twisted	at	her	nerves.	The	floors	of	 the	rooms,	like	 all	the	places	inhabited	by
gnomes,	were	never	at	one	level,	but	 made	like	 a	series	of	terraces;	even	the
smallest	chambers	had	two	or	 more.	And	 as	she	searched,	the	eerie	sense	of
being	watched	 grew	upon	 her,	until	  she	feared	to	 pass	through	 new	doors,
half-expecting	 to	meet	some	 evil	 thing	gloating	 in	 the	 blackness.	She	felt	 a
power,	 stronger	 than	 any	  she	had	  encountered—stronger	 than	 Zyerne’s,
stronger	than	the	dragon’s.	But	she	found	 nothing,	neither	that	waiting,	 silent
evil,	nor	 any	book	of	 power	by	 which	 magic	would	 be	transmitted	down	 the
years	among	 the	 gnome	 mages—only	  herbals,	anatomies,	 or	 catalogs	 of
diseases	and	cures.	In	spite	 of	 her	uneasy	fear,	 she	felt	 puzzled—Mab	 had
said	that	the	gnomes	had	no	Lines,	yet	surely	the	power	had	to	be	transmitted
somehow.	So	she	forced	herself	to	seek,	deeper	and	deeper,	for	the	books	that
must	contain	it.
       Exhaustion	 was	beginning	 to	weaken	 her	like	 slow	 illness.	Last	 night’s
watching	and	the	night’s	 before	weighed	her	bones,	and	she	knew	she	would
have	to	abandon	her	search.	But	knowledge	of	her	own	inadequacy	drove	her,
questing	inward	 into	the	forbidden	 heart	of	 the	Deep,	desperate	to	find	 what
she	might	before	she	returned	to	 the	surface	to	do	 what	she	could	with	 what
she	had.
       She	 stepped	through	  a	door	  into	 a	 dark	 place	 that	 echoed	with	  her
breathing.
       She	had	felt	 cold	 before,	but	 it	seemed	nothing	now;	 nothing	 compared
to	the	dread	that	congealed	around	her	heart.
       She	stood	in	 the	place	she	had	seen	in	the	water	 bowl,	 in	the	visions	 of
John’s	death.
       It	 shocked	her,	for	 she	had	come	on	it	unexpectedly.	She	had	thought	to
find	an	archive	 there,	a	place	of	teaching,	for	 she	guessed	this	to	be	the	heart
and	center	of	the	 blank	places	on	Dromar’s	 ambiguous	 maps.	But	through	 a
knotted	forest	of	 stalactites	and	columns,	 she	glimpsed	only	 empty	 darkness
that	smelled	 faintly	 of	 the	 wax	 of	 a	thousand	candles,	 which	 slumped	like

182
dead	things	in	the	 niches	of	the	 rock.	No	 living	 thing	 was	there,	but	 she	felt
again	that	 sense	of	 evil	 and	 she	stepped	cautiously	 forward	  into	 the	open
spaces	of	black	toward	the	misshapen	stone	altar.
       She	 laid	 her	 hands	 upon	 the	 blue-black,	 soapy-feeling	  stone.	In	  her
vision	the	 place	had	been	filled	 with	 muttering	 whispers,	but	 now	there	 was
only	 silence.	For	 a	moment,	 dark	swirlings	  seemed	to	stir	 in	 her	mind,	 the
inchoate	 whisperings	   of	  fragmentary	  visions,	  but	  they	  passed	 like	   a
groundswell,	leaving	no	more	aftertaste	than	a	dream.
       Still,	  they	seemed	to	take	from	 her	the	last	of	 her	strength	and	her	will;
she	felt	bitterly	 weary	and	suddenly	very	 frightened	of	 the	place.	Though	she
heard	no	sound,	she	whirled,	 her	heart	beating	so	that	 she	could	almost	hear
its	thudding	echo	in	 the	dark.	There	was	evil	 there,	somewhere—she	knew	it
now,	felt	it	close	enough	to	leer	over	her	shoulder.	Shifting	 the	bulging	satchel
upon	her	shoulder,	she	hastened	like	a	thief	across	the	slithery	darkness	of	the
gnomes’	dancing	 floor,	  seeking	 the	 ways	 that	 would	 lead	 her	 out	 of	 the
darkness,	back	to	the	air	above.


Morkeleb’s	 mind	had	 guided	her	down	 into	 the	abyss,	but	she	could	 feel	no
touch	of	 it	 now.	She	followed	  the	marks	she	had	 made,	runes	that	only	 she
could	see,	drawn	upon	the	walls	with	 her	forefinger.	As	 she	ascended	through
the	dark	 rock	  seams	and	stairs	 of	  amber	flowstone,	  she	wondered	 if	  the
dragon	were	dead.	A	part	of	her	hoped	that	he	was,	for	 the	sake	of	the	people
of	these	lands,	for	the	gnomes,	and	for	 the	Master;	a	part	of	 her	felt	the	same
grief	that	she	had,	standing	above	the	dragon’s	corpse	in	the	gully	of	Wyr.	But
there	was	something	 about	that	grief	 that	 made	her	hope	still	  more	that	 the
dragon	was	dead,	for	reasons	she	hesitated	to	examine.
       The	 Grand	 Passage	was	as	dark	as	the	 bowels	of	 the	 Deep	had	 been,
bereft	of	 even	the	little	 moonlight	  that	had	leaked	in	 to	illuminate	  it	 before;
but	even	in	 the	utter	 darkness,	the	air	 here	was	different—cold	  but	 dry	and
moving,	unlike	 the	still,	brooding	 watchfulness	of	the	heart	of	the	Deep.
       Her	  wizard’s	 sight	 showed	 her	the	 dark,	 bony	 shape	of	 the	 dragon’s
haunch	lying	across	the	doorway,	the	bristling	spears	of	his	backbone	pointing

183
inward	toward	 her.	As	 she	came	nearer	she	saw	how	sunken	the	scaled	skin
lay	on	the	curve	of	the	bone.
       Listen	 as	she	would,	 she	heard	no	murmur	 of	 his	mind.	 But,	 the	music
that	had	seemed	to	fill	 the	Market	 Hall	 echoed	there	still,	 faint	 and	piercing,
with	molten	shivers	of	 dying	sound.
       He	 was	unconscious—dying,	she	thought.	Do	you	think	this	man	will	 live
longer	than	I?	he	had	asked.
       Jenny	unslung	 her	plaid	 from	 her	shoulder	and	laid	 the	thick	 folds	over
the	cutting	 knives	of	 the	dragon’s	spine.	 The	edges	drove	through	 the	cloth;
she	added	the	heavy	sheepskin	of	her	jacket	 and,	shivering	as	the	outer	 cold
sliced	through	the	thin	sleeves	of	her	shift,	worked	 her	foot	onto	the	largest	of
the	spines.	Catching	the	doorpost	once	again	for	 leverage,	she	swung	herself
nimbly	 up	and	 over.	For	 an	instant	she	balanced	on	 the	haunch,	feeling	 the
slender	suppleness	of	the	bones	under	the	 steel	scales	and	the	soft	 heat	that
radiated	from	  the	dragon’s	 body;	 then	 she	 sprang	down.	 She	 stood	 for	 a
moment,	listening	with	 her	ears	and	her	mind.
       The	 dragon	made	no	move.	 The	Market	 Hall	 lay	before	 her,	blue-black
and	ivory	 with	 the	 feeble	trickle	 of	 starlight	 that	seemed	so	bright	 after	 the
utter	night	below	 the	ground.	Even	though	 the	moon	had	set,	every	pot	sherd
and	skewed	lampframe	seemed	to	Jenny’s	eyes	outlined	 in	brightness,	 every
shadow	like	 spilled	ink.	 The	 blood	was	drying,	 though	 the	place	stank	of	 it.
Osprey	 still	  lay	 in	  a	 smeared	pool	  of	 darkness,	 surrounded	 by	 glinting
harpoons.	The	night	 felt	 very	 old.	A	 twist	 of	 wind	 brought	her	 the	smell	 of
woodsmoke	from	the	fire	on	Tanner’s	Rise.
       Like	  a	ghost	Jenny	crossed	the	 hall,	shivering	 in	 the	dead	cold.	 It	 was
only	when	she	reached	the	open	night	of	the	steps	that	she	began	to	run.

184
                                  CHAPTER	                    XI


AT	DAWN	SHE	felt	John’s	hand	tighten	slightly	around	her	own.
       Two	nights	ago	she	had	worked	the	death-spells,	weaving	an	aura	of
poison	and	ruin—the	circles	of	them	still	lay	scratched	in	the	earth	at	the	far
end	of	the	Rise.	She	had	not	slept	more	than	an	hour	or	so	the	night	before
that,	somewhere	on	the	road	outside	Bel,	curled	in	John’s	arms.	Now	the
drifting	smoke	of	the	low	fire	was	a	smudge	of	gray	silk	in	the	pallid	morning
air,	and	she	 felt	 worn	and	 chilled	 and	strange,	as	if	 her	 skin	had	 been
sandpapered	and	every	nerve	lay	exposed.	Yet	she	felt	strangely	calm.
       She	had	done	everything	she	could,	slowly,	meticulously,	step	by	step,
following	Miss	 Mab’s	remembered	instructions	as	if	the	body	she	knew	so
well	were	a	stranger’s.	She	had	given	him	the	philters	and	medicines	as	the
gnomes	did,	by	means	of	a	hollow	 needle	driven	into	 the	veins,	and	had
packed	poultices	on	the	wounds	to	draw	from	them	the	poison	of	the	dragon’s
blood.	She	had	traced	the	runes	of	healing	where	the	marks	of	the	wounds	cut
the	paths	of	life	throughout	his	body,	touching	them	with	his	inner	name,	the
secret	of	his	essence,	woven	into	the	spells.	She	had	called	him	patiently,
repeatedly,	by	the	name	that	his	soul	knew,	holding	his	spirit	to	his	body	by
what	force	of	magic	she	could	muster,	until	the	medicines	could	take	hold.
       She	had	not	thought	that	she	would	succeed.	When	she	did,	she	was
exhausted	past	grief	or	joy,	able	to	think	no	further	than	the	slight	lift	of	his
ribcage	and	the	crease	of	his	blackened	eyelids	with	his	dreams.
       Gareth	said	softly,	“Will	he	be	all	right?”	and	she	nodded.	Looking	at	the
gawky	young	prince	who	hunkered	at	her	side	by	the	fire,	she	was	struck	by
his	silence.	Perhaps	the	closeness	of	death	and	the	endless	weariness	of	the
night	had	sobered	him.	He	had	spent	the	hours	while	she	was	in	the	Deep
patiently	heating	stones	and	placing	them	around	John’s	body	as	he	had	been
told	to	 do—a	dull	 and	necessary	task,	and	one	to	which,	she	was	almost
certain,	she	owed	the	fact	that	John	had	still	been	alive	when	she	had	returned

185
from	the	dragon’s	lair.
       Slowly,	  her	 every	 bone	hurting	 her	 to	 move,	 she	put	 off	  the	scuffed
scarlet	weight	of	 his	 cloak.	She	felt	 scraped	and	aching,	and	wanted	 only	to
sleep.	But	 she	stood	 up,	 knowing	  there	was	 something	 else	she	must	 do,
worse	than	all	 that	had	 gone	before.	She	stumbled	 to	her	 medicine	bag	and
brought	 out	  the	  brown	  tabat	 leaves	  she	 always	  carried,	  dried	 to	  the
consistency	of	 leather.	Breaking	two	 of	 them	to	 pieces,	she	put	 them	in	 her
mouth	and	chewed.
       Their	 wringing	 bitterness	was	in	itself	 enough	to	wake	her,	without	 their
other	 properties.	 She	 had	 chewed	 them	 earlier	 in	  the	 night,	 against	 the
exhaustion	that	she	had	felt	 catching	 up	with	  her	while	 she	worked.	 Gareth
watched	her	apprehensively,	his	long	 face	haggard	within	 the	 straggly	frame
of	his	green-tipped	hair,	 and	she	reflected	that	he	must	be	almost	as	weary	as
she.	Lines	that	 had	existed	only	 as	brief	 traces	of	 passing	expressions	were
etched	there	now,	 from	 his	nostrils	 to	 the	corners	 of	 his	mouth,	 and	others
showed	around	his	 eyes	when	 he	took	 off	 his	 broken	spectacles	to	 rub	the
inner	corners	of	the	lids—lines	 that	would	deepen	and	settle	into	his	manhood
and	his	old	age.	As	she	ran	her	hands	through	the	loosened	cloud	of	 her	hair,
she	wondered	what	her	own	face	looked	like,	 or	would	 look	like	 after	she	did
what	she	knew	she	must	do.
       She	began	collecting	medicines	into	 her	satchel	once	more.
       “Where	 are	you	going?”
       She	 found	  one	 of	 John’s	  plaids	 and	 wrapped	 it	  about	 her,	 all	  her
movements	stiff	with	 weariness.	She	felt	threadbare	as	a	piece	of	worn	 cloth,
but	the	uneasy	strength	of	 the	tabat	leaves	was	already	coursing	 through	her
veins.	She	knew	she	would	have	to	be	careful,	for	 the	tabat	was	like	a	usurer;
it	lent,	but	it	 had	a	way	of	demanding	back	with	 interest	when	one	could	least
afford	to	pay.	The	moist	air	felt	 cold	in	her	lungs;	her	soul	was	oddly	numb.
       “To	 keep	a	promise,”	she	said.
       The	 boy	 watched	 her	with	 trepidation	  in	 his	earnest	gray	 eyes	as	she
shouldered	her	satchel	once	more	and	set	off	through	the	misty	silences	of	the
ruined	town	toward	the	Gates	of	the	Deep.

186
“Morkeleb?”
       Her	 voice	 dissipated	like	 a	thread	of	 mist	in	 the	stillness	 of	the	 Market
Hall.	Vapor	and	blue	 morning	shadow	cloaked	the	 Vale	outside,	and	the	light
here	was	gray	and	sickly.	Before	her	the	dragon	lay	like	a	dropped	garment	of
black	silk,	held	 to	shape	only	by	its	bonings.	One	wing	 stretched	out,	where	it
had	fallen	after	 the	convulsions	of	 the	night	before;	 the	long	antennae	trailed
limp	 among	 the	ribbons	 of	 the	 mane.	 Faint	 singing	 still	 lay	 upon	 the	 air,
drawing	at	Jenny’s	heart.
       He	 had	given	her	 the	way	through	 the	Deep,	she	thought;	 it	was	John’s
life	that	she	owed	him.	 She	tried	to	tell	 herself	that	it	was	for	 this	reason	only
that	she	did	not	want	that	terrible	beauty	to	die.
       Her	  voice	  echoed	  among	 the	  upended	 ivory	  turrets	  of	  the	  roof.
“Morkeleb!”
       The	 humming	 changed	within	  her	mind,	 and	 she	knew	 he	heard.	One
delicate,	crayfish	 antenna	stirred.	The	lids	 of	 silver	eyes	slipped	 back	a	bare
inch.	 For	the	 first	  time	 she	saw	 how	 delicate	those	 lids	 were,	 tinted	 with
subtle	shades	of	violet	and	green	within	the	blackness.	Looking	 into	the	white
depths	they	partly	 shielded,	she	felt	 fear,	 but	not	 fear	for	 her	body;	 she	felt
again	the	cross-blowing	winds	of	 present	should	and	future	if,	rising	 up	out	of
the	chasms	of	doubt.	She	summoned	calm	to	her,	as	she	summoned	clouds	or
the	birds	of	the	hawthorn	brakes,	and	was	rather	surprised	at	the	steadiness	of
her	voice.
       “Give	 me	your	 name.”
       Life	  moved	in	him	 then,	a	gold	 heat	that	she	felt	 through	the	singing	 of
the	air.	Anger	and	resistance;	bitter	resistance	to	the	last.
       “I	  cannot	save	you	without	 knowing	  your	name,”	 she	said.	“If	 you	 slip
beyond	the	 bounds	of	 your	  flesh,	 I	 need	something	 by	 which	 to	 call	 you
back.”
       Still	  that	  molten	 wrath	 surged	 through	 the	 weakness	 and	 pain.	 She
remembered	Caerdinn	saying,	“Save	a	dragon,	slave	a	dragon.”	 At	 that	time,
she	had	not	known	why	anyone	would	wish	 to	save	the	life	of	such	a	creature,
nor	how	doing	so	would	place	something	so	great	within	 your	power.	Cock	by

187
its	feet...
       “Morkeleb!”	   She	walked	 forward,	 forgetting	  her	fear	 of	him—perhaps
through	anger	and	 dread	that	 he	would	 die,	 perhaps	only	 through	the	 tabat
leaves—and	laid	her	small	hands	on	the	soft	flesh	around	his	eyes.	The	scales
there	were	tinier	 than	the	ends	of	needles.	The	skin	 felt	like	 dry	 silk	 beneath
her	hand,	pulsing	 with	 warm	life.	 She	felt	 again	that	 sense,	half-fright,	 half-
awe,	of	taking	a	step	down	a	road	which	should	not	be	trodden,	and	wondered
if	it	 would	be	wiser	and	better	to	turn	away	and	let	him	die.	 She	knew	what	he
was.	But	 having	 touched	him,	 having	 looked	 into	 those	diamond	 eyes,	she
could	more	easily	have	given	up	her	own	life.
       In	 the	 glitter	 of	 the	singing	 within	  her	mind,	 one	single	 air	 seemed	to
detach	itself,	 as	if	 the	 thread	that	 bound	 together	the	 complex	 knots	of	 its
many	 harmonies	  had	  suddenly	  taken	 on	  another	  color.	  She	 knew	  it
immediately	in	 its	wholeness,	from	the	few	 truncated	fragments	Caerdinn	had
whistled	 for	 her	in	 a	 hedgerow	one	 summer	day.	The	 music	 itself	 was	the
dragon’s	name.
       It	 slid	 through	her	fingers,	 soft	as	silken	 ribbons;	taking	 it,	she	began	to
braid	 it	 into	  her	 spells,	 weaving	 them	 like	  a	rope	 of	  crystal	 around	 the
dragon’s	 fading	 soul.	 Through	  the	 turns	 of	 the	 music,	 she	 glimpsed	 the
entrance	to	the	 dark,	 starry	mazes	of	 his	 inner	 mind	 and	heart	and,	 by	 the
flickering	 light	 of	it,	 seemed	to	see	the	paths	that	she	must	take	to	the	healing
of	his	body.
       She	had	brought	with	 her	the	medicines	from	 the	Deep,	but	she	saw	now
that	they	were	 useless.	Dragons	healed	themselves	and	one	another	through
the	mind	alone.	At	 times,	in	 the	hours	that	followed,	 she	was	terrified	 of	 this
healing,	at	others,	only	 exhausted	past	anything	she	had	ever	experienced	or
imagined,	even	in	 the	long	 night	 before.	Her	 weariness	grew,	encompassing
body	and	brain	 in	 mounting	 agony;	 she	felt	 entangled	in	 a	net	of	 light	  and
blackness,	struggling	 to	 draw	across	some	 barrier	a	 vast,	cloudy	 force	 that
pulled	her	toward	 it	 over	that	same	frontier.	 It	was	not	 what	she	had	thought
to	do,	 for	 it	 had	 nothing	 to	 do	with	  the	healing	 of	 humans	or	 beasts.	She
summoned	the	last	 reserves	of	 her	own	 power,	 digging	 forgotten	 strengths

188
from	the	marrow	of	 her	bones	to	battle	for	his	life	and	her	own.	Holding	 to	the
ropes	of	his	life	 took	all	this	 strength	and	more	that	she	did	not	have;	and	in	a
kind	 of	 delirium,	  she	 understood	that	 if	  he	 died,	 she	would	  die	 also,	 so
entangled	was	her	essence	in	the	starry	skeins	of	his	soul.	Small	and	clear,	she
got	a	glimpse	 of	 the	future,	 like	 an	 image	in	 her	scrying-stone—that	 if	 she
died,	John	would	 die	within	 the	day,	and	Gareth	would	 last	slightly	 less	than
seven	years,	 as	 a	 husk	 slowly	  hollowed	  by	  Zyerne’s	 perverted	 powers.
Turning	 from	 this,	she	clung	 to	 the	small,	 rock-steady	strength	 of	what	 she
knew:	 old	 Caerdinn’s	 spells	and	 her	own	 long	  meditations	 in	 the	solitude
among	the	stones	of	Frost	Fell.
       Twice	 she	called	Morkeleb	by	 his	name,	tangling	the	music	of	it	 with	the
spells	she	had	so	laboriously	 learned	rune	by	 rune,	holding	 herself	anchored
to	this	 life	 with	 the	memory	 of	 familiar	 things—the	 shapes	of	the	 leaves	of
plants,	gentian	 and	dog’s	 mercury,	 the	tracks	 of	 hares	upon	 the	snow,	 and
wild,	 vagrant	airs	 played	on	the	 pennywhistle	upon	 summer	nights.	 She	felt
the	dragon’s	strength	stir	and	the	echo	of	his	name	return.
       She	did	not	remember	sleeping	afterward.	But	 she	woke	to	the	warmth	of
sunlight	on	 her	hair.	Through	 the	open	Gates	of	 the	Deep,	she	could	see	the
looming	rock	face	of	 the	cliffs	outside	drenched	with	 cinnabar	and	gold	by	the
afternoon’s	 slanted	light.	  Turning	 her	 head,	 she	saw	 that	 the	 dragon	 had
moved	and	lay	sleeping	also,	great	wings	folded	once	more	and	his	chin	 upon
his	foreclaws	 like	a	 dog.	In	 the	shadows,	he	was	nearly	 invisible.	 She	could
not	see	that	he	breathed,	but	wondered	if	she	ever	had.	Did	dragons	breathe?
       Lassitude	 flooded	 her,	burying	  her	like	  silk-fine	 sand.	 The	last	 of	 the
tabat	leaves	had	burned	out	of	her	veins,	and	that	exhaustion	added	to	the	rest.
Scraped,	drained,	wrung,	she	wanted	only	to	 sleep	again,	hour	after	hour,	for
days	if	possible.
       But	  she	knew	 it	 was	 not	possible.	 She	had	 saved	Morkeleb,	  but	was
under	no	illusion	 that	this	 would	let	 her	sleep	safely	in	 his	presence,	once	he
had	regained	 a	 little	 of	  his	 strength.	A	  detached	thread	 of	 amusement	at
herself	made	her	 chuckle;	 Ian	and	 Adric,	 she	thought,	 would	 boast	to	 each
other	and	every	 boy	 in	 the	village	 that	 their	 mother	could	 go	 to	sleep	 in	 a

189
dragon’s	lair—that	 is,	if	 she	ever	made	it	back	to	tell	 them	of	 it.	Even	rolling
over	hurt	her	bones.	The	weight	of	her	clothes	and	her	hair	dragged	at	her	like
chain	mail	as	she	stood.
       She	stumbled	 to	the	 Gates	and	stood	for	 a	moment,	leaning	 against	the
rough-hewn	 granite	of	  the	vast	 pillar,	 the	 dry,	 moving	 freedom	 of	 the	 air
fingering	 her	face.	Turning	 her	head,	she	looked	back	 over	her	shoulder	and
met	the	 dragon’s	 open	eyes.	Their	 depths	 stared	into	 hers	 for	 one	instant,
crystalline	flowers	 of	 white	 and	silver,	 like	glittering	  wells	 of	rage	and	hate.
Then	 they	 slid	  shut	 again.	 She	 walked	  from	  the	 shadows	 out	 into	  the
brilliance	of	 the	evening.
       Her	 mind	 as	well	 as	her	 body	felt	 numbed	 as	she	walked	 slowly	 back
through	Deeping.	Everything	 seemed	queer	and	changed,	the	shadow	of	each
pebble	and	weed	a	 thing	of	 new	 and	unknown	 significance	 to	 her,	as	if	 for
years	she	 had	 walked	 half-blind	   and	 now	 had	 opened	 her	 eyes.	At	  the
northern	side	 of	 the	town,	  she	climbed	 the	rocks	 to	 the	 water	tanks,	 deep
black	pools	 cut	 into	 the	bones	of	 the	 mountain,	 with	 sun	flashing	  on	their
opaque	surfaces.	She	stripped	 and	swam,	 though	 the	water	 was	very	 cold.
Afterward	 she	lay	for	a	long	time	 upon	her	spread-out	clothing,	dreaming	 she
knew	 not	  what.	 Wind	  tracked	 across	 her	 bare	 back	 and	  legs	 like	  tiny
footprints,	and	the	sun-dance	changed	in	the	pool	as	shadows	crept	across	the
black	water.	She	felt	it	 would	 have	been	good	to	cry,	but	was	too	weary	 even
for	that.
       In	  time	 she	got	 up,	 put	 on	 her	 clothes	again,	 and	 returned	to	 camp.
Gareth	was	asleep,	sitting	with	his	knees	drawn	up	and	his	face	upon	them	on
his	crossed	arms,	near	the	glowing	ashes	of	the	fire.
       Jenny	 knelt	  beside	 John,	 feeling	 his	  hands	and	 face.	 They	  seemed
warmer,	though	 she	could	detect	 no	surface	blood	 under	 the	thin,	 fair	 skin.
Still,	 his	eyebrows	and	the	reddish	 stubble	of	his	 beard	no	longer	seemed	so
dark.	She	lay	down	beside	him,	her	body	against	his	beneath	the	blankets,	and
fell	asleep.


In	the	drowsy	warmth	 of	half-waking,	 she	heard	John	murmur,	“I	thought	 that

190
was	you	calling	 me.”	 His	 breath	was	no	more	 than	a	faint	 touch	against	her
hair.	She	blinked	into	waking.	The	light	 had	changed	again.	It	was	dawn.
       She	said,	“What?”	  and	sat	up,	shaking	back	the	thick	 weight	 of	her	hair
from	her	face.	She	still	 felt	 tired	to	 death,	but	ravenously	hungry.	Gareth	was
kneeling	by	 the	campfire,	 tousled	and	unshaven	with	 his	 battered	spectacles
sliding	down	the	end	of	his	nose,	making	griddle-cakes.	She	noted	that	he	was
better	at	it	than	John	had	ever	been.
       “I	 thought	 you	were	never	waking	up,”	 he	said.
       “I	  thought	I	was	never	waking	 up	either,	my	 hero,”	John	whispered.	His
voice	was	too	weak	to	carry	even	that	short	distance,	but	Jenny	heard	him	and
smiled.
       She	climbed	 stiffly	 to	her	feet,	pulled	 on	her	skirt	 again	over	her	creased
shift,	laced	her	 bodice	and	put	on	 her	boots,	while	 Gareth	set	water	over	 the
coals	to	boil	 for	 coffee,	 a	bitter	 black	 drink	 popular	at	 Court.	When	 Gareth
went	to	fetch	 more	water	 from	 the	spring	 in	the	woods	 beyond	the	wrecked
well	 house,	Jenny	took	some	of	 the	boiling	 water	to	 renew	John’s	poultices,
welcoming	the	simplicity	 of	 human	healing;	and	the	smell	of	herbs	soon	filled
the	little	 clearing	among	the	ruins,	 along	with	 the	warm,	strange	smell	 of	the
drink.	 John	 fell	  asleep	 again,	 even	 before	  Jenny	 had	 finished	 with	  the
bandages,	but	Gareth	fetched	her	some	bannocks	and	honey	and	sat	with	her
beside	the	breakfast	fire.
       “I	  didn’t	 know	 what	 to	 do,	you	 were	gone	 so	long,”	 he	 said	around	a
mouthful	 of	mealcake.	“I	 thought	 about	following	 you—that	 you	 might	need
help—but	I	 didn’t	 want	to	leave	John	alone.	Besides,”	he	added	with	 a	rueful
grin,	“I’ve	 never	managed	to	rescue	you	from	anything	yet.”
       Jenny	laughed	and	said,	“You	did	right.”
       “And	 the	promise	you	 made?”
       “I	 kept	it.”
       He	 let	 out	his	 breath	with	 a	sigh	and	 bowed	his	 head,	as	if	some	great
weight	that	had	 been	pressing	down	upon	him	 had	been	lifted.	 After	 a	while
he	said	shyly,	 “While	  I	 was	waiting	  for	 you,	I	 made	 up	a	song...	 a	ballad.
About	the	 slaying	of	 Morkeleb,	 the	Black	 Dragon	of	 Nast	Wall.	 It	isn’t	 very

191
good...”
       “It	  wouldn’t	   be,”	 Jenny	 said	slowly,	  and	 licked	 the	 honey	 from	  her
fingers.	“Morkeleb	 is	not	dead.”
       He	 stared	at	her,	 as	he	once	had	when	 she	had	told	 him	 that	John	had
killed	 the	Golden	 Dragon	 of	 Wyr	 with	 an	ax.	 “But	 I	 thought—wasn’t	 your
promise	to	John	to—to	slay	him	if—if	  John	could	not?”
       She	shook	 her	head,	the	dark	 cloud	 of	her	 hair	snagging	 in	the	 grubby
fleece	of	her	jacket	 collar.	“My	  promise	was	to	 Morkeleb,”	 she	said.	“It	 was
to	heal	him.”
       Collecting	  her	feet	beneath	her,	she	rose	and	walked	 over	to	 John	once
more,	  leaving	  Gareth	  staring	  after	   her	  in	  appalled	  and	  unbelieving
bewilderment.


A	 day	passed	before	 Jenny	returned	 to	 the	 Deep.	She	 stayed	close	to	 the
camp,	taking	care	of	John	and	washing	clothes—a	mundane	task,	but	one	that
needed	to	 be	done.	 Somewhat	 to	 her	 surprise,	Gareth	 helped	 her	 in	 this,
fetching	 water	from	  the	spring	 in	 the	 glade,	but	 without	  his	 usual	chatter.
Knowing	 she	would	need	her	strength,	she	slept	a	good	 deal,	but	her	dreams
were	disquieting.	  Her	 waking	  hours	were	 plagued	 with	  a	 sense	of	 being
watched.	She	told	herself	that	this	was	simply	because	Morkeleb,	waking,	had
extended	his	awareness	across	the	Vale	and	knew	where	they	were,	but	certain
understandings	she	had	found	within	  the	mazes	of	the	dragon’s	 mind	 would
not	allow	her	to	believe	this.
       She	 was	 aware	 that	 Gareth	was	 watching	  her,	too,	  mostly	 when	 he
thought	she	wasn’t	looking.
       She	was	aware	of	 other	things,	 as	well.	Never	 had	she	felt	so	conscious
of	the	traces	and	turnings	of	the	wind,	and	of	 the	insignificant	 activities	of	 the
animals	 in	  the	 surrounding	  woods.	  She	 found	  herself	  prey	 to	  strange
contemplation	and	odd	knowledge	of	 things	before	unsuspected—how	clouds
grow,	and	why	 the	 wind	 walked	 the	way	 it	 did,	 how	 birds	knew	 their	 way
south,	and	why,	in	certain	places	of	the	world	at	certain	times,	voices	could	 be
heard	speaking	indistinctly	 in	empty	 air.	She	would	 have	liked	 to	think	 these

192
changes	frightened	her	because	she	did	not	understand	them,	but	in	 truth	the
reason	she	feared	them	was	because	she	did.
       While	 she	slept	in	 the	late	afternoon,	 she	heard	Gareth	speak	to	John	of
it,	seeing	them	and	understanding	through	the	depths	of	her	altered	dreams.
       “She	 healed	 him,”	  she	heard	 Gareth	whisper,	 and	 was	aware	 of	 him
squatting	beside	the	tangle	 of	 bearskins	and	plaids	 where	John	lay.	 “I	 think
she	promised	 to	 do	 so,	in	  trade	for	  his	 letting	 her	 past	 him	 to	 fetch	 the
medicines.”
       John	 sighed	and	moved	 one	bandaged	hand	a	little	 where	 it	 lay	on	 his
chest.	“Better,	maybe,	she	had	let	me	die.”
       “Do	  you	think...”	  Gareth	swallowed	 nervously	and	cast	a	glance	 at	her,
as	if	he	knew	 that	asleep,	she	still	could	 hear.	“Do	 you	think	 he’s	put	a	 spell
on	her?”
       John	was	silent	 for	a	time,	looking	 up	at	the	gulfs	 of	sky	 above	the	Vale,
thinking.	 Though	 the	air	 down	here	 was	still,	 great	winds	 racked	 the	upper
atmosphere,	herding	piled	masses	of	cloud,	charcoal	gray	and	blinding	 white,
up	against	the	shaggy	flanks	of	 the	mountains.	At	 length	he	said,	“I	 think	 I’d
feel	it,	if	 there	were	another	mind	controlling	 hers.	Or	I’d	like	 to	flatter	myself
to	thinking	 I’d	 feel	 it.	 They	say	you	 should	never	look	 into	 a	dragon’s	eyes,
lest	he	put	a	spell	on	you.	But	she’s	stronger	than	that.”
       He	 turned	his	head	a	little	and	looked	at	where	she	lay,	squinting	to	focus
his	shortsighted	 brown	 eyes	upon	her.	 The	bare	 flesh	on	 either	 side	of	 the
bandages	on	his	arms	and	 chest	was	livid	  with	 bruises	and	pitted	 with	 tiny
scabs	where	the	broken	links	 of	 the	mail	 shirt	 had	been	dragged	through	 it.
“When	I	 used	to	dream	of	her,	she	didn’t	look	 the	same	as	in	waking.	When	I
was	delirious,	I	dreamed	of	her—it’s	 as	if	she’s	grown	more	herself,	not	less.”
       He	 sighed	and	looked	 back	at	Gareth.	 “I	 used	to	be	jealous	 of	her,	you
know.	Not	 of	 another	man,	but	 jealousy	of	 herself,	of	 that	 part	of	 her	she’d
never	give	me—though	God	 knows,	back	in	 those	days,	what	I	wanted	it	 for.
Who	was	it	who	 said	that	jealousy	is	the	only	vice	that	gives	no	pleasure?	But
that	was	the	first	 thing	 I	 had	to	 learn	about	her,	and	maybe	 the	hardest	I’ve
ever	learned	about	anything—that	she	is	her	own,	and	what	she	gives	me	is	of

193
her	choosing,	and	the	more	precious	because	of	it.	Sometimes	a	butterfly	 will
come	to	sit	 in	 your	 open	palm,	 but	if	 you	 close	your	 hand,	one	way	 or	 the
other,	it—and	its	choice	to	be	there—are	gone.”
       From	 there	 Jenny	slid	 into	 deeper	dreams	of	 the	 crushing	darkness	of
Ylferdun	 and	the	deep	magic	she	sensed	slumbering	in	the	Places	of	Healing.
As	if	 from	 a	 great	distance,	she	saw	her	 children,	 her	boys,	 whom	she	 had
never	wanted	to	conceive	but	had	borne	and	birthed	for	John’s	sake,	but	loved
uneasily,	unwillingly,	  and	with	 desperately	divided	  heart.	With	 her	wizard’s
sight	she	 could	 see	them	sitting	 up	 in	 their	 curtained	 bed	in	 the	 darkness,
while	wind	 drove	snow	against	the	tower	walls;	 not	sleeping	at	all,	 but	telling
one	another	tales	about	 how	their	 father	 and	mother	 would	 slay	the	 dragon
and	ride	back	with	pack	trains	and	pack	trains	of	gold.
       She	woke	when	the	sun	lay	three-quarters	down	the	sky	toward	 the	flinty
crest	of	 the	 ridge.	The	 wind	 had	 shifted;	 the	whole	 Vale	 smelled	 of	 sharp
snow	and	pine	needles	from	 the	high	slopes.	The	air	 in	the	 lengthening	slaty
shadows	was	cold	and	damp.
       John	 was	 asleep,	 wrapped	 in	 every	 cloak	 and	 blanket	 in	  the	 camp.
Gareth’s	voice	 could	 be	 heard	in	 the	 woods	 near	the	 little	 stone	 fountain,
tunelessly	singing	romantic	 lyrics	of	 passionate	love	for	the	edification	 of	 the
horses.	Moving	with	 her	habitual	quiet,	 Jenny	laced	up	her	bodice	and	put	on
her	boots	and	her	sheepskin	jacket.	 She	thought	about	eating	 something	and
decided	not	to.	Food	would	 break	her	 concentration,	and	she	felt	the	 need	of
every	fragment	of	strength	and	alertness	that	she	could	muster.
       She	paused	for	a	moment,	looking	 around	her.	The	old,	uneasy	sensation
of	being	 watched	 returned	to	 her,	like	 a	 hand	touching	 her	 elbow.	But	 she
sensed,	also,	the	faint	tingling	 of	 Morkeleb’s	 power	 in	the	 back	of	 her	mind
and	knew	that	the	dragon’s	strength	 was	returning	far	 more	quickly	 than	that
of	the	man	he	had	almost	slain.
       She	would	 have	to	act	and	act	 now,	and	the	thought	of	 it	 filled	 her	with
fear.
       “Save	 a	dragon,	 slave	a	dragon,”	 Caerdinn	 had	said.	Her	 awareness	of
how	small	 her	own	 powers	 were	terrified	 her,	knowing	  what	it	 was	 against

194
which	she	must	pit	them.	So	this,	in	the	end,	was	what	she	had	paid	for	John’s
love,	she	told	 herself,	 with	 a	 little	 wry	 amusement.	To	 go	into	 a	battle	 she
could	not	hope	to	win.	Involuntarily	  another	part	of	her	thought	at	once	that	at
least	it	wasn’t	 John’s	life,	 but	 her	own,	 that	would	 be	forfeit,	 and	she	shook
her	head	in	  wonderment	at	 the	 follies	 of	 love.	 No	 wonder	 those	 with	 the
power	were	warned	against	it,	she	thought.
       As	 for	 the	dragon,	she	had	a	sense,	almost	an	instinct,	of	what	 she	must
do,	alien	 to	her	 and	yet	 terrifyingly	  clear.	Her	 heart	was	hammering	 as	she
selected	a	scruffy	plaid	 from	 the	top	 of	 the	pile	 over	John.	The	thin	 breezes
fluttered	at	its	edges	as	she	slung	it	around	her;	its	colors	faded	into	the	muted
hues	of	weed	 and	stone	as	she	made	her	 way	 silently	 down	 the	ridge	 once
more	and	took	the	track	for	the	Deep.
       Morkeleb	  no	longer	 lay	 in	 the	Market	 Hall.	 She	followed	  the	scent	of
him	through	 the	massive	inner	 doors	and	along	the	 Grand	Passage—a	smell
that	was	pungent	but	not	 unpleasant,	unlike	the	 burning,	metallic	 reek	of	 his
poisons.	The	tiny	 echoes	of	 her	footfalls	 were	 like	 far-off	 water	dripping	  in
the	silent	vaults	 of	the	passage—she	knew	Morkeleb	 would	hear	them,	 lying
upon	 his	 gold	 in	  the	 darkness.	Almost,	  she	 thought,	 he	 would	 hear	 the
pounding	of	her	heart.
       As	 Dromar	had	said,	the	dragon	was	laired	 in	the	Temple	of	 Sarmendes,
some	quarter-mile	along	the	passage.	The	Temple	had	been	built	for	the	use	of
the	children	 of	 men	 and	so	 had	been	wrought	 into	 the	 likeness	of	 a	 room
rather	than	a	cave.	From	the	 chryselephantine	doors	Jenny	looked	about,	her
eyes	piercing	the	absolute	darkness	there,	seeing	how	the	stalagmites	that	rose
from	 the	floor	  had	been	 cut	into	  pillars,	 and	how	 walls	  had	been	built	  to
conceal	the	uneven	shape	of	the	cavern’s	native	rock.	The	floor	was	smoothed
all	to	 one	level;	 the	 statue	of	 the	god,	 with	 his	lyre	 and	 his	bow,	 had	been
sculpted	of	white	 marble	from	 the	royal	 quarries	of	 Istmark,	 as	had	been	his
altar	with	 its	carved	 garlands.	But	none	of	 this	 could	conceal	the	 size	of	the
place,	nor	the	 enormous,	irregular	 grandeur	of	 its	 proportions.	 Above	 those
modestly	classical	walls	 arched	the	ceiling,	 a	maze	of	 sinter	and	 crystal	that
marked	the	place	as	nature’s	work	timidly	home-steaded	by	man.

195
       The	 smell	of	 the	dragon	was	 thick	here,	though	 it	 was	clean	of	 offal	or
carrion.	Instead	 the	floor	  was	heaped	with	  gold,	 all	 the	 gold	 of	 the	Deep,
plates,	 holy	 vessels,	 reliquaries	  of	 forgotten	  saints	 and	 demigods,	 piled
between	die	 pillars	 and	around	 the	 statues,	tiny	 cosmetic	 pots	smelling	  of
balsam,	candlesticks	quivering	with	 pendant	pearls	like	aspen	leaves	in	spring
wind,	cups	whose	rims	flashed	 with	the	dark	 fire	of	 jewels,	a	votive	 statue	of
Salernesse,	the	Lady	of	Beasts,	three	feet	high	and	solid	gold...	All	  the	things
that	gnomes	or	 men	 had	wrought	  of	 that	soft	 and	 shining	 metal	had	 been
gathered	there	from	 the	 farthest	tunnels	 of	 the	 Deep.	The	 floor	 was	 like	 a
beach	with	  the	 packed	coins	  that	 had	spilled	  from	 their	  torn	 sacks,	 and
through	it	gleamed	the	darkness	of	the	floor,	like	water	collected	in	 hollows	of
the	sand.
       Morkeleb	 lay	 upon	the	gold,	 his	vast	wings	 folded	along	 his	sides,	their
tips	crossed	over	his	tail,	 black	as	coal	and	seeming	to	shine,	his	crystal	 eyes
like	 lamps	 in	 the	 dark.	The	 sweet,	 terrible	 singing	 that	 Jenny	 had	felt	  so
strongly	had	faded,	but	the	air	about	him	was	vibrant	with	 the	unheard	music.
       “Morkeleb,”	  she	said	softly,	and	the	word	whispered	back	at	her	from	the
forest	of	 glittering	  spikes	 overhead.	She	felt	  the	silver	  eyes	upon	 her	and
reached	out,	tentatively,	to	the	dark	maze	of	that	mind.
       Why	gold?	 she	asked.	Why	do	dragons	covet	the	gold	of	men?
       It	  was	not	 what	 she	had	meant	 to	say	 to	him,	 and	 she	felt,	 under	 his
coiled	anger	and	suspicion,	something	else	move.
       What	is	 that	to	you,	wizard	woman?
       What	 was	it	 to	me	that	 I	returned	 here	to	save	your	 life?	It	 would	 have
served	me	and	mine	better	to	have	let	you	die.
       Why	then	did	you	not?
       There	 were	 two	 answers.	The	one	 she	gave	him	  was,	Because	it	 was
understood	between	us	that	if	you	gave	me	the	way	into	the	heart	of	the	Deep,
I	should	heal	you	and	give	you	your	life.	 But	in	that	 healing	you	gave	me	your
name,	Morkeleb	 the	 Black—and	the	 name	she	 spoke	in	 her	 mind	 was	 the
ribbon	of	 music	that	was	his	 true	name,	his	essence;	and	she	saw	him	flinch.
They	have	said,	Save	a	dragon,	slave	a	 dragon,	and	 by	your	name	you	 shall

196
do	as	I	bid	you.
       The	surge	of	his	anger	against	her	was	like	a	dark	wave,	and	all	along	his
sides	the	knifelike	 scales	lifted	 a	little,	 like	 a	dog’s	 hackles.	Around	 them	in
the	blackness	 of	 the	Temple,	 the	 gold	 seemed	to	 whisper,	 picking	 up	 the
groundswell	of	his	wrath.
       I	 am	Morkeleb	 the	Black.	I	 am	and	will	 be	slave	to	 no	one	and	nothing,
least	of	all	 a	human	 woman,	mage	though	she	may	be.	I	 do	no	bidding	 save
my	own.
       The	 bitter	weight	 of	alien	 thoughts	crushed	down	upon	her,	heavier	than
the	darkness.	But	her	eyes	were	a	mage’s	eyes,	seeing	in	darkness;	her	mind
held	a	kind	of	glowing	 illumination	  that	it	had	not	had	before.	She	felt	no	fear
of	him	 now;	a	queer	strength	she	had	not	known	 she	possessed	stirred	in	her.
She	whispered	the	 magic	 of	 his	name	 as	she	would	 have	 formed	its	 notes
upon	her	harp,	in	all	its	knotted	complexities,	 and	saw	him	shrink	back	a	little.
His	razor	claws	stirred	faintly	 in	the	gold.
       By	  your	 name,	 Morkeleb	 the	 Black,	  she	 repeated,	you	 shall	  do	 my
bidding.	And	by	your	 name,	I	tell	you	that	you	will	 do	 no	harm,	either	to	John
Aversin,	or	to	 Prince	Gareth,	 or	to	 any	other	human	 being	while	 you	remain
here	in	the	south.	When	you	are	well	 enough	to	sustain	the	journey,	you	shall
leave	this	place	and	return	to	your	home.
       Ire	 radiated	from	 his	scales	like	 a	heat,	reflected	back	about	 him	by	 the
thrumming	 gold.	She	felt	 in	 it	 the	iron	 pride	of	 dragons,	and	their	 contempt
for	humankind,	 and	also	his	furious	 grief	 at	being	parted	from	 the	hoard	that
he	had	so	 newly	 won.	 For	 a	moment	 their	 souls	 met	and	 locked,	 twisting
together	like	snakes	striving,	 fighting	 for	 advantage.	The	tide	of	 her	strength
rose	in	her,	surging	and	sure,	as	if	 it	 drew	life	 from	 the	combat	 itself.	Terror
and	exhilaration	 flooded	her,	like	 the	tabat	leaves,	only	 far	 stronger,	and	she
cast	aside	concern	for	the	limitations	of	 her	flesh	and	strove	against	him	mind
to	mind,	twisting	 at	the	glittering	 chain	of	his	name.
       She	felt	 the	spew	of	his	venomous	anger,	but	would	not	let	 go.	If	you	kill
me,	I	shall	 drag	you	down	 with	me	into	 death,	she	thought;	for	 dying,	I	 shall
not	release	your	name	from	my	mind.

197
       The	strength	that	was	breaking	the	sinews	of	her	mind	 drew	back,	but	his
eyes	held	to	hers.	Her	thoughts	were	suddenly	flooded	 with	 images	and	half-
memories,	like	  the	 visions	 of	  the	 heart	 of	 the	 Deep;	 things	 she	 did	 not
understand,	 distracting	 and	  terrifying	   in	 their	  strangeness.	 She	 felt	  the
plunging	vertigo	 of	 flight	 in	 darkness;	saw	black	 mountains	that	cast	double
shadows,	red	deserts	unstirred	 by	 wind	 since	 time	 began	and	inhabited	 by
glass	spiders	that	lived	upon	salt.	They	were	dragon	memories,	confusing	her,
luring	 her	toward	 the	 place	where	 his	mind	 could	 close	 around	hers	like	 a
trap,	and	she	held	fast	to	 those	things	of	 her	own	 life	 that	she	knew	and	 her
memory	 of	  the	  piping	  of	  old	 Caerdinn	  whistling	   the	 truncated	 air	  of
Morkeleb’s	true	name.	Into	that	air	 she	twisted	her	own	spells	of	breaking	and
exhaustion,	mingling	 them	with	 the	 rhythm	of	 his	heart	 that	she	had	learned
so	well	in	the	healing,	and	she	felt	once	more	his	mind	draw	back	from	 hers.
       His	 wrath	 was	like	 the	 lour	of	 thunder-sky,	 building	 all	 around	her;	 he
loomed	before	her	like	 a	cloud	harboring	 lightning.	 Then	without	 warning	he
struck	at	her	like	a	snake,	one	thin-boned	claw	raised	to	slash.
       He	 would	 not	strike,	 she	told	herself	 as	her	heart	contracted	with	 terror
and	her	every	muscle	screamed	to	flee...	 He	could	 not	strike	 her	for	 she	had
his	name	 and	he	 knew	it...	  She	had	saved	him;	  he	must	 obey...	Her	 mind
gripped	the	music	 of	 his	name	even	as	the	claws	 hissed	down.	The	 wind	 of
them	slashed	at	her	 hair,	the	saber	blades	passing	less	than	 a	foot	 from	 her
face.	White	 eyes	stared	down	at	her,	blazing	 with	 hate;	the	rage	of	 him	beat
against	her	like	a	storm.
       Then	 he	settled	back	slowly	upon	 his	bed	of	gold.	The	 tang	of	his	defeat
was	like	wormwood	 in	the	air.
       You	chose	to	give	 me	your	name	rather	 than	 die,	Morkeleb.	 She	played
his	name	like	 a	glissando	and	felt	 the	surge	of	her	 own	rising	 power	 hum	in
the	gold	against	his.	You	will	go	from	these	lands	and	not	return.
       For	 a	moment	 more	she	 felt	 his	anger,	resentment,	and	the	 fury	 of	 his
humbled	pride.	 But	 there	was	 something	else	in	 the	 hoarfrost	 glitter	 of	 his
gaze	upon	her,	the	knowledge	that	she	was	not	contemptible.
       He	 said	quietly,	Do	you	not	understand?

198
       Jenny	shook	 her	head.	She	looked	around	her	once	again	at	the	Temple,
its	dark	archways	piled	 high	with	 more	gold	 than	she	had	ever	seen	before,	a
treasure	more	fabulous	than	any	other	upon	earth.	It	would	 have	bought	all	of
Bel	and	the	souls	of	most	of	the	men	who	dwelled	there.	But,	perhaps	because
she	herself	had	 little	 use	 for	 gold,	 she	felt	 drawn	 to	 ask	again,	 Why	 gold,
Morkeleb?	Was	it	the	gold	that	brought	you	here?
       He	 lowered	 his	 head	to	his	 paws	 again,	and	all	 around	 them	the	 gold
vibrated	 with	 the	 whisper	 of	 the	dragon’s	 name.	 It	 was	the	 gold,	 and	 the
dreams	of	the	gold,	 he	said.	I	 had	discontent	in	 all	 things;	 the	longing	 grew
upon	me	while	I	slept.	Do	you	not	 know,	wizard	woman,	the	love	that	dragons
have	for	gold?
       She	shook	 her	head	again.	Only	 that	they	 are	greedy	for	 it,	 as	men	are
greedy.
       Rose-red	light	 rimmed	the	slits	 of	his	nostrils	 as	he	sniffed.	Men,	he	said
softly.	They	 have	no	understanding	 of	 gold;	 no	 understanding	of	 what	 it	 is
and	of	what	it	can	be.	Come	here,	wizard	woman.	Put	your	hand	upon	me	and
listen	with	my	mind.
       She	hesitated,	fearing	 a	trap,	but	her	 curiosity	 as	a	mage	drove	her.	She
picked	  her	 way	  over	  the	  cold,	  uneven	  heaps	 of	  rings,	  platters,	  and
candlesticks,	to	 rest	 her	 hand	 once	more	 against	 the	 soft	 skin	 below	  the
dragon’s	great	eye.	As	before,	it	felt	surprisingly	 warm,	unlike	 a	reptile’s	skin,
and	soft	as	silk.	His	mind	touched	hers	like	a	firm	 hand	in	the	darkness.
       In	 a	 thousand	murmuring	 voices,	 she	could	 hear	the	 gold	 pick	 up	the
music	of	the	dragon’s	name.	The	blended	nuances	of	thought	were	 magnified
and	made	richer,	distinct	as	subtle	perfumes,	piercing	the	heart	with	 beauty.	It
seemed	to	 Jenny	that	 she	 could	 identify	  every	 piece	 of	 gold	  within	  that
enormous	chamber	by	its	separate	sounding,	and	hear	the	harmonic	curve	of	a
vessel,	the	melding	 voices	 of	 every	 single	coin	 and	 hairpin,	 and	the	 sweet
tingling	 locked	 in	 the	crystal	 heart	 of	 every	jewel.	 Her	 mind,	 touching	 the
dragon’s,	 flinched	  in	 aching	 wonder	  from	 the	  caress	of	 that	  unbearable
sweetness	as	 the	 echoes	 awoke	  answering	 resonances	 within	  her	 soul.
Memories	of	 dove-colored	dusks	on	the	Fell	 that	was	her	home	pulled	 at	her

199
with	the	deep	joy	 of	winter	 nights	 lying	 on	the	bearskins	before	the	hearth	at
Alyn	 Hold,	with	 John	and	her	sons	at	her	side.	Happiness	she	could	not	name
swept	over	her,	breaking	down	the	defenses	of	her	heart	as	the	intensity	of	the
music	built,	 and	she	knew	that	for	 Morkeleb	 it	 was	the	same	in	the	chimeric
deeps	of	his	mind.
       When	 the	 music	 faded,	she	realized	 she	had	closed	 her	eyes,	 and	her
cheeks	were	wet	with	tears.	Looking	 about	her,	though	the	room	was	as	black
as	before,	she	thought	that	 the	memory	 of	the	 dragon’s	song	lingered	 in	the
gold,	and	a	faint	luminosity	 clung	to	it	 still.
       In	 time	 she	said,	 That	is	 why	men	 say	that	 dragon’s	gold	 is	 poisoned.
Others	say	that	 it	is	 lucky...	but	 it	is	 merely	charged	with	 yearning	 and	with
music,	so	that	even	dullards	can	feel	it	through	their	fingers.
       Even	so,	whispered	the	voice	of	the	dragon	in	her	mind.
       But	  dragons	 cannot	 mine	 gold,	  nor	 work	  it.	  Only	 gnomes	 and	 the
children	of	men.
       We	are	like	 the	whales	that	 live	in	 the	sea,	he	said,	civilizations	 without
artifacts,	living	  between	stone	and	sky	in	our	islands	 in	the	 northern	oceans.
We	lair	 in	rocks	that	 bear	gold,	 but	 it	is	 impure.	Only	 with	 pure	gold	 is	this
music	possible.	Now	do	you	understand?
       The	 sharing	had	broken	something	between	them,	and	she	felt	no	fear	of
him	now.	She	went	 to	sit	 close	to	the	bony	 curve	of	 his	shoulder	and	picked
up	a	gold	cup	from	 the	hoard.	She	felt	 as	she	turned	it	over	in	 her	hands	that
she	could	have	chosen	it	 out	from	 a	dozen	identical	 ones.	Its	 resonance	was
clear	and	individuated	 in	her	mind;	 the	echo	of	the	dragon’s	 music	held	to	it,
like	 a	 remembrance	 of	 perfume.	 She	 saw	 how	 precisely	  it	 was	 formed,
chastened	and	highly	polished,	its	handles	tiny	 ladies	with	 garlands	twined	in
their	  hair	  where	  it	  streamed	 back	  over	  the	  body	  of	  the	  cup;	  even
microscopically	 fine,	 the	flowers	 were	recognizable	as	the	lilies	 of	 hope	and
the	roses	 of	 fulfillment.	   Morkeleb	  had	killed	  the	 owner	 of	  this	 cup,	 she
thought	to	 herself,	only	 for	 the	sake	of	 the	incredible	 music	which	 he	could
call	from	 the	gold.	Yet	his	 love	for	 the	gold	had	as	little	 to	do	with	 its	 beauty
as	her	love	for	her	sons	had	to	do	with	 their—undeniable,	she	thought—good

200
looks.
       How	 did	you	know	this	was	here?
       Do	  you	not	 think	 that	 we,	 who	 live	 for	 hundreds	 of	 years,	would	  be
aware	of	the	 comings	and	goings	of	 men?	Where	they	build	 their	 cities,	and
with	whom	they	trade,	and	in	what?	I	 am	old,	Jenny	Waynest.	Even	among	the
dragons,	my	 magic	is	 accounted	 great.	I	 was	 born	 before	we	 came	to	 this
world;	 I	 can	 sniff	gold	 from	 the	 bones	of	the	 earth	 and	follow	 its	 path	 for
miles,	as	you	follow	  ground	water	 with	 a	hazel	twig.	 The	 gold-seams	of	the
Wall	rise	to	the	 surface	here	like	the	great	salmon	of	 the	north	country	 rising
to	spawn.
       The	 dragon’s	words	were	spoken	in	her	mind,	 and	in	her	mind	 she	had	a
brief,	 distant	glimpse	 of	 the	 Earth	as	the	 dragons	saw	 it,	 spread	out	like	  a
mottled	carpet	of	 purple	and	 green	and	brown.	She	saw	the	 green-black	pelt
of	the	forests	of	Wyr,	 the	infinitely	 delicate	 cloud	shapes	of	the	crowns	of	the
tall	oaks,	fragile	and	thready	with	 winter,	and	saw	how,	toward	the	north,	they
were	more	and	more	 replaced	by	the	 coarse	spiky	teeth	 of	pine	 and	fir.	 She
saw	the	gray	and	white	 stones	of	the	bare	Winterlands,	 stained	all	 the	colors
of	 the	rainbow	  with	 lichen	  and	moss	 in	 summer,	 and	saw	 how	 the	 huge
flashing	silver	shapes	of	eight-	and	ten-foot	 salmon	moved	beneath	the	waters
of	the	 rivers,	under	 the	blue,	 gliding	 shadow	of	 the	 dragon’s	wings.	 For	an
instant,	it	 was	as	if	 she	could	 feel	 the	air	 all	 about	her,	holding	 her	 up	like
water;	its	currents	and	countereddies,	its	changes	from	warm	to	cold.
       Then	she	felt	 his	mind	closing	around	hers,	like	the	jaws	of	 a	trap.	For	an
instant	she	was	locked	 into	 suffocating	 darkness,	the	utter	darkness	that	not
even	the	eyes	of	a	wizard	 could	pierce.	 Panic	crushed	her.	She	could	neither
move	nor	think,	 and	felt	 only	 the	acid	gloating	 of	 the	dragon	all	 around	her,
and,	opening	beneath	her,	a	bottomless	despair.
       Then	 as	Caerdinn	had	taught	 her,	as	she	had	done	in	 healing	 John—as
she	had	always	done	within	the	circumscribed	limits	 of	 her	small	magic—she
forced	 her	mind	  to	calm	  and	began	to	 work	  rune	 by	 rune,	note	 by	 note,
concentrating	singly	and	simply	 upon	each	element	with	her	whole	 mind.	She
felt	 the	wrath	 of	the	 dragon	smothering	 her	like	 a	 hot	sea	of	 night,	 but	she

201
wedged	open	a	crack	of	 light,	and	 into	that	crack	 she	drove	the	music	of	 the
dragon’s	name,	fashioned	by	her	spells	into	a	spear.
       She	 felt	 his	 mind	 flinch	  and	give.	 Her	 sight	 returned,	 and	 she	found
herself	on	 her	feet	 among	the	 knee-deep	piles	of	 gold,	 the	 monstrous	dark
shape	backing	from	her	 in	anger.	This	time	 she	did	not	 let	him	 go,	but	 flung
her	own	wrath	and	her	will	 after	him,	 playing	upon	the	music	of	 his	name	and
weaving	into	 it	the	 fires	that	scorched	his	 essence.	All	the	spells	of	 pain	and
ruin	she	had	wrought	into	the	poison	flooded	 to	her	mind;	 but,	like	her	fury	 at
the	bandits	at	the	crossroads	these	many	weeks	ago,	her	anger	had	no	hate	in
it,	offering	 him	no	 hold	upon	her	mind.	 He	shrank	back	from	 it,	and	the	great
head	lowered	so	that	the	ribbons	 of	his	 mane	swept	the	coins	with	 a	slithery
tinkle.
       Wrapped	 in	 a	rage	of	 magic	and	 fire,	 she	said,	You	shall	 not	dominate
me,	Morkeleb	the	Black—neither	 with	 your	power	 nor	with	 your	 treachery.	I
have	saved	your	life,	and	 you	shall	do	as	I	 command	you.	By	your	 name	you
shall	go,	and	you	shall	not	return	 to	the	south.	Do	you	hear	me?
       She	felt	 him	 resist,	and	drove	her	will	  and	the	strength	of	her	newfound
powers	against	him.	 Like	 a	wrestler’s	body,	 she	felt	the	 dark,	sulfurous	 rage
slither	 from	  beneath	the	 pressure	 of	 her	  will;	  she	 stepped	back,	  almost
instinctively,	 and	faced	him	 where	 he	crouched	against	the	 wall	 like	 a	vast,
inky	cobra,	his	every	scale	bristling	 with	glittering	 wrath.
       She	heard	him	whisper,	I	hear	 you,	wizard	woman,	and	heard,	in	the	cold
voice,	 the	 resonance	not	 only	 of	 furious	  anger	 at	being	 humbled,	  but	 of
surprise	that	she	could	have	done	so.
       Turning	 without	 a	word,	she	left	the	Temple	and	walked	back	toward	 the
square	of	 diffuse	 light	 that	 marked	 the	outer	 hall	 at	 the	end	 of	 the	Grand
Passage	and	the	Great	Gates	beyond.

202
                                 CHAPTER	                    XII


WHEN	JENNY	CAME	down	the	steps	of	the	Deep	she	was	shaking	with
exhaustion	and	an	aftermath	of	common	sense	that	told	her	that	she	should
have	been	terrified.	Yet	she	felt	curiously	little	fear	of	Morkeleb,	even	in	the
face	of	his	treachery	and	his	wrath.	Her	body	ached—the	power	she	had	put
forth	against	him	 had	been	far	 in	 excess	of	what	her	 flesh	was	used	to
sustaining—but	her	head	felt	clear	and	alert,	without	the	numbed	weariness
she	felt	when	she	had	overstretched	her	powers.	She	was	aware,	down	to	her
last	finger	end,	of	the	depth	and	greatness	of	the	dragon’s	magic,	but	was
aware	also	of	her	own	strength	against	him.
       Evening	wind	dusted	across	her	face.	The	sun	had	sunk	beyond	the	flinty
crest	of	the	westward	ridge,	and	though	the	sky	still	held	light,	Deeping	lay	at
the	bottom	of	a	lake	of	shadow.	She	was	aware	of	many	things	passing	in	the
Vale,	most	of	 them	having	 nothing	to	 do	with	 the	 affairs	of	 dragons	or
humankind—the	skreak	of	a	single	cricket	under	a	charred	stone,	the	flirt	of	a
squirrel’s	tail	 as	it	 fled	 from	its	 hopeful	 mate,	and	the	flutterings	of	 the
chaffinches	as	they	sought	their	 nighttime	 nests.	Where	the	 trail	 turned
downward	around	a	broken	pile	of	rubble	that	had	once	been	a	house,	she	saw
a	man’s	skeleton	lying	in	the	weeds,	the	bag	of	gold	he	had	died	clutching
split	open	and	the	coins	singing	softly	to	her	where	they	lay	scattered	among
his	ribs.
       She	was	aware,	suddenly,	that	someone	else	had	entered	the	Vale.
       It	was	analogous	to	sound,	though	unheard.	The	scent	of	magic	came	to
her	like	smoke	on	the	shift	of	the	wind.	She	stopped	still	in	the	dry	tangle	of
broomsedge,	cold	shreds	of	breeze	that	frayed	down	from	 the	timberline
stirring	in	her	plaids.	There	was	magic	in	the	Vale,	up	on	the	ridge.	She	could
hear	the	slither	and	snag	of	silk	on	beech	mast,	the	startled	splash	of	spilled
water	in	the	dusk	by	the	fountain,	and	Gareth’s	voice	halting	over	a	name...
       Catching	up	her	skirts,	Jenny	began	to	run.

203
       The	  smell	  of	 Zyerne’s	  perfume	 seemed	 everywhere	 in	  the	 woods.
Darkness	was	already	beginning	 to	collect	 beneath	the	trees.	Panting,	 Jenny
sprang	up	  the	 whitish,	  flinty	  rocks	  to	 the	 glade	 by	  the	 fountain.	  Long
experience	in	the	Winterlands	had	taught	her	to	move	 in	utter	silence,	even	at
a	dead	run;	and	thus,	for	the	first	moment,	neither	of	those	who	stood	near	the
little	well	 was	aware	of	her	arrival.
       It	 took	 her	 a	moment	to	 see	Zyerne.	Gareth	 she	saw	at	 once,	standing
frozen	beside	the	 wellhead.	 Spilled	 water	was	 soaking	into	 the	 beech	mast
around	his	feet;	a	half-empty	 bucket	balanced	on	the	edge	of	the	stone	trough
beside	the	 well	 itself.	  He	 didn’t	 heed	 it;	 she	wondered	 how	 much	 of	 his
surroundings	he	was	aware	of	at	all.
       Zyerne’s	 spells	 filled	  the	small	 glade	like	  the	music	 heard	in	 dreams.
Even	she,	a	woman,	felt	 the	 scented	warmth	of	 the	air	 that	belied	the	 tingly
cold	lower	 down	 in	the	 Vale	and	sensed	the	stirring	 of	 need	in	her	 flesh.	In
Gareth’s	eyes	was	a	kind	of	madness,	and	his	hands	were	shaking	where	they
were	clenched,	knotted	into	 fists,	 before	him.	 His	voice	 was	a	whisper	 more
desperate	than	a	scream	as	he	said,	“No.”
       “Gareth.”	  Zyerne	moved,	and	Jenny	saw	her,	as	she	seemed	to	float	like
a	ghost	in	the	dusk	among	the	birch	 trees	at	the	glade’s	edge.	“Why	 pretend?
You	know	 your	love	 for	me	has	grown,	 as	mine	has	for	 you.	It	 is	like	 fire	 in
your	flesh	now;	 the	taste	of	your	 mouth	in	 my	dreams	has	tormented	me	day
and	night...”
       “While	  you	were	lying	 with	my	 father?”
       She	 shook	 back	her	 hair,	 a	small,	 characteristic	 gesture,	brushing	 the
tendrils	of	it	 away	from	her	smooth	brow.	It	was	difficult	  to	see	what	she	wore
in	the	dusk—	 something	white	 and	fragile	 that	rippled	 in	 the	stirrings	 of	the
wind,	pale	 as	the	birches	themselves.	Her	 hair	was	 loosened	down	her	back
like	a	young	girl’s;	 and,	like	 a	young	girl,	 she	wore	no	veils.	 Years	seemed	to
have	vanished	from	her	age,	young	as	she	had	seemed	before.	She	looked	like
a	girl	of	Gareth’s	age,	unless,	like	Jenny,	one	saw	her	with	a	wizard’s	eye.
       “Gareth,	 I	never	lay	 with	 your	father,”	 she	said	softly.	“Oh,	we	agreed	to
pretend,	for	the	sake	of	appearances	at	Court—but	even	if	 he	had	wanted	me

204
to,	I	 don’t	 think	 I	 could	 have.	He	 treated	me	 like	 a	daughter.	It	 was	 you	 I
wanted,	you...”
       “That’s	 a	lie!”	 His	 mouth	sounded	dried	by	fever	heat.
       She	held	out	 her	hands,	and	the	wind	lifted	 the	thin	 fabric	of	 her	sleeves
back	from	her	arms	as	she	moved	a	step	into	the	glade.	“I	 could	 bear	waiting
no	longer.	 I	 had	to	 come,	to	 learn	 what	 had	happened	to	 you—to	 be	with
you...”
       He	 sobbed,	“Get	 away	 from	 me!”	  His	 face	was	twisted	 by	 something
close	to	pain.
       She	only	 whispered,	“I	want	 you...”
       Jenny	stepped	from	 the	somber	shade	of	the	trail	and	said,	“No,	 Zyerne.
What	you	want	is	the	Deep.”
       Zyerne	 swung	around,	her	concentration	breaking,	as	Morkeleb	had	tried
to	break	Jenny’s.	The	lurid	 sensuality	that	 had	dripped	from	 the	air	shattered
with	 an	almost	 audible	 snap.	At	 once,	Zyerne	 seemed	older,	no	 longer	 the
virgin	girl	 who	 could	inflame	 Gareth’s	passion.	The	boy	dropped	to	his	knees
and	covered	his	face,	his	body	racked	with	dry	sobs.
       “It’s	  what	you’ve	 always	 wanted,	isn’t	 it?”	 Jenny	touched	Gareth’s	hair
comfortingly,	 and	he	threw	 his	arms	around	 her	waist,	clinging	  to	her	like	 a
drowning	man	to	 a	spar.	Oddly	enough,	she	felt	no	 fear	of	Zyerne	 now,	or	of
the	greater	strength	of	the	younger	woman’s	magic.	She	seemed	to	see	Zyerne
differently,	even,	and	felt	calm	as	she	faced	her—calm	and	ready.
       Zyerne	 uttered	a	ribald	laugh.	 “So	there’s	our	boy	 who	won’t	 tumble	his
father’s	mistress?	 You	had	 them	both	 to	 yourself,	 didn’t	 you,	 slut,	 coming
down	from	the	north?	Enough	time	and	more	to	tangle	him	 in	your	hair.”
       Gareth	 pulled	free	 of	 Jenny	and	scrambled	to	 his	feet,	shaking	 all	 over
with	anger.	Though	 Jenny	could	see	he	was	still	 terrified	 of	the	sorceress,	he
faced	her	and	gasped,	“You’re	lying!”
       Zyerne	 laughed	again,	foully,	as	she	had	in	the	garden	outside	the	King’s
rooms.	Jenny	only	said,	“She	knows	it	 isn’t	true.	What	 did	you	come	here	for,
Zyerne?	To	 do	to	 Gareth	what	 you’ve	  done	to	 his	father?	 Or	 to	see	if	  it’s
finally	 safe	for	you	to	enter	the	Deep?”

205
       The	 enchantress’s	mouth	moved	uncertainly,	 and	her	eyes	shifted	under
Jenny’s	cool	  gaze.	 Then	 she	laughed,	 the	 mockery	  in	 it	  marred	 by	 her
uncertainty.	“Maybe	to	get	your	 precious	Dragonsbane	at	the	same	time?”
       A	 week—even	 a	 day—ago,	Jenny	 would	 have	 responded	to	the	 taunt
with	fear	for	 John’s	safety.	But	she	knew	Zyerne	had	not	gone	anywhere	near
John.	She	knew	she	would	have	sensed	it,	if	 such	magic	had	been	worked	so
near—almost,	she	thought,	she	would	have	heard	their	voices,	no	matter	 how
softly	 they	spoke.	And	 in	 any	case,	John	was	unable	to	 flee;	one	deals	with
the	unwounded	enemy	first.
       She	saw	Zyerne’s	hand	move	and	felt	 the	nature	of	the	spell,	even	as	she
smelled	the	singed	wool	of	 her	skirts	beginning	 to	smoke.	Her	own	 spell	was
fast	and	hard,	called	with	the	mind	 and	the	minimal	gesture	of	the	hand	rather
than	the	labor	it	had	once	entailed.	Zyerne	staggered	back,	her	hands	over	her
eyes,	taken	completely	by	surprise.
       When	  Zyerne	 raised	her	 head	 again,	 her	 eyes	were	 livid	  with	  rage,
yellow	 as	a	devil’s	in	 a	face	transformed	with	 fury.	“You	 can’t	 keep	me	from
the	Deep,”	she	said	in	a	voice	which	 shook.	“It	 is	mine—it	 will	  be	mine.	I’ve
driven	the	 gnomes	from	 it.	 When	 I	take	 it,	 no	one,	 no	one,	will	  be	able	 to
contend	against	my	power!”
       Stooping,	 she	seized	a	handful	of	old	leaves	and	beechnuts	from	the	mast
that	lay	all	about	their	 feet.	She	flung	them	at	Jenny.	In	the	air,	they	burst	into
flame,	growing	 as	they	burned,	a	tangled	bonfire	 that	Jenny	swept	aside	with
a	spell	she	had	 hardly	 been	aware	she’d	known.	 The	 blazing	 logs	scattered
everywhere,	 throwing	  streamers	of	  yellow	  fire	 into	  the	 blue	 gloom	  and
blazing	up	 in	 half-a-dozen	places	where	 they	touched	 dry	 weeds.	Doubling
like	a	hare	upon	her	tracks,	 Zyerne	darted	for	 the	path	that	led	down	 into	the
Vale.	Jenny	leaped	at	her	 heels,	her	soft	 boots	in	 three	strides	outdistancing
the	younger	woman’s	precarious	court	shoes.
       Zyerne	 twisted	in	 her	grip.	 She	was	taller	than	 Jenny	but	not	physically
as	strong,	even	 taking	 into	 account	Jenny’s	exhaustion;	 for	 an	instant	 their
eyes	were	inches	apart,	the	yellow	gaze	boring	like	balefire	into	the	blue.
       Like	 a	hammerblow,	Jenny	felt	 the	impact	of	 a	mind	upon	hers,	spells	of

206
hurt	and	terror	that	 gripped	and	twisted	 at	her	muscles,	utterly	 different	from
the	weight	and	living	 strength	of	the	dragon’s	mind.	 She	parried	the	spell,	not
so	much	 with	 a	spell	 as	with	  the	strength	 of	 her	 will,	 throwing	  it	 back	 at
Zyerne,	and	she	heard	the	younger	woman	curse	her	in	 a	spate	of	fury	 like	 a
burst	sewer.	Nails	 tore	at	 her	wrists	 as	she	sought	the	yellow	  eyes	with	 her
own	again,	catching	 Zyerne’s	silky	  curls	in	 a	fist	 like	 a	rock,	 forcing	 her	to
look.	 It	 was	the	 first	 time	 she	had	matched	 strength	in	 anger	with	  another
mage,	and	it	surprised	her	how	instinctive	it	was	to	probe	into	 the	essence—as
she	had	probed	into	 Gareth’s,	and	Mab	 into	 hers—not	solely	 to	 understand,
but	to	dominate	 by	understanding,	to	give	 nothing	 of	her	own	 soul	in	 return.
She	had	a	glimpse	 of	something	 sticky	 and	foul	 as	the	plants	 that	eat	those
foolish	 enough	to	came	 near,	the	eroded	remains	of	 a	soul,	 like	 an	animate
corpse	of	the	young	woman’s	mind.
       Zyerne	 screamed	as	she	felt	 the	secrets	of	 her	being	 bared,	and	power
exploded	in	 the	air	 between	them,	a	 burning	 fire	 that	surrounded	them	 in	a
whirlwind	 of	 tearing	force.	Jenny	felt	a	weight	 falling	 against	her,	a	blackness
like	the	 dragon’s	mind	 but	greater,	the	shadow	of	 some	crushing	power,	like
an	ocean	of	 uncounted	 years.	It	  drove	 her	to	 her	 knees,	but	 she	held	 on,
sloughing	away	 the	crawling,	  biting	 pains	that	 tore	at	her	 skin,	 the	rending
agony	in	 her	muscles,	the	fire,	 and	the	 darkness,	boring	into	 Zyerne’s	 mind
with	her	own,	like	 a	white	needle	of	fire.
       The	 weight	of	 the	shadow	faded.	She	felt	 Zyerne’s	nerve	and	will	 break
and	got	 to	her	 feet	again,	 throwing	 the	 girl	 from	 her	 with	 all	 her	 strength.
Zyerne	collapsed	on	 the	dirt	 of	 the	 path,	her	dark	 hair	 hanging	in	 a	torrent
over	her	white	dress,	her	nails	broken	from	 tearing	at	Jenny’s	wrists,	her	nose
running	 and	dust	 plastered	to	 her	 face	with	  mucus.	Jenny	 stood	 over	her,
panting	 for	 breath,	 her	every	 muscle	 hurting	 from	  the	 twisting	 impact	  of
Zyerne’s	spells.	“Go,”	 she	said,	her	voice	quiet,	but	 with	 power	in	her	words.
“Go	back	to	Bel	and	never	touch	Gareth	again.”
       Sobbing	 with	  fury,	 Zyerne	 picked	 herself	 up.	 Her	 voice	 shook.	“You
stinking	 gutter-nosed	sow!	 I	 won’t	 be	kept	 from	 the	 Deep!	It’s	 mine,	 I	 tell
you;	and	when	I	come	there,	I’ll	 show	you!	 I	swear	by	the	Stone,	when	I	have

207
the	Deep,	I’ll	  crush	you	 out	like	  the	dung-eating	cockroach	 you	are!	 You’ll
see!	They’ll	all	 see!	They	have	no	right	to	keep	me	away!”
       “Get	 out	of	here,”	 Jenny	said	softly.
       Sobbing,	 Zyerne	 obeyed	her,	gathering	up	 her	trailing	  white	 gown	and
stumbling	down	 the	path	 that	led	 toward	the	 clock	 tower.	Jenny	stood	for	 a
long	time	 watching	 her	go.	 The	power	 Jenny	had	 summoned	to	protect	 her
faded	slowly,	like	fire	 banked	under	embers	until	it	was	needed	again.
       It	 was	only	after	Zyerne	was	out	of	 sight	that	she	realized	that	she	should
never	have	been	able	to	do	 what	she	had	just	done—not	 here	and	not	 in	the
Deep.
       And	 it	came	to	her	then,	what	had	happened	to	her	when	she	had	touched
the	mind	of	the	dragon.
       The	 dragon’s	magic	 was	alive	 in	 her	soul,	 like	 streaks	of	 iron	 in	gold.
She	should	have	known	it	 before;	if	 she	had	not	been	so	weary,	she	thought,
perhaps	she	would	have.	Her	awareness,	like	Morkeleb’s,	 had	widened	to	fill
the	Vale,	so	that,	even	in	sleep,	she	was	conscious	of	things	taking	place	about
her.	A	shiver	 passed	through	her	flesh	 and	racked	her	bones	with	 terror	 and
wonderment,	as	if	  she	had	conceived	 again,	and	something	 alive	 and	alien
was	growing	within	 her.
       Smoke	 from	the	woods	 above	stung	her	nose	and	eyes,	white	billows	 of
it	telling	 her	that	Gareth	had	succeeded	in	dousing	the	flames.	Somewhere	the
horses	were	whinnying	  in	 terror.	She	felt	  exhausted	and	aching,	her	 whole
body	wrenched	 by	 the	cramp	 of	 those	gripping	  spells,	her	 wrists	 smarting
where	Zyerne’s	 nails	 had	 torn	 them.	She	 began	to	 tremble,	 the	 newfound
strength	draining	away	under	the	impact	of	shock	and	fear.
       A	 countersurge	of	wind	shook	the	trees	around	her,	as	if	at	the	stroke	of	a
giant	wing.	Her	 hair	blowing	 about	her	face,	she	looked	up,	but	for	a	moment
saw	nothing.	It	 was	something	she’d	heard	of—that	dragons,	for	 all	their	 size
and	gaudiness,	could	be	harder	to	 see	in	plain	 daylight	 than	the	voles	of	 the
hedgerow.	He	seemed	to	blend	down	out	 of	the	dusk,	a	vast	 shape	of	jointed
ebony	and	black	silk,	silver-crystal	 eyes	like	small	moons	in	the	dark.
       He	  could	 feel	  my	 power	 nearing	 its	  end,	 she	thought	  despairingly,

208
remembering	how	he	had	turned	on	her	 before.	The	terrible,	 shadowy	weight
of	Zyerne’s	spells	still	 lay	 on	her	bones;	she	felt	they	would	break	if	 she	tried
to	summon	the	 power	to	 resist	the	dragon.	Wrung	 with	 a	weariness	close	to
physical	nausea,	she	looked	up	to	face	him	and	hardened	her	mind	once	again
to	meet	his	attack.
       Even	 as	she	did	so,	she	realized	that	 he	was	beautiful,	 as	he	hung	for	 a
moment	like	a	black,	drifting	 kite	 upon	the	air.
       Then	 his	 mind	 touched	hers,	 and	the	 last	pain	 of	 Zyerne’s	 spells	was
sponged	away.
       What	 is	 it,	  wizard	 woman?	 he	 asked.	It	 is	 only	  evil	 words,	 such	 as
fishwives	throw	at	one	another.
       He	 settled	before	her	on	the	path,	folding	 his	great	wings	 with	 a	queerly
graceful	articulation,	and	regarded	her	with	his	silver	 eyes	in	the	dusk.
       He	 said,	You	understand.
       No,	  she	 replied.	 I	  think	 I	  know	 what	  has	 happened,	but	  I	 do	  not
understand.
       Bah.	 In	 the	leaky	gray	 twilight	  beneath	the	trees,	she	saw	all	the	scale-
points	along	his	 sides	ruffle	 slightly,	 like	 the	hair	of	 an	affronted	 cat.	I	think
that	you	do.	 When	your	 mind	was	in	 mine,	my	magic	 called	 to	you,	and	 the
dragon	within	 you	answered.	Know	you	not	your	 own	power,	wizard	woman?
Know	you	not	what	you	could	be?
       With	 a	cold	 vertigo	that	 was	not	quite	fear	 she	understood	him	then	and
willed	herself	not	 to	understand.
       He	 felt	 the	closing	 of	 her	mind,	 and	irritation	  smoked	from	 him	 like	 a
white	spume	of	mist.	 You	understand,	he	said	again.	You	have	been	within	my
mind;	you	know	what	it	would	 be	to	be	a	dragon.
       Jenny	 said,	No,	 not	to	 him,	 but	 to	that	 trickle	 of	 fire	 in	 her	mind	 that
surged	suddenly	into	a	stream.
       As	 in	 a	dream,	images	surfaced	 of	things	 she	felt	 she	had	once	known
and	forgotten,	  like	 the	 soaring	 freedom	 of	 flight.	  She	 saw	 the	 earth	lost
beneath	her	 in	 the	 clouds,	 and	about	 her	 was	 a	vaporous	 eternity	 whose
absolute	silence	was	broken	 only	 by	 the	sheer	of	 her	wings.	 As	 from	 great

209
height,	she	glimpsed	 the	stone	circle	 on	Frost	 Fell,	the	 mere	below	 it	 like	a
broken	piece	of	dirty	glass,	and	the	little	stone	house	a	chrysalis,	cracked	open
to	release	the	butterfly	that	had	slept	within.
       She	said,	I	have	not	the	power	to	change	my	essence.
       I	 have,	the	voice	whispered	among	the	visions	 in	her	mind.	You	have	the
strength	to	be	a	 dragon,	once	 you	consent	to	take	 the	form.	I	 sensed	that	in
you	when	we	struggled.	I	was	angry	then,	to	be	defeated	by	a	human;	but	you
can	be	more	than	human.
       Gazing	 up	at	the	dark	 splendor	of	 the	dragon’s	angular	form,	 she	shook
her	head.	I	will	  not	put	myself	 thus	in	 your	power,	Morkeleb.	 I	 cannot	leave
my	own	form	without	your	 aid,	nor	could	I	 return	to	it.	 Do	not	tempt	me.
       Tempt?	Morkeleb’s	 voice	 said.	There	 is	no	 temptation	from	 outside	the
heart.	 And	 as	for	  returning—what	  are	 you	 as	a	 human,	 Jenny	 Waynest?
Pitiful,	 puling,	 like	all	 your	kin	 the	slave	of	time	that	 rots	the	body	before	the
mind	has	seen	more	than	a	single	flower	in	all	the	meadows	of	the	Cosmos.	To
be	a	mage	you	must	be	a	mage,	and	I	 see	in	your	mind	 that	you	fight	 for	 the
time	to	do	even	that.	To	be	a	dragon...
       “To	 be	a	dragon,”	she	said	aloud,	to	force	 her	own	mind	 upon	it,	“I	 have
only	to	give	 over	my	control	 of	 you.	I	will	  not	lose	myself	 thus	in	the	dragon
mind	and	the	dragon	magic.	You	will	 not	thus	get	me	to	release	you.”
       She	 felt	 the	strength	 press	against	the	 closed	doors	 in	 her	 mind,	 then
ease,	and	heard	the	steely	rustle	of	 his	scales	as	his	long	 tail	 lashed	through
the	dry	 grasses	with	annoyance.	The	 dark	woods	 came	back	into	 focus;	 the
strange	visions	receded	like	 a	shining	 mist.	The	light	  was	waning	fast	 about
them,	all	the	colors	bled	from	 straggly	briar	 and	fern.	As	if	 his	blackness	took
on	the	softer	hues	of	 the	evening,	the	 dragon	was	nearly	invisible,	  his	shape
blending	with	 the	milky	 stringers	of	fog	 that	had	begun	to	veil	 the	woods	and
with	the	black,	 abrupt	outlines	of	 dead	branch	and	charred	trunk.	Somewhere
on	the	ridge	above	her,	Jenny	could	hear	Gareth	calling	her	name.
       She	found	 she	was	trembling,	 not	solely	 from	 weariness	or	the	piercing
cold.	The	need	within	 her	was	terrifying—to	  be	what	 she	had	always	wished
to	be,	to	 have	what	 she	had	wanted	 since	she	had	been	fourteen,	 ugly,	 and

210
cursed	with	 a	terrible	 need.	She	had	tasted	the	strength	of	 the	dragon’s	fire,
and	the	taste	lingered	sweet	in	her	mouth.
       I	 can	give	you	this,	the	voice	in	her	mind	 said.
       She	shook	 her	head,	more	 violently	 this	 time.	No.	 I	 will	 not	 betray	my
friends.
       Friends?	 Those	who	 would	hind	 you	to	 littleness	 for	their	 own	 passing
convenience?	The	 man	who	 grudges	 you	 the	 essence	of	your	  soul	out	 of
mourning	for	 his	dinner?	Do	 you	cling	 to	all	 these	little	joys	because	you	are
afraid	to	taste	the	great	ones,	Jenny	Waynest?
       He	 had	 been	right	 when	 he	had	said	 that	 there	is	 no	temptation	 from
outside	the	heart.	She	flung	 back	her	long	hair	 over	her	shoulders	and	called
to	herself	all	 the	strength	remaining	 in	her,	against	the	star-prickled	 darkness
that	seemed	to	draw	upon	the	very	marrow	of	her	bones.
       Get	away	 from	me,	she	told	him.	Go	now	and	 return	to	the	islands	 in	the
northern	 sea	that	are	 your	 home.	Sing	your	 songs	to	 the	rock-gold	 and	the
whales,	and	let	be	forever	the	sons	of	men	and	the	sons	of	gnomes.
       As	 if	 she	had	struck	 a	black	 log	that,	 breaking,	had	revealed	the	 living
fire	smoldering	 within,	 she	felt	 the	surge	of	his	 anger	again.	He	reared	back,
his	body	arched	against	the	dimming	sky.	The	dark	 wire	and	silk	 of	his	wings
rattled	as	he	said,	Be	it	so	then,	wizard	 woman.	I	leave	to	 you	the	gold	 of	the
Deep—take	of	it	what	 you	will.	 My	song	is	 in	it.	 When	old	age	comes,	whose
mortal	frost	 you	have	already	begun	to	feel	 upon	your	bones,	press	it	to	your
heart	and	remember	that	which	you	have	let	pass	you	by.
       He	 gathered	himself	  upon	his	 haunches,	his	compact,	 snakelike	 shape
rising	above	her	as	he	gathered	about	him	the	glitter	of	magic	in	 the	air.	Black
wings	unfurled	 against	 the	sky,	 looming	 over	her	 so	that	 she	could	 see	the
obsidian	gleam	 of	 his	sides,	the	 baby-skin	 softness	of	the	 velvet	 belly,	 still
puckered	with	 the	crimped,	 ugly	 mouths	of	 harpoon	wounds.	Then	 he	flung
himself	 skyward.	The	 great	stroke	of	 his	 wings	caught	 him	 up.	She	felt	 the
magic	that	swirled	 about	him,	 a	spindrift	 of	 enchantment,	the	star	trail	 of	 an
invisible	 comet.	 The	last	 rays	 of	 sinking	 light	 tipped	 his	 wings	 as	he	rose
beyond	the	blue	shadow	of	the	ridge.	Then	he	was	gone.

211
       Jenny	 watched	 him	  go	 with	  desolation	 in	 her	 heart.	 All	  the	 woods
seemed	laden	now	with	the	smell	of	wet	 burning,	and	the	murky	 earthiness	of
dead	smoke.	She	became	slowly	aware	that	the	 hem	of	her	skirt	 was	sodden
from	kneeling	in	 the	wet	path;	her	boots	were	damp	and	her	feet	cold.	Listless
weariness	dragged	upon	her,	from	 muscles	 pulled	by	 exertion	 and	Zyerne’s
spells	and	also	from	 the	 words	the	 dragon	had	spoken	to	 her	when	 she	had
turned	away	from	what	he	had	offered.
       As	 a	 dragon,	she	would	 have	 no	more	 hold	 upon	him,	 nor	 would	 she
wish	any	longer	to	drive	 him	from	 the	Deep.	Was	that,	she	wondered,	why	he
had	offered	her	 the	splendid	and	terrifying	  freedom	 of	that	 form?	They	 said
that	dragons	did	not	entrap	with	 lies	but	with	 truth,	and	she	knew	he	had	read
accurately	the	desires	of	her	soul.
       “Jenny?”	 A	 smudged,	dirty	 Gareth	came	hurrying	  toward	her	down	 the
path.	To	her	ears,	used	to	the	voice	of	the	dragon,	he	sounded	tinny	and	false.
“Are	 you	all	right?	 What	happened?	I	saw	the	dragon...”	He	 had	removed	his
specs	and	was	seeking	a	sufficiently	clean	patch	of	his	sooty,	spark-holed	shirt
to	wipe	 them	 on,	without	 much	 success.	Against	 the	grime	 on	his	 face	the
lenses	had	left	two	white	 circles,	like	 a	mask,	in	 which	 his	gray	eyes	blinked
nakedly.
       Jenny	 shook	 her	 head.	 She	felt	  weary	 to	 the	 point	  of	 tears,	 almost
incapable	of	speech.	He	fell	 into	 step	with	 her	as	she	began	slowly	climbing
the	path	up	the	Rise	once	more.
       “Did	  Zyerne	get	away?”
       She	looked	 at	him,	 startled.	After	 what	 had	passed	between	herself	and
Morkeleb,	she	had	nearly	forgotten	 Zyerne.	“She—she	 left.	I	 sent	her	away.”
It	seemed	like	days	ago.
       “You	 sent	her	away?”	Gareth	gasped,	dumfounded.
       Jenny	 nodded,	too	 tired	to	 explain.	 Thinking	  about	it,	 she	frowned,	 as
something	snagged	at	her	mind.	But	she	only	asked,	“And	you?”
       He	 looked	away	from	her	and	reddened	with	shame.	Part	of	Jenny	sighed
in	exasperation	 at	this	 foolishness,	 so	petty	 after	 the	force	 of	 the	 dragon’s
greater	seduction;	but	part	of	her	remembered	what	it	was	like	 to	be	eighteen,

212
and	prey	  to	 the	 uncontrollable	 yearnings	 of	  the	 body.	 Comfortingly,	  she
touched	the	skinny	arm	under	the	ripped	lawn	of	his	shirtsleeve.
       “It	  is	 a	 spell	 she	had	 on	 you,”	 she	 said.	“Nothing	  more.	 We	 are	 all
tempted...”	 She	pushed	aside	 the	 echoing	memory	 of	  the	dragon’s	 words.
“...And	 what	is	 in	 our	deepest	hearts	is	still	 not	 what	we	 are	judged	on,	 but
rather	what	we	ultimately	 do.	She	only	uses	such	spells	to	draw	you	to	her,	to
control	you	as	she	controls	your	father.”
       They	 reached	the	clearing,	soggy	and	dirty-looking,	 like	 a	garment	upon
which	acid	had	been	spilled,	with	 charred	spots	and	little	puddles	of	gleaming
water	which	still	 steamed	faintly	from	 the	smolder	they	had	quenched.
       “I	  know.”	  Gareth	 sighed	 and	picked	 up	 the	 bucket	 from	  the	 sodden
ground	 to	 dip	 it	 once	 more	 into	 the	 well.	  He	 moved	 stiffly	  from	  pulled
muscles	and	exertion	 but	 didn’t	  complain	 of	 them	 as	he	 once	might	 have
done.	On	the	edge	of	the	 well	 trough,	he	found	 his	tin	 cup	and	dipped	water
from	 the	 bucket	 to	 hand	to	 her,	 the	 wetness	icy	 against	 her	 fingers.	 She
realized	with	a	little	 start	that	she	had	neither	eaten	nor	drunk	since	breakfast.
There	had	been	no	time,	and	 now	she	felt	 old	and	exhausted	as	she	took	the
cup	from	his	hand.
       “You	  just	 sent	her	 away?”	 Gareth	 asked	again.	 “And	  she	went?	 She
didn’t	turn	 herself	into	a	falcon...?”
       “No.”	  Jenny	looked	 up,	as	it	 came	to	her	what	 it	was	that	 had	bothered
her	about	the	events	of	 the	evening.	“Morkeleb...”	  She	stopped,	not	 wanting
to	speak	of	what	Morkeleb	had	offered	to	her.
       But	 even	so,	she	thought,	 she	could	not	 have	taken	on	a	 dragon’s	form
without	his	help.	His	 powers	had	broken	through	to	the	powers	within	 her,	but
her	powers	were	still	raw	and	small.	And	 Zyerne...
       “I	  defeated	her,”	 she	said	 slowly.	 “But	 if	 she’s	 as	shape-crafty	as	you
have	said—if	 she	has	that	 kind	 of	strength—	 I	 shouldn’t	 have	been	able	 to
defeat	her,	even	though	my	powers	have	grown.”
       She	almost	 said,	“Even	 with	the	 dragon’s	powers	in	 me,”	but	 the	words
stuck	on	 her	lips.	 She	felt	 the	 powers	stir	 in	 her,	like	  an	alien	 child	 in	 the
womb	of	 fate,	 and	tried	 to	 put	aside	the	 thought	of	 them	 and	of	 what	 they

213
might	mean.	She	raised	 the	cup	to	 her	lips,	 but	stopped,	the	water	 untasted,
and	looked	up	at	Gareth	again.
       “Have	 you	drunk	 any	of	the	water	from	this	well?”	 she	asked.
       He	 looked	 at	her	in	 surprise.	“We’ve	  all	 been	drinking	 it	 for	 days,”	he
said.
       “This	 evening,	I	 mean.”
       He	 looked	ruefully	 around	at	the	clearing	and	his	own	 soaked	sleeves.	“I
was	too	busy	throwing	it	about	to	drink	 any,”	he	said.	“Why?”
       She	passed	her	hand	across	the	mouth	of	the	cup.	As	things	were	visible
to	a	wizard	in	 darkness,	she	saw	the	viscid	sparkle	of	green	luminosity	 in	 the
water.
       “Has	 it	gone	bad?”	he	asked	worriedly.	“How	 can	you	tell?”
       She	upended	the	cup,	 dumping	the	contents	to	 the	ground.	“Where	 was
Zyerne	when	you	came	into	the	clearing?”
       He	 shook	his	 head,	puzzled.	“I	 don’t	 remember.	It	 was	like	 a	dream...”
He	 looked	 around	 him,	 though	 Jenny	 knew	 that	 the	 clearing,	 soggy	 and
trampled	 in	 the	 dismal	 gloom,	 was	 very	 different	  from	 the	 soft	 place	 of
twilight	 enchantment	if	had	appeared	an	hour	or	so	ago.
       At	 last	 he	said,	“I	 think	 she	was	sitting	where	you	 are	now,	on	the	edge
of	the	wellhead.”
       Morkeleb	  had	said,	They	 did	 not	think	 that	 I	 could	 see	the	death	 that
tainted	 the	 meat.	 Was	 it	  Dromar	 who	  had	 remarked	 that	 dragons	 were
impossible	to	poison?
       She	 twisted	 her	body	 and	 moved	 her	hands	 across	the	surface	 of	 the
bucket	that	 Gareth	had	 drawn	up.	 The	 reek	of	 death	rose	 from	 it,	 and	she
recoiled	in	disgust	and	horror,	 as	if	the	water	had	turned	to	blood	 beneath	her
fingers.

214
                                CHAPTER	                   XIII


“BUT	WHY?”	SQUATTING	before	the	fire	on	his	hunker-bones,	Gareth	turned	to
look	at	John,	who	lay	in	his	nest	of	bearskin	blankets	and	ratty	plaids	a	few
feet	away.	“As	far	as	she	was	concerned,	you’d	slain	her	dragon	for	her.”	He
unraveled	the	screw	of	paper	in	which	they’d	brought	the	coffee	up	from	Bel,
decided	there	wasn’t	enough	to	bother	with	measuring,	and	dumped	it	into	the
pot	of	water	that	bubbled	over	the	fire.	“She	didn’t	know	then	that	Jenny	was
any	threat	to	her.	Why	poison	us?”
       “At	 a	 guess,”	John	said,	propping	himself	with	great	care	up	on	one
elbow	and	fitting	his	spectacles	to	his	dirty,	unshaven	face,	“to	keep	us	from
riding	back	to	Bel	with	the	news	that	the	dragon	was	dead	before	she	could
get	your	dad	to	round	up	the	remaining	gnomes	on	some	trumped-up	charge.
As	far	as	she	knew,	the	dragon	was	dead—I	mean,	she	couldn’t	have	seen	him
in	a	crystal	or	a	water	bowl,	but	she	could	see	us	all	alive	and	chipper,	and	the
inference	is	a	pretty	obvious	one.”
       “I	 suppose.”	Gareth	unrolled	his	turned-up	sleeves	and	slung	his	cloak
around	his	shoulders	once	more.	The	morning	was	foggy	and	cold,	and	the
sweat	he’d	worked	up	clearing	out	the	well	house	close	to	their	camp	in	the
ruined	tanneries	was	drying.
       “I	 doubt	she’d	have	poisoned	you,”	John	went	on.	“If	she’d	wanted	you
dead,	she’d	never	have	waited	for	you.”
       Gareth	blushed	hotly.	“That	isn’t	why	she	waited,”	he	mumbled.
       “Of	 course	not,”	John	said.	“Dead,	you’re	not	only	no	good	to	her—if
you	die,	she	loses	everything.”
       The	boy	frowned.	“Why?	I	 mean,	I	can	see	her	wanting	me	under	her
power	so	I’d	no	longer	be	a	threat	to	her,	the	same	reason	she	put	Polycarp
out	of	the	way.	And	if	she	killed	the	two	of	you,	she’d	need	me	to	back	up	her
story	about	the	dragon	still	being	in	the	Deep,	at	least	until	she	could	get	rid
of	the	gnomes.”	He	sniffed	bitterly	and	held	out	his	blistered	hands	to	the	fire.

215
“She’d	probably	 use	Bond	and	me	as	witnesses	to	say	eventually	that	she	slew
the	dragon.	Then	she’d	be	able	to	justify	having	my	father	give	 her	the	Deep.”
       He	  sighed,	  his	 mouth	  tight	  with	   disillusionment.	  “And	   I	  thought
Polycarp	stretching	 a	 bit	 of	 cable	over	 a	fence	 sounded	like	 the	 depths	of
perfidy.”	 He	settled	the	griddle	over	the	fire,	 his	thin	 face	looking	 much	older
than	it	had	in	the	jonquil	 pallor	of	the	daytime	flames.
       “Well,”	   John	said	 gently,	“it	  isn’t	 only	 that,	 Gar.”	 He	glanced	 over	 at
Jenny,	who	 sat	in	 the	 shadows	of	 the	 newly	 cleared	 doorway	 of	 the	 well
house,	but	she	said	nothing.	 Then	he	 looked	back	 to	Gareth.	“How	  long	 do
you	think	your	 father’s	going	to	last	with	 Zyerne	alive?	I	 don’t	know	 what	her
spells	are	doing	to	him,	 and	I	know	 a	dying	man	when	 I	see	one.	As	it	is,	 for
all	her	power,	she’s	only	a	mistress.	She	needs	the	Deep	for	a	power	base	and
fortress	independent	of	the	King,	and	she	needs	the	Deep’s	gold.”
       “My	  father	would	 give	 it	to	 her,”	Gareth	 said	softly.	“And	  I—I	 suppose
I’m	 just	the	contingency	 plan,	in	case	he	should	die?”	 He	poked	at	the	softly
sizzling	cakes	on	the	griddle.	 “Then	 she	had	to	destroy	Polycarp,	 whether	or
not	he	 tried	 to	warn	 me	 of	 her.	The	 Citadel	 guards	the	 back	way	 into	 the
Deep.”
       “Well,	  not	even	that.”	John	lay	back	down	 again	and	folded	his	hands	on
his	breast.	“She	wanted	to	be	rid	of	Polycarp	because	he’s	an	alternative	heir.”
       “Alternative	  to	whom?”	 Gareth	asked,	puzzled.	“To	me?”
       John	shook	his	head.	“Alternative	 to	Zyerne’s	child.”
       The	 horror	 that	crossed	the	boy’s	 face	was	deeper	than	fear	 of	death—
deeper,	Jenny	thought	with	 the	strange	dispassion	that	 had	lain	 upon	her	all
that	morning	and	through	 the	previous	night,	than	fear	 of	being	subjugated	to
the	enchantress’s	spells.	 He	 looked	 nauseated	by	the	 thought,	 as	if	  at	 the
violation	 of	some	dark	taboo.	It	 was	a	long	time	 before	he	could	speak.	“You
mean—my	father’s	child?”
       “Or	  yours.	It	 would	 scarcely	matter	which,	 as	long	 as	it	had	the	 family
looks.”	 Bandaged	hands	folded,	John	looked	shortsightedly	 up	at	the	 boy	as,
half-numbed,	  Gareth	  went	  through	  the	  automatic	  motions	  of	   forking
griddlecakes	from	the	skillet.	 Still	 in	that	gentle,	matter-of-fact	 voice,	he	went

216
on,	“But	 you	see,	after	this	long	under	Zyerne’s	spells,	your	father	may	not	 be
capable	of	 fathering	 a	 child.	 And	 Zyerne	 needs	a	 child,	 if	 she’s	 to	 go	on
ruling.”
       Jenny	 looked	away	 from	 them,	thinking	  about	what	 it	 would	 be,	to	 be
that	child.	 The	same	wave	of	sickness	Gareth	had	felt	 passed	over	her	at	the
knowledge	of	what	 Zyerne	would	do	to	 any	child	of	 hers.	She	would	not	feed
upon	 it,	  as	 she	fed	  upon	 the	  King	  and	 Bond;	  but	 she	 would	  raise	 it
deliberately	as	an	emotional	cripple,	forever	dependent	upon	her	and	her	love.
Jenny	had	seen	it	done,	by	women	or	by	men,	and	knew	what	manner	of	 man
or	 woman	 emerged	 from	  that	 smothered	 childhood.	  But	 even	  then,	 the
twisting	 had	been	from	 some	need	of	 the	parent’s	 heart,	and	not	 something
done	merely	to	keep	power.
       She	 thought	of	 her	 own	 sons	and	the	 absurd	love	 she	bore	them.	 She
might	 have	abandoned	them,	 she	thought	 with	 sudden	 fury	 at	 Zyerne,	but
even	had	she	not	loved	them,	 even	were	they	got	 on	her	by	 rape,	she	would
never	have	done	that	to	them.	It	was	a	thing	she	would	have	liked	to	think	 she
herself	could	scarcely	conceive	of	anyone	doing	 to	an	innocent	child—except
that	in	her	heart	she	knew	exactly	how	it	could	be	done.
       Anger	 and	sickness	stirred	in	her,	as	if	she	had	looked	upon	torture.
       “Jenny?”
       Gareth’s	 voice	broke	her	 from	her	 thoughts.	He	stood	a	few	 paces	from
her,	looking	pleadingly	 down	 at	her.	“He	will	  get	better,	won’t	 he?”	he	asked
hesitantly.	“My	 father,	 I	mean?	When	 Zyerne	is	banished,	or—or	 is	killed—
he	will	be	the	way	he	was	before?”
       Jenny	sighed.	“I	  don’t	know,”	 she	replied	in	 a	low	 voice.	She	shook	her
mind	free	of	the	lethargy	 that	gripped	her,	a	weariness	of	the	spirit	as	much	as
the	ache	of	her	body	 left	 by	the	battering	 of	 Zyerne’s	spells.	It	 was	not	only
that	she	had	badly	overstretched	her	own	newfound	powers,	not	 only	that	her
body	was	 unused	to	sustaining	 the	terrible	 demands	of	 the	dragon’s	 magic.
She	was	aware	now	that	her	 very	perceptions	were	changing,	 that	it	 was	not
only	her	magic	that	had	been	changed	by	the	touch	of	the	dragon’s	 mind.	The
dragon	in	 you	 answered,	he	 had	said—she	 was	starting	 to	 see	things	as	 a

217
dragon	saw.
       She	 got	 stiffly	   to	 her	 feet,	 staggering	 a	 little	  against	 the	 shored-up
doorpost	of	the	well	house,	feeling	physically	 drained	and	very	weak.	She	had
watched	through	the	night,	 telling	herself	 it	was	for	 Zyerne	that	she	watched,
though	in	 her	heart	she	knew	the	enchantress	would	 not	be	back,	and	 it	was
not,	in	fact,	for	 her	that	she	waited.	She	said,	“It	 isn’t	the	spells	that	she	holds
him	 under	that	 are	harming	 him.	 Zyerne	 is	 a	vampire,	 Gareth—not	 of	 the
blood,	like	 the	Whisperers,	but	of	the	life-essence	itself.	 In	her	eyes	last	night
I	saw	her	essence,	her	soul;	a	sticky	and	devouring	thing,	yes,	but	a	thing	 that
must	feed	to	 go	on	 living.	 Miss	 Mab	 told	 me	of	 the	spells	 of	 the	Places	of
Healing	that	can	shore	up	the	life	 of	a	dying	 man	by	taking	a	little	 of	 the	life-
energy	of	those	who	consent	to	give	it.	It	 is	done	seldom,	and	only	in	cases	of
great	need.	I	am	certain	this	is	what	 she	has	done	to	your	father	and	to	Bond.
What	I	  don’t	 understand	is	 why	 she	would	  need	to.	 Her	 powers	are	 such
that...”
       “You	 know,”	 John	 broke	in,	“it	  says	in	Dotys’	 Histories...	 or	maybe	 it’s
in	Terens...	or	is	it	the	Elucidus	Lapidarus...?”
       “But	  what	 can	we	do?”	  Gareth	pleaded.	 “There	 must	be	something!	 I
could	 ride	 back	to	 Bel	  and	let	 Dromar	  know	 it’s	 safe	 for	 the	 gnomes	to
reoccupy	the	Deep.	It	would	give	them	a	strong	base	to...”
       “No,”	  Jenny	 said.	“Zyerne’s	  hold	on	 the	city	  is	too	 strong.	 After	 this,
she’ll	be	watching	 for	you,	scrying	 the	roads.	She’d	intercept	you	long	 before
you	came	near	Bel.”
       “But	  we	have	to	do	 something!”	 Panic	and	desperation	lurked	 at	bay	in
his	voice.	“Where	can	we	go?	Polycarp	would	 give	us	shelter	in	the	Citadel...”
       “You	 going	 to	 tell	the	 siege	troops	around	the	walls	 you	want	 a	private
word	with	  him?”	 John	asked,	forgetting	 all	 about	his	 speculations	upon	 the
classics.
       “There	 are	ways	through	the	Deep	into	Halnath.”
       “And	  a	nice	 locked	door	 at	the	end	of	 ’em,	 I	 bet,	or	the	 tunnels	sealed
shut	with	 blasting	 powder	to	 keep	the	dragon	 out—even	if	 old	 Dromar	 had
put	them	on	his	maps,	which	he	didn’t.	I	 had	a	look	for	that	back	in	Bel.”

218
       “Damn	  him...”	 Gareth	began	angrily,	 and	John	waved	him	 silent	with	 a
mealcake	in	hand.
       “I	 can’t	 blame	him,”	 he	said.	Against	the	random	browns	and	heathers	of
the	bloodstained	plaid	 folded	 beneath	his	head	his	face	 still	 looked	 pale	but
had	lost	its	dreadful	chalkiness.	Behind	 his	specs,	his	brown	eyes	were	bright
and	alert.	“He’s	 a	canny	 old	bird,	 and	he	 knows	Zyerne.	 If	 she	didn’t	 know
where	the	 ways	through	 to	 the	 Citadel	 hooked	up	 into	 the	 main	 Deep,	he
wasn’t	going	 to	 have	 that	information	  down	 on	paper	 that	she	could	 steal.
Still,	Jen	might	be	able	to	lead	us.”
       “No.”	  Jenny	glanced	over	at	him	from	 where	she	sat	cross-legged	beside
the	fire,	 dipping	the	 last	bite	 of	her	griddlecake	 into	 the	honey.	“Even	 being
able	to	see	in	darkness,	I	could	not	scout	them	out	 unaided.	As	for	 you	going
through	them,	if	you	 try	to	get	up	in	 under	a	week,	I’ll	 put	a	spell	of	 lameness
on	you.”
       “Cheat.”
       “Watch	 me.”	 She	wiped	 her	fingers	 on	the	end	of	 her	plaid.	 “Morkeleb
guided	me	through	to	the	heart	of	the	Deep;	I	could	never	have	found	it,	else.”
       “What	  was	 it	 like?”	  Gareth	asked	after	 a	 moment.	 “The	 heart	 of	 the
Deep?	The	gnomes	swear	by	it...”
       Jenny	frowned,	 remembering	the	whispering	darkness	and	the	soapy	feel
of	the	 stone	altar	 beneath	her	fingertips.	 “I’m	   not	sure,”	 she	said	 softly.	 “I
dreamed	about	it...”
       As	 one,	the	horses	suddenly	 flung	 up	their	 heads	from	the	stiff,	 frosted
grass.	Battlehammer	nickered	softly	 and	 was	answered,	thin	 and	clear,	from
the	mists	that	 floated	 on	the	 fringes	 of	 the	woods	that	 surrounded	Deeping
Vale.	Hooves	struck	the	stone,	and	a	girl’s	voice	 called	out,	“Gar?	Gar,	where
are	you?”
       “It’s	  Trey.”	He	raised	his	voice	to	shout.	“Here!”
       There	 was	a	frenzied	scrambling	of	 sliding	 gravel,	and	the	whitish	 mists
solidified	  into	 the	 dark	  shapes	of	 a	 horse	 and	 rider	 and	 a	 fluttering	  of
dampened	veils.	Gareth	strode	to	 the	edge	of	the	 high	ground	 of	the	 Rise	to
catch	the	bridle	 of	 Trey’s	 dappled	 palfrey	 as	it	 came	stumbling	 up	 the	last

219
slope,	head-down	with	exhaustion	and	matted	with	 sweat	in	spite	of	the	day’s
cold.	 Trey,	clinging	  to	 the	saddlebow,	 looked	 scarcely	better	 off,	  her	face
scratched	as	if	 she	had	 ridden	into	 low-hanging	  branches	in	 the	wood	 and
long	streamers	clawed	loose	from	her	purple-and-white	coiffure.
       “Gar,	 I	 knew	you	 had	to	be	 all	right.”	  She	slid	from	 the	saddle	into	 his
arms.	“They	 said	they	saw	the	dragon—that	 Lady	Jenny	had	put	 spells	upon
him—I	 knew	you	had	to	be	all	right.”
       “We’re	  fine,	 Trey,”	 Gareth	 said	doubtfully,	  frowning	  at	the	 terror	 and
desperation	of	the	girl’s	 voice.	 “You	 look	 as	if	 you’ve	 ridden	here	without	 a
break.”
       “I	  had	to!”	 she	gasped.	Under	the	torn	rags	of	her	white	Court	dress,	her
knees	were	trembling,	and	she	clung	to	Gareth’s	arm	for	support;	her	face	was
colorless	beneath	what	was	left	of	 its	paint.	“They’re	  coming	for	 you!	I	 don’t
understand	what’s	happening,	but	you’ve	 got	to	get	out	of	 here!	Bond...”	 She
stumbled	on	her	brother’s	name.
       “What	 about	Bond?	Trey,	what’s	going	on?”
       “I	   don’t	  know!”	   she	 cried.	  Tears	 of	 wretchedness	 and	  exhaustion
overflowed	her	eyes,	and	she	wiped	them	impatiently,	 leaving	faint	 streaks	of
blue-black	 kohl	 on	 her	round	 cheeks.	 “There’s	 a	 mob	on	 its	 way,	 Bond’s
leading	it...”
       “Bond?”	   The	idea	of	the	lazy	and	elegant	Bond	troubling	himself	 to	lead
anyone	anywhere	was	absurd.
       “They’re	  going	 to	 kill	  you,	Gar!	 I	 heard	them	 say	so!	 You,	 and	Lady
Jenny,	and	Lord	John.”
       “What?	 Why?”	 Gareth	was	growing	more	and	more	confused.
       “More	  to	the	 point,	who?”	 John	 asked,	propping	himself	 up	 among	his
blankets	once	again.
       “These—these	  people,	 laborers	  mostly—smelters	  and	 artisans	 from
Deeping	out	of	work,	 the	ones	who	hang	around	the	Sheep	in	the	Mire	all	day.
There	are	Palace	guards	with	them,	too,	and	I	think	more	are	coming—I	 don’t
know	why!	 I	 tried	to	get	some	sense	out	of	Bond,	 but	it’s	 as	if	he	didn’t	 hear
me,	didn’t	 know	me!	 He	slapped	me—and	he’s	never	hit	me,	Gar,	not	since	I

220
was	a	child...”
       “Tell	 us,”	 Jenny	said	quietly,	taking	the	girl’s	 hand,	cold	as	a	dead	bird	in
her	warm	rough	one.	“Start	from	 the	beginning.”
       Trey	 gulped	and	wiped	her	eyes	again,	her	hands	shaking	with	weariness
and	the	 exertion	  of	 a	 fifteen-mile	  ride.	  The	 ornamental	 cloak	 about	 her
shoulders	was	an	 indoor	 garment	 of	 white	 silk	 and	milky	  fur,	 designed	to
ward	off	 the	chance	drafts	of	 a	ballroom,	not	 the	bitter	 chill	 of	a	foggy	 night
such	as	the	previous	 one	had	been.	Her	 long	 fingers	 were	chapped	and	red
among	their	diamonds.
       “We’d	  all	 been	 dancing,”	 she	began	hesitantly.	 “It	  was	past	 midnight
when	Zyerne	came	in.	She	looked	strange—	I	thought	she’d	been	sick,	but	I’d
seen	her	in	the	morning	and	she’d	been	fine	then.	She	called	Bond	to	her,	into
an	alcove	by	the	window.	 I—”	  Some	color	returned	 to	her	too-white	 cheeks.
“I	 crept	after	them	to	eavesdrop.	I	 know	it’s	 a	terribly	 rude	and	catty	thing	 to
do,	but	after	what	we’d	 talked	of	before	you	left	 I—I	 couldn’t	 help	doing	it.	 It
wasn’t	to	learn	gossip,”	she	added	earnestly.	“I	was	afraid	for	 him—and	I	 was
so	scared	because	I’d	never	done	it	before	and	I’m	 not	nearly	as	good	at	it	 as
someone	like	Isolde	or	Merriwyn	 would	 be.”
       Gareth	 looked	 a	little	 shocked	 at	this	 frankness,	but	 John	laughed	and
patted	the	 toe	 of	 the	 girl’s	  pearl-beaded	slipper	 in	 commiseration.	 “We’ll
forgive	 you	this	 time,	love,	 but	don’t	 neglect	 your	education	like	 that	 again.
You	see	where	it	leads	you?”	 Jenny	kicked	 him,	 not	hard,	in	 his	unwounded
shoulder.
       “And	 then?”	 she	asked.
       “I	  heard	her	say,	‘I	must	 have	the	Deep.	They	must	be	destroyed,	and	it
must	be	now,	before	the	gnomes	hear.	They	mustn’t	be	allowed	 to	reach	it.’	 I
followed	 them	down	 to	that	little	  postern	gate	that	leads	to	the	 Dockmarket;
they	went	 to	 the	 Sheep	in	 the	 Mire.	  The	place	 was	 still	 full	  of	 men	 and
women;	all	 drunk	and	 quarreling	with	 each	other.	Bond	 went	rushing	 in	and
told	them	 he’d	 heard	you’d	 betrayed	 them,	sold	 them	out	 to	Polycarp;	 that
you	 had	the	 dragon	 under	Lady	  Jenny’s	spells	 and	 were	 going	 to	 turn	 it
against	Bel;	that	you	 were	going	to	 keep	the	gold	of	 the	Deep	for	 yourselves

221
and	not	give	it	 to	them,	 its	rightful	 owners.	But	 they	weren’t	 ever	its	 rightful
owners—it	 always	 belonged	 to	  the	 gnomes,	or	 to	  the	 rich	 merchants	 in
Deeping.	I	 tried	 to	tell	 that	to	 Bond...”	 Her	 cold-reddened	hand	stole	 to	her
cheek,	as	if	to	wipe	away	the	memory	of	a	handprint.
       “But	  they	 were	all	 shouting	 how	they	 had	to	 kill	  you	and	 regain	their
gold.	They	 were	all	 drunk—Zyerne	 got	 the	innkeeper	 to	broach	some	 more
kegs.	She	said	she	was	going	to	re-enforce	them	with	the	Palace	guards.	They
were	yelling	  and	 making	 torches	 and	getting	  weapons.	I	 ran	 back	 to	 the
Palace	stables	and	got	Prettyfeet,	 here...”	 She	stroked	the	 exhausted	pony’s
dappled	neck,	and	her	voice	 grew	 suddenly	small.	“And	  then	I	 came	here.	I
rode	as	fast	as	I	dared—I	was	afraid	of	what	 might	happen	if	 they	caught	me.
I’d	never	been	out	riding	alone	at	night...”
       Gareth	 pulled	  off	 his	 grubby	 crimson	 cloak	  and	slung	 it	  around	her
shoulders	as	her	trembling	increased.
       She	concluded,	“So	you	 have	to	get	out	of	here...”
       “That	  we	do.”	 John	flung	  back	the	bearskins	from	 over	 his	 body.	“We
can	defend	the	Deep.”
       “Can	  you	  ride	 that	 far?”	  Gareth	 asked	 worriedly,	  handing	 him	  his
patched,	iron-plated	leather	jerkin.
       “I’ll	   be	gie	in	trouble	if	 I	can’t,	my	hero.”
       “Trey?”
       The	girl	 looked	up	from	 gathering	camp	things	as	Jenny	spoke	her	name.
       Jenny	crossed	quietly	 to	where	she	stood	and	took	 her	by	the	shoulders,
looking	 into	 her	eyes	for	 a	long	 moment.	The	 probing	went	 deep,	and	Trey
pulled	back	with	 a	 thin	cry	 of	alarm	 that	brought	 Gareth	running.	 But	to	 the
bottom,	her	mind	 was	a	young	girl’s—not	  always	truthful,	 anxious	to	 please,
eager	to	love	 and	 to	be	 loved.	There	 was	no	 taint	 on	it,	  and	its	 innocence
twisted	at	Jenny’s	own	heart.
       Then	Gareth	was	there,	indignantly	 gathering	Trey	to	him.
       Jenny’s	 smile	was	crooked	 but	kind.	 “I’m	  sorry,”	 she	said.	“I	 had	to	be
sure.”
       By	 their	shocked	faces	she	saw	that	it	had	not	occurred	to	either	 of	them

222
that	Zyerne	might	have	made	use	of	Trey’s	form—or	of	 Trey.
       “Come,”	  she	said.	“We	probably	don’t	 have	much	time.	Gar,	get	John	on
a	horse.	Trey,	help	him.”
       “I’m	  perfectly	 capable...”	John	began,	irritated.
       But	  Jenny	scarcely	heard.	 Somewhere	in	 the	 mists	of	 the	 half-burned
woods	below	 the	 town,	 she	 felt	 sudden	movement,	 the	 intrusion	 of	 angry
voices	among	 the	 frost-rimmed	 silence	 of	 the	 blackened	trees.	 They	 were
coming	and	they	were	coming	 fast—she	could	almost	see	them	at	the	turning
of	the	road	below	the	crumbling	 ruin	of	the	clock	 tower.
       She	turned	 swiftly	 back	to	 the	others.	“Go!”	  she	said.	“Quickly,	 they’re
almost	on	us!”
       “How...”	  began	Gareth.
       She	 caught	up	her	 medicine	bag	 and	her	halberd	 and	vaulted	 to	Moon
Horse’s	bare	back.	“Now!	 Gar,	take	Trey	 with	 you.	John,	RIDE,	 damn	you!”
For	he	 had	wheeled	 back,	barely	 able	 to	keep	 upright	 in	 Cow’s	 saddle,	to
remain	at	her	side.	Gareth	flung	Trey	up	to	Battlehammer’s	 back	in	a	flurry	 of
torn	skirts;	Jenny	could	hear	the	echo	of	hooves	on	the	trail	below.
       Her	 mind	 reached	out,	 gathering	 spells	together,	 even	the	 small	effort
wrenching	at	 her.	She	set	her	teeth	 at	the	stabbing	 pain	as	she	gathered	the
dispersing	mists	that	had	been	burning	off	 in	 the	sun’s	pallid	brightness—her
body	was	 not	 nearly	 recovered	from	 yesterday.	But	 there	 was	no	 time	 for
anything	else.	She	wove	 the	cold	and	dampness	into	 a	cloak	to	 cover	all	 the
Vale	of	Deeping;	 like	 a	secondary	pattern	in	 a	plaid,	she	traced	the	 spells	of
disorientation,	of	 jamais	 vu.	Even	 as	she	did	 so,	the	 hooves	and	the	 angry,
incoherent	voices	were	very	 close.	They	rang	in	 the	misty	 woods	around	the
Rise	and	near	the	gatehouse	in	the	Vale	as	well—Zyerne	must	have	told	them
where	to	 come.	She	wheeled	 Moon	 Horse	and	gave	 her	a	 hard	kick	 in	 her
skinny	 ribs,	 and	the	 white	 mare	 threw	 herself	 down	 the	 rocky	 slope	 in	 a
gangly	sprawl	of	legs,	making	for	 the	Gates	of	the	Deep.
       She	overtook	 the	others	in	 the	gauzy	boil	 of	the	 mists	in	the	Vale.	 They
had	slowed	down	as	visibility	 lessened;	she	led	them	at	a	canter	over	the	paths
that	she	knew	 so	well	 through	 the	town.	 Curses	and	shouts,	muffled	 by	 the

223
fog,	came	from	 the	Rise	behind	them.	Cold	 mists	shredded	past	her	face	and
stroked	back	the	black	coils	of	 her	hair.	She	could	feel	the	spells	that	held	the
brume	in	place	fretting	 away	 as	she	left	the	Rise	behind,	but	 dared	not	try	 to
put	forth	 the	strength	of	 will	 it	 would	 take	to	 hold	them	 after	she	was	gone.
Her	very	bones	ached	from	 even	the	small	exertion	 of	summoning	 them;	she
knew	already	that	she	would	 need	all	 the	strength	she	could	summon	for	 the
final	battle.
       The	 three	horses	clattered	up	 the	shallow	 granite	 steps.	From	the	great
darkness	of	the	gate	arch,	Jenny	turned	 to	see	the	mob	 still	 milling	 about	 in
the	thinning	 fog,	 some	fifty	 or	 sixty	 of	 them,	of	 all	 stations	and	classes	but
mostly	poor	laborers.	The	 uniforms	of	 the	handful	of	 Palace	guards	stood	out
as	gaudy	splotches	in	 the	grayness.	She	heard	 their	shouts	and	 swearing	as
they	became	lost	 within	 plain	 sight	 of	 one	another	in	 territory	  they	had	 all
known	well	 of	old.	That	won’t	 last	long,	she	thought.
       Moon	 Horse	shied	and	fidgeted	at	the	smell	 of	the	dragon	and	of	 the	old
blood	within	  the	 vast	gloom	 of	 the	 Market	 Hall.	 The	 carcass	of	 the	 horse
Osprey	had	disappeared,	but	the	place	still	smelled	of	death,	and	all	the	horses
felt	 it.	  Jenny	slid	  from	  her	mare’s	 tall	  back	 and	 stroked	 her	 neck,	 then
whispered	to	her	to	stay	close	to	the	place	in	case	of	need	and	let	her	go	back
down	the	steps.
       Hooves	 clopped	 behind	her	 on	the	charred	 and	broken	 flagstones.	She
looked	back	 and	saw	John,	ashen	under	the	stubble	 of	beard,	still	  somehow
upright	in	 Cow’s	saddle.	He	studied	 the	Vale	below	them	 with	 his	usual	cool
expressionlessness.	“Zyerne	out	there?”	he	asked,	and	Jenny	shook	her	head.
       “Perhaps	I	 hurt	her	too	badly.	Perhaps	she’s	only	remaining	at	the	Palace
to	gather	other	forces	to	send	against	us.”
       “She	 always	did	like	 her	killing	 to	be	done	by	others.	How	long	will	 your
spells	hold	them?”
       “Not	 long,”	 Jenny	said	doubtfully.	 “We	have	to	hold	 this	gate	here,	John.
If	they’re	 from	Deeping,	 many	of	them	will	  know	the	first	 levels	of	the	Deep.
There	are	four	 or	five	 ways	 out	of	 the	Market	 Hall.	 If	 we	 retreat	further	 in,
we’ll	 be	flanked.”

224
       “Aye.”	  He	 scratched	the	side	 of	 his	nose	 thoughtfully.	 “What’s	  wrong
with	just	 letting	them	in?	 We	could	hide	up	somewhere—once	they	got	to	the
Temple	of	 Sarmendes	with	all	 that	 gold,	I	 doubt	 they’d	 waste	much	 energy
looking	for	 us.”
       Jenny	 hesitated	for	a	moment,	 then	shook	her	 head.	“No,”	 she	said.	“If
they	were	an	 ordinary	 mob,	I’d	 say	 yes,	but—Zyerne	 wants	us	dead.	If	 she
cannot	break	and	overwhelm	my	mind	with	 her	magic,	she’s	not	going	to	give
up	before	she	has	destroyed	my	 body.	There	are	enough	of	 them	that	 would
keep	hunting	 us,	and	we	 can’t	take	 a	horse	into	 the	deeper	tunnels	to	 carry
you;	without	 one,	we’d	 never	be	able	to	move	swiftly	  enough	to	avoid	 them.
We’d	be	trapped	in	a	cul-de-sac	and	slaughtered.	No,	if	we’re	 to	hold	 them,	it
has	to	be	here.”
       “Right.”	  He	nodded.	“Can	we	help	you?”
       She	had	returned	her	attention	to	the	angry	snarl	of	moving	 figures	out	in
the	pale	ruins.	Over	her	shoulder,	she	said,	“You	can’t	even	help	yourself.”
       “I	  know	 that”	 he	 agreed	equably.	“But	  that	wasn’t	 my	 question,	 love.
Look...”	 He	pointed.	“That	 bloke	there’s	figured	out	 the	way.	Here	they	come.
Gaw,	they’re	like	ants.”
       Jenny	 said	nothing,	 but	 felt	 a	 shiver	 pass	through	 her	as	she	 saw	the
trickle	of	 attackers	widen	into	a	stream.
       Gareth	came	up	beside	them,	leading	Battlehammer;	 Jenny	whispered	to
the	big	 horse	and	turned	 him	 loose	down	 the	 steps.	Her	 mind	 was	already
turning	inward	 upon	itself,	 digging	 at	the	strength	in	 the	exhausted	depths	of
her	spirit	 and	body.	John,	Gareth,	and	 the	slender	girl	 in	 the	white	 rags	of	a
Court	gown,	clinging	 to	 Gareth’s	arm,	were	becoming	mere	wraiths	 to	her	as
her	soul	 spiraled	 down	 into	  a	single	 inner	 vortex,	  like	 the	 single-minded
madness	that	comes	before	childbearing—nothing	else	existed	but	herself,	her
power,	and	what	she	must	do.
       Her	 hands	pressed	to	the	cold	rock	of	the	gate	pillar,	and	she	felt	that	she
drew	fire	and	strength	from	the	stone	itself	and	from	 the	mountain	beneath	her
feet	 and	 above	 her	  head—drew	 it	  from	  the	 air	  and	 the	  darkness	that
surrounded	 her.	 She	 felt	  the	 magic	  surge	 into	 her	  veins	 like	  a	 reined

225
whirlwind	 of	 compressed	lightning.	 Its	power	 frightened	her,	for	 she	knew	it
was	greater	than	 her	 body	would	  bear,	yet	 she	could	 afford	 no	 Limitation
upon	these	spells.	It	was	thus,	she	knew,	with	dragons,	but	her	body	was	not	a
dragon’s.
       She	was	 aware	of	 John	reining	 Cow	sharply	 back	away	 from	 her,	as	if
frightened;	Gareth	and	Trey	had	retreated	already.	But	her	mind	was	out	in	the
pale	light	of	the	steps,	looking	 down	over	Deeping,	contemplating	 in	leisurely
timelessness	the	men	and	women	running	through	 the	crumbled	 walls	of	 the
ruins.	She	saw	each	one	of	them	 with	 the	cool	exactness	of	a	 dragon’s	eyes,
not	only	 how	 they	were	 dressed,	but	the	composition	 of	 their	souls	 through
the	flesh	they	wore.	 Bond	she	saw	distinctly,	 urging	them	on	with	 a	sword	 in
his	hand,	his	soul	eaten	through	with	abscesses	like	termite-riddled	wood.
       The	 forerunners	hit	 the	cracked	pavement	and	dust	of	 the	square	before
the	gates.	Like	 the	chirp	 of	 an	insect	 in	 a	wall,	 she	heard	Gareth	nattering,
“What	 can	we	do?	We	have	to	help	her!”	 as	she	dispassionately	gathered	the
lightning	in	 her	hands.
       “Put	 that	 down,”	 John’s	voice	 said,	suddenly	 weak	and	 bleached.	“Get
ready	to	run	for	it—you	 can	hide	in	the	warrens	for	 a	time	if	they	 get	through.
Here’s	the	maps...”
       The	 mob	was	on	the	steps.	Incoherent	hate	rose	around	her	like	 a	storm
tide.	Jenny	lifted	her	hands,	the	whole	strength	of	rock	and	darkness	funneling
into	her	body,	her	mind	relaxing	into	 the	shock	instead	of	bracing	against	it.
       The	 key	 to	 magic	is	 magic,	 she	thought.	 Her	life	  began	and	ended	in
each	isolate	crystal	second	of	impacted	time.
       The	 fire	 went	 up	 from	 the	third	  step,	a	red	 wall	 of	 it,	 whole	 and	 all-
consuming.	She	heard	those	trapped	in	 the	first	 rush	screaming	and	 smelled
smoke,	charring	 meat,	and	burning	 cloth.	 Like	 a	dragon,	 she	killed	 without
hate,	striking	 hard	 and	cruel,	 knowing	 that	 the	 first	 strike	 must	kill	  or	 her
small	group	would	all	 be	dead.
       Then	 she	slammed	shut	before	her	the	illusion	of	the	doors	that	had	long
ago	been	broken	from	the	gateway	arch.	They	appeared	like	faded	glass	from
within,	 but	 every	 nail	 and	beam	and	 brace	of	 them	 was	wrought	 perfectly

226
from	enchanted	air.	Through	them	she	saw	men	and	women	milling	 about	the
base	of	the	steps,	pointing	 up	at	 what	they	saw	 as	the	renewed	Gates	of	the
Deep	and	 crying	 out	 in	 wonder	 and	 alarm.	 Others	 lay	 on	 the	 ground,	or
crawled	helplessly	 here	and	there,	beating	 out	the	 flames	from	 their	 clothes
with	 frenzied	 hands.	Those	who	 had	not	 been	trapped	 in	 the	fire	 made	 no
move	to	help	them,	 but	stood	along	the	 bottom	of	 the	step,	looking	 up	at	the
gates	and	shouting	with	drunken	rage.	With	the	cacophony	of	the	screams	and
groans	of	the	wounded,	 the	noise	was	terrible,	 and	worse	than	the	noise	was
the	stench	of	sizzling	 flesh.	Among	 it	 all,	Bond	 Clerlock	 stood,	staring	up	 at
the	phantom	gates	with	his	hunger-eaten	eyes.
       Jenny	 stepped	back,	feeling	 suddenly	 sick	as	the	 human	in	 her	looked
upon	what	 the	dragon	in	 her	had	done.	 She	had	killed	 before	 to	protect	 her
own	life	  and	the	lives	 of	 those	she	loved.	 But	 she	had	never	 killed	 on	this
scale,	and	 the	 power	 she	wielded	  shocked	her	 even	 as	it	  drained	 her	 of
strength.
       The	 dragon	 in	  you	answered,	 Morkeleb	 had	 said.	 She	felt	  sick	 with
horror	at	how	true	his	knowledge	of	 her	had	been.
       She	staggered	back,	and	someone	caught	her—John	and	Gareth,	looking
like	  a	 couple	  of	  not-very-successful	  brigands,	 filthy	   and	  battered	 and
incongruous	in	their	 spectacles.	Trey,	with	Gareth’s	tattered	cloak	still	 draped
over	her	 mud-stained	white	 silks	 and	 her	purple-and-white	 hair	 hanging	 in
asymmetrical	coils	 about	 her	chalky	 face,	 wordlessly	 took	 a	collapsible	 tin
cup	from	 her	pearl-beaded	reticule,	 filled	 it	 from	 the	 water	bottle	 on	Cow’s
saddle,	and	handed	it	to	her.
       John	said,	“It	 hasn’t	stopped	them	for	 long.”	 A	mist	of	 sweat	covered	his
face,	and	the	nostrils	of	 his	long	nose	were	marked	 by	dints	of	 pain	from	 the
mere	effort	  of	 standing.	 “Look,	  there’s	Bond	  drumming	 up	 support	 for	 a
second	go.	Silly	 bleater.”	He	glanced	 across	at	Trey	and	added,	“Sorry.”	 She
only	shook	her	head.
       Jenny	 freed	 herself	and	 walked	 unsteadily	 to	 the	edge	 of	 the	shadow
gate.	Her	head	throbbed	with	 exhaustion	that	bordered	nausea.	The	voices	of
the	men	and	her	own	voice,	 when	she	spoke,	sounded	flat	and	unreal.	 “He’ll

227
get	it,	too.”
       In	 the	square	below	 the	gates,	Bond	was	running	 here	and	there	among
the	men,	 stepping	 over	the	 charred	 bodies	of	 the	 dying,	 gesticulating	  and
pointing	up	at	the	phantom	doors.	The	Palace	guards	looked	uncertain,	but	the
laborers	from	the	Dockmarket	 were	gathered	about	him,	listening	and	passing
wineskins	 among	themselves.	 They	 shook	 their	 fists	 up	 at	 the	 Deep,	and
Jenny	remarked,	“Like	the	gnomes,	they’ve	had	their	taste	of	poverty.”
       “Yes,	 but	 how	 can	they	 blame	us	for	 it?”	  Gareth	objected	indignantly.
“How	 can	they	blame	the	gnomes?	The	gnomes	were	even	more	victims	of	 it
than	they.”
       “Whether	 or	 no,”	 John	said,	leaning	against	the	stone	pillar	 of	the	 Gate,
“I	 bet	they’re	telling	 themselves	the	treasures	of	the	Deep	are	theirs	by	 right.
It’s	what	 Zyerne	will	  have	told	’em,	 and	they	obviously	 believe	 it	enough	to
kill	 for	them.”
       “But	 it’s	 silly!”
       “Not	  as	silly	 as	falling	 in	love	 with	 a	witch,	and	we’ve	 both	 done	that,”
John	replied	 cheerfully.	 In	 spite	 of	 her	 exhaustion,	Jenny	 chuckled.	 “How
long	can	you	hold	them,	love?”
       Something	 in	the	sound	of	 his	voice	made	her	look	 back	quickly	 at	him.
Though	he	had	dismounted	from	Cow	to	help	 her,	it	was	obvious	he	could	not
stand	alone;	 his	 flesh	 looked	 gray	as	 ash.	Shouting	 from	  below	 drew	 her
attention	a	moment	later;	past	the	smoke	still	curling	from	 the	steps,	she	could
see	men	forming	 up	into	 a	ragged	 line,	the	 madness	of	unreasoning	hate	in
their	eyes.
       “I	 don’t	 know,”	 she	said	softly.	“All	 power	 must	be	paid	for.	Maintaining
the	illusion	of	 the	Gates	draws	still	more	of	my	 strength.	But	it	buys	us	a	little
time,	breaking	the	thrust	of	their	will	  if	they	think	 they’ll	 have	to	break	them.”
       “I	  doubt	that	lot	has	the	brains	to	 think	that	far.”	 Still	 leaning	heavily	 on
the	pillar,	 John	looked	out	 into	the	 slanted	sun	of	the	square	outside.	“Look,
here	they	come.”
       “Get	 back,”	 Jenny	said.	Her	bones	hurt	with	the	thought	of	drawing	 forth
power	from	 them	 and	from	 the	stone	and	 air	around	 her	one	more	 time.	 “I

228
don’t	know	what	 will	 happen	without	Limitations.”
       “I	 can’t	 get	back,	love;	if	I	 let	go	of	this	wall,	 I’ll	 fall	 down.”
       Through	 the	 ghost	shape	of	 the	Gates,	 she	saw	them	 coming,	 running
across	the	square	toward	the	steps.	The	magic	came	more	slowly,	dredged	and
scraped	from	 the	 seared	core	of	 her	 being—her	 soul	 felt	 bleached	 by	 the
effort.	The	voices	 below	rose	in	a	mad	crescendo,	in	which	 the	words	 “gold”
and	“kill”	  were	 flung	 up	like	 spars	of	driftwood	  on	the	rage	of	 an	incoming
wave.	 She	glimpsed	 Bond	  Clerlock,	 or	  what	 was	left	  of	 Bond	  Clerlock,
somewhere	in	their	midst,	his	Court	 suit	pink	 as	a	shell	among	the	blood-and-
buttercup	 hues	of	 the	 Palace	 guards.	Her	 mind	  locked	 into	 focus,	 like	  a
dragon’s	mind;	all	 things	were	 clear	to	her	and	distant,	impersonal	 as	images
in	a	divining	 crystal.	 She	called	the	white	 dragon	rage	like	a	thunderclap	and
smote	the	steps	with	fire,	not	before	them	now,	but	beneath	their	feet.
       As	 the	fire	 exploded	from	 the	bare	stone,	a	wave	 of	sickness	consumed
her,	as	if	in	that	second	all	 her	veins	had	been	opened.	The	shrieking	of	men,
caught	in	  the	agony	 of	 the	 fire,	  struck	 her	 ears	like	  a	slapping	 hand,	 as
grayness	threatened	to	drown	her	senses	and	heat	rose	through	her,	then	sank
away,	leaving	behind	it	a	cold	like	 death.
       She	 saw	them	 reeling	 and	 staggering,	ripping	  flaming	 garments	 from
charred	flesh.	Tears	of	grief	and	weakness	ran	down	her	face	at	what	 she	had
done,	though	she	knew	that	 the	mob	would	 have	torn	 the	four	 of	them	 apart
and	had	known,	 that	 time,	 that	she	could	 summon	 fire.	 The	illusion	  of	 the
Gates	felt	as	tenuous	as	a	soap-bubble	around	her—like	 her	 own	body,	light
and	drifting.	 John	stumbled	to	catch	her	as	she	swayed	and	pulled	her	back	to
the	pillar	  against	which	 he	 had	stood;	 for	 a	 moment	 they	 both	held	 to	 it,
neither	strong	enough	to	stand.
       Her	 eyes	cleared	a	little.	She	saw	men	running	about	the	square	in	panic,
rage,	and	pain;	and	Bond,	oblivious	to	burns	which	 covered	his	hand	and	arm,
was	chasing	after	them,	shouting.
       “What	 do	we	do	now,	love?”
       She	 shook	her	 head.	“I	  don’t	 know,”	 she	whispered.	 “I	  feel	as	 if	 I’m
going	to	faint.”

229
       His	   arm	  tightened	  around	  her	  waist.	   “Oh,	  do,”	   he	  encouraged
enthusiastically.	“I’ve	 always	wanted	to	carry	you	to	safety	in	 my	arms.”
       Her	 laughter	 revived	 her,	as	he	 had	no	 doubt	meant	 it	 to.	She	pushed
herself	clear	of	 his	support	as	Gareth	and	Trey	came	up,	both	 looking	 ill	 and
frightened.
       “Could	  we	 run	 for	 it	 through	 the	Deep?”	 Gareth	 asked,	fumbling	  the
maps	from	 an	 inner	 pocket	and	 dropping	 two	 of	 them.	 “To	 the	 Citadel,	 I
mean?”
       “No,”	  Jenny	said.	“I	 told	 John—if	 we	left	 the	Market	 Hall,	 they’d	flank
us;	and	carrying	John,	we	couldn’t	outdistance	them.”
       “I	 could	 stay	here,	love,”	John	said	quietly.	“I	 could	buy	you	time.”
       Sarcastically,	  she	 replied,	  “The	  time	  it	  would	   take	 them	  to	  pick
themselves	up	after	 tripping	 over	your	 body	 in	 the	archway	 would	 scarcely
suffice.”
       “One	 of	 us	could	try	 to	get	through,”	 Trey	 suggested	timidly.	 “Polycarp
and	the	gnomes	at	the	 Citadel	would	 know	 the	 way	through	 from	 that	side.
They	could	come	for	 the	rest	of	you.	 I	have	some	candles	in	my	reticule,	 and
some	chalk	to	mark	the	way,	and	I’m	no	good	to	you	here...”
       “No,”	  Gareth	objected,	 valiantly	 fighting	 his	terror	 of	 the	dark	warrens.
“I’ll	  go.”
       “You’d	  never	find	 it,”	 Jenny	said.	“I’ve	 been	down	 in	the	Deep,	Gareth,
and	believe	me,	it	 is	 not	something	that	 can	be	reasoned	out	with	 chalk	and
candles.	And,	as	John	has	said,	the	door	at	the	end	will	be	locked	in	any	case,
even	if	they	didn’t	 blast	it	shut.”
       Down	 below	 them,	Bond’s	voice	 could	be	heard	dimly,	shouting	 that	the
Gate	wasn’t	real,	that	it	 was	just	a	witch’s	 trick,	 and	that	all	the	gold	 that	had
been	lost	 was	theirs	 by	 right.	 People	 were	 yelling,	 “Death	  to	the	 thieves!
Death	to	the	 gnome-lovers!”	 Jenny	leaned	her	 head	against	the	stone	of	 the
pillar,	 a	bar	of	 sunlight	 falling	 through	the	 Gate	around	her	and	 lying	 like	 a
pale	carpet	 on	 the	fire-black	  rubble	 of	 the	 Market	 Hall.	  She	wondered	 if
Zyerne	had	ever	felt	 like	this,	 when	she	had	called	upon	the	deep	reserves	of
her	powers,	without	Limitations—helpless	 before	the	anger	of	men.

230
       She	doubted	it.	It	 did	something	to	you	to	be	helpless.
       All	  power	must	be	paid	for.	Zyerne	had	never	paid.
       She	 wondered,	just	 for	  a	moment,	 how	 the	 enchantress	had	managed
that.
       “What’s	 that?”
       At	 the	sound	of	 Trey’s	voice,	 she	opened	her	eyes	again	and	looked	out
to	where	the	 girl	 was	pointing.	 The	 light	 filling	  the	Vale	 glinted	 harshly	on
something	up	near	the	 ruined	clock	 tower.	 Listening,	 she	could	pick	 out	 the
sound	 of	 hooves	 and	 voices	  and	 feel	 the	  distant	 clamor	  of	 anger	 and
unthinking	 hate.	Against	the	dull	 slate	color	 of	the	tower’s	 stones,	the	weeds
of	the	hillside	 looked	pale	as	yellow	 wine;	between	them	the	uniforms	 of	half
a	company	of	 Palace	guards	glowed	like	 a	tumble	 of	hothouse	poppies.	 The
sun	threw	fire	upon	their	weapons.
       “Gaw,”	 John	said.	“Reinforcements.”
       Bond	 and	a	small	group	of	 men	were	running	 up	through	the	rubble	 and
sedge	toward	the	new	company,	flies	swarming	 thick	 on	the	young	courtier’s
untended	wounds.	Small	with	 distance,	Jenny	saw	more	and	more	men	under
the	shadow	of	 the	 tower,	the	 brass	of	 pike	 and	cuirass	flashing,	 the	 red	of
helmet	 crests	 like	  spilled	  blood	  against	 the	  muted	 hues	 of	  the	  stone.
Exhaustion	ate	like	 poison	 into	 her	bones.	Her	 skin	 felt	 like	 a	single	 open,
throbbing	wound;	 through	it,	 she	could	feel	the	 illusion	 of	the	Gate	fading	 to
nothingness	as	her	power	drained	and	died.
       She	 said	 quietly,	  “You	  three	 get	 back	 to	 the	 doors	 into	  the	 Grand
Passage.	Gar,	Trey—carry	 John.	Bolt	 the	 doors	from	  the	inside—there	 are
winches	and	pulleys	there.”
       “Don’t	  be	stupid.”	  John	was	clinging	 to	 the	gatepost	beside	her	to	stay
upright.
       “Don’t	  you	be	stupid.”	 She	would	 not	 take	her	eyes	from	 the	swarming
men	in	the	square	below.
       “We’re	 not	leaving	 you,”	Gareth	stated.	“At	 least,	I’m	 not.	Trey,	you	take
John...”
       “No,”	  Trey	 and	the	 Dragonsbane	insisted	in	 approximate	unison.	 They

231
looked	at	one	another	and	managed	the	ghost	of	a	mutual	grin.
       “It’s	  all	of	us	or	none	of	us,	love.”
       She	swung	 around	on	them,	her	 eyes	blazing	palely	 with	 the	crystalline
coldness	of	the	dragon’s	eyes.	“None	of	 you	can	be	of	the	slightest	use	to	me
here	against	 so	many.	 John	and	 Trey,	 all	 you’ll	  be	 is	 killed	  immediately.
Gareth...”	Her	 eyes	pinned	his	 like	 a	lance	of	 frost.	“You	  may	not	be.	 They
may	have	 other	instructions	 concerning	 you,	 from	 Zyerne.	 I	 may	 have	the
strength	for	 one	more	 spell.	That	 can	buy	 you	 some	time.	 John’s	wits	 may
keep	you	alive	for	a	while	 more	in	the	Deep;	you’ll	 need	Trey’s	willingness	 as
well.	Now	 go.”
       There	 was	a	short	silence,	in	 which	she	could	 feel	John’s	eyes	upon	her
face.	 She	was	 conscious	 of	  the	 men	 approaching	 in	  the	 Vale;	 her	 soul
screamed	at	her	to	get	rid	of	 these	three	whom	she	loved	while	 there	was	yet
time.
       It	  was	Gareth	 who	 spoke.	 “Will	  you	 really	 be	 able	to	 hold	 the	 Gate
against	another	charge?	Even	of—of	my	father’s	men?”
       “I	  think	 so,”	 Jenny	lied,	knowing	  she	hadn’t	the	 strength	left	 to	light	 a
candle.
       “Aye,	 then,	love,”	 said	John	softly.	 “We’d	 best	go.”	 He	took	her	halberd
to	use	as	a	crutch;	holding	himself	 upright	 with	 it,	he	put	 a	hand	on	her	nape
and	kissed	her.	His	mouth	felt	cold	 against	hers,	his	lips	soft	even	through	the
hard	scratchiness	of	five	days’	beard.	As	their	lips	 parted,	their	eyes	met,	and,
through	the	dragon	armor	of	hardness,	she	saw	he	knew	she’d	lied.
       “Let’s	  go,	children,”	 he	said.	“We	 won’t	 shoot	the	 bolts	till	 we	 have	to,
Jen.”
       The	 line	 of	 soldiers	was	 descending	through	 the	labyrinth	 of	 shattered
foundations	and	charred	stone.	They	 were	joined	 by	the	 men	and	women	 of
Deeping,	those,	Jenny	 noted,	who	 had	thrown	 garbage	at	 Miss	 Mab	 in	 the
fountain	square	of	 Bel.	 Makeshift	 weapons	jostled	 pikes	and	swords.	 In	the
brilliance	 of	 daylight	 everything	 seemed	hard	and	sharp.	Every	 house	beam
and	brick	stood	out	to	Jenny’s	raw	perceptions	like	 filigree	work,	 every	tangle
of	weed	 and	stand	of	 grass	clear	 and	individuated.	  The	amber	 air	held	 the

232
stench	of	sulfur	and	burned	flesh.	Like	a	dim	 background	to	angry	ranting	and
exhortation	 rose	the	 keening	 of	 the	 wounded	 and,	now	 and	 again,	 voices
crying,	“Gold...gold...”
       They	scarcely	even	know	what	it	is	for,	Morkeleb	 had	said.
       Jenny	 thought	 about	Ian	 and	Adric,	  and	wondered	 briefly	  who	 would
raise	them,	or	 if,	 without	 her	and	John’s	protection	 of	 the	Winterlands,	 they
would	 live	 to	 grow	 up	at	 all.	 Then	 she	sighed	and	 stepped	forth	 from	 the
shadows	into	 the	light.	  The	pale	 sun	drenched	 her,	a	small,	 skinny,	 black-
haired	woman	 alone	 in	 the	 vast	arch	 of	 the	 shattered	Gate.	 Men	 pointed,
shouting.	A	 rock	 clattered	 against	 the	steps,	yards	 away.	 The	sunlight	 felt
warm	and	pleasant	upon	her	face.
       Bond	 was	screaming	hysterically,	 “Attack!	  Attack	 now!	 Kill	  the	witch-
bitch!	It’s	 our	gold!	We’ll	 get	the	slut	this	time—get	 her...”
       Men	 began	to	run	forward	up	the	steps.	She	watched	them	coming	with	a
curious	 feeling	  of	  absolute	 detachment.	 The	 fires	  of	  dragon-magic	 had
drained	her	 utterly-one	 last	 trap,	 she	thought	 ironically,	  from	 Morkeleb,	  a
final	 vengeance	for	 humiliating	 him.	 The	 mob	curled	 like	 a	 breaking	wave
over	the	ruined	beams	and	panels	of	the	shattered	gates,	the	sunlight	flashing
on	the	steel	of	the	weapons	in	their	hands.
       Then	 a	shadow	crossed	the	 sunlight—like	 a	 hawk’s,	 but	immeasurably
more	huge.
       One	man	looked	up,	pointed	 at	the	sky,	and	screamed.
       Again	  the	 sunlight	 was	 darkened	by	 circling	  shade.	Jenny	raised	 her
head.	The	aureate	light	  streamed	translucently	 through	 the	black	 spread	of
bones	and	the	dark	veins	of	sable	wings,	sparkled	from	 the	spikes	that	tipped
the	seventy-foot	span	of	 that	silent	silk,	 and	gilded	 every	horn	 and	ribbon	of
the	gleaming	mane.
       She	 watched	the	dragon	 circling,	 riding	  the	thermals	like	  a	vast	eagle,
only	 peripherally	  conscious	of	  the	 terrified	  shouting	 of	 the	 men	 and	 the
frenzied	squeals	of	the	guards’	horses.	Yelling	and	crashing	in	 the	rubble,	the
attackers	of	the	Deep	turned	and	fled,	trampling	upon	their	 dead	and	dropping
their	weapons	in	their	headlong	flight.

233
       The	 Vale	was	quite	 empty	by	 the	time	 Morkeleb	 lighted	upon	 the	heat-
cracked	steps	of	the	Deep.

234
                                CHAPTER	                    XIV


WHY	DID	YOU	RETURN?

       The	sun	had	set.	Echoes	of	its	brightness	lingered	on	the	cinnamon	edges
of	the	cliff	above.	After	the	firelight	and	blackness	of	the	Market	Hall,	where
Gareth	and	Trey	could	be	heard	talking	softly	beside	the	small	blaze	they	had
kindled,	the	windy	coolness	of	the	steps	was	deeply	refreshing.	Jenny	ran
tired	hands	through	her	hair,	the	cold	of	 her	fingers	 welcome	against	her
aching	skull.
       The	great,	gleaming	black	shape	that	lay	like	a	sphinx	along	the	top	step
turned	its	head.	In	the	reflected	glow	from	the	fire	in	the	hall	she	saw	the	long
edges	of	that	birdlike	skull,	the	turn	and	flutter	of	the	ribboned	mane	and	the
glint	of	the	bobs	of	jet	that	quivered	on	long	antennae.
       His	voice	was	soft	in	her	mind.	I	need	your	help,	wizard	woman.
       What?	It	was	the	last	thing	she	would	have	expected	from	the	dragon.
She	wondered	illogically	if	she	had	heard	rightly,	though	with	dragons	there
was	never	a	question	of	that.	My	HELP?	MY	help?
       Bitter	anger	curled	from	the	dragon	like	an	acrid	smoke,	anger	at	having
to	ask	the	help	of	any	human,	anger	at	needing	help,	anger	at	admitting	it,
even	to	himself.	 But	 in	 the	close-shielded	mind,	she	felt	 other	 things—
exhaustion	approaching	her	own	and	the	chill	thread	of	fear.
       By	my	name	you	drove	me	forth	from	this	place,	he	said.	But	something
else,	something	beyond	my	name,	draws	me	back.	Like	a	jewel,	 one	jet-
bobbed	antenna	flicked	in	the	wind.	Like	the	discontented	dreams	that	first
brought	me	to	this	place,	it	 will	  not	let	me	rest;	 it	 is	a	 yearning	like	the
craving	for	gold,	 but	worse.	It	 tormented	me	as	I	flew	north,	mounting	to
pain,	and	the	only	ease	I	had	was	when	I	turned	south	again.	Now	all	the
torments	of	my	soul	and	my	dreams	center	upon	this	mountain.	Before	you
entered	my	mind,	it	was	not	so—	I	came	and	went	as	I	pleased,	and	naught
but	my	own	desire	for	the	gold	made	me	return.	But	this	pain,	this	longing	of

235
the	heart,	is	 something	I	 never	felt	 before,	in	all	 my	 years;	it	 is	something	 I
never	knew	 of,	 until	  your	 healing	  touched	 me.	It	  is	 not	 of	 you,	 for	  you
commanded	me	to	go.	It	is	a	magic	that	I	 do	not	understand,	unlike	the	magic
of	dragons.	 It	 gives	 me	no	 rest,	no	 peace.	I	 think	 of	 this	 place	constantly,
though,	by	my	name,	wizard	woman,	it	is	against	my	will	 that	I	return.
       He	 shifted	upon	his	 haunches,	so	that	he	lay	as	a	cat	will	 sometimes	lie,
his	forelimbs	and	shoulders	sphinxlike,	 but	his	hinder	legs	stretched	out	along
the	uppermost	step.	The	spiked	club	of	his	tail	lashed	slightly	at	its	clawed	tip.
       It	 is	not	the	gold,	he	said.	Gold	calls	to	 me,	but	never	with	a	madness	like
this.	It	is	alien	 to	my	understanding,	as	if	 the	soul	were	being	rooted	from	me.
I	hate	this	 place,	for	 it	 is	a	 place	of	 defeat	and	disgrace	 to	me	now,	but	 the
craving	 to	be	here	 consumes	me.	I	have	 never	felt	 this	before	 and	I	 do	 not
know	what	it	 is.	Has	it	 come	from	you,	wizard	 woman?	Do	you	know	what	 is
it?
       Jenny	was	 silent	for	 a	time.	 Her	strength	was	slowly	  returning,	and	she
felt	already	 less	weak	and	brittle	  than	she	had.	Sitting	 on	the	 steps	between
the	dragon’s	claws,	 his	head	rose	above	hers,	the	 thin,	 satiny	ribbons	 of	his
mane	brushing	against	her	face.	Now	 he	cocked	 his	head	down;	 looking	 up,
she	met	one	crystalline	silver	eye.
       She	said,	It	is	a	longing	 such	as	humans	feel.	I	do	not	know	why	it	should
possess	you,	Morkeleb—but	I	 think	it	 is	 time	that	 we	found	out.	 You	are	not
the	only	one	drawn	 to	the	Deep	as	if	 possessed.	Like	you,	I	do	not	 think	it	 is
the	gold.	 There	is	 something	 within	 the	 Deep.	I	 sense	it,	 feel	 it	 within	 my
bones.
       The	 dragon	shook	 his	great	head.	I	 know	 the	Deep,	he	said.	 It	 was	my
hold	and	dominion.	 I	know	every	dropped	 coin	and	every	soda-straw	crystal;
I	 heard	 the	 tread	 of	 every	 foot	 passing	 in	 the	 Citadel	 overhead	 and	 the
slipping	of	the	blind	 white	fish	through	 the	waters	deep	below.	I	tell	you,	there
is	nothing	in	 the	Deep	but	water,	stone,	and	the	gold	 of	the	gnomes,	sleeping
in	the	darkness.	There	is	nothing	there	that	should	draw	me	so.
       Perhaps,	 Jenny	 said.	Then,	 aloud,	 she	called	 into	 the	 echoing	cavern
behind	her,	“Gareth?	John?	Trey?”

236
       The	 dragon	 lifted	  his	 head	with	 indignation	  as	soft	 footfalls	  scuffled
within.	 Like	speech	without	 words,	Jenny	felt	 the	sharp	flash	of	his	pride	 and
his	annoyance	at	her	 for	 bringing	 other	humans	 into	their	 counsels	and	 she
longed	to	 slap	his	nose	as	she	slapped	her	 cat’s	when	he	 tried	to	 steal	food
from	her	fingers.
       He	 must	have	felt	the	returning	glint	 of	her	exasperation,	for	he	subsided,
his	narrow	  chin	 sinking	 to	 rest	 upon	 the	 long-boned	 hooks	 of	 one	 black
foreclaw.	Beyond	the	spears	of	his	backbone	she	saw	the	great	tail	lash.
       The	others	came	out,	Gareth	and	Trey	supporting	John	between	them.	He
had	slept	 a	little	  and	 rested	and	 looked	 better	than	 he	 had.	The	 spells	 of
healing	she	had	laid	 upon	him	 were	 having	their	 effect.	 He	gazed	up	 at	the
dark	 shape	of	 the	 dragon,	 and	Jenny	 felt	  their	 eyes	meet	 and	 knew	 that
Morkeleb	spoke	to	him,	thought	 she	heard	not	what	he	said.
       John	replied	in	 words.	“Well,	 it	was	just	as	well,	wasn’t	 it?	Thank	you.”
       Their	 eyes	held	for	a	moment	more.	Then	the	dragon	raised	his	head	and
turned	it	away	irritably,	 transferring	 his	cold	 silver	gaze	to	Gareth.	Jenny	saw
the	young	man	flush	 with	 shame	and	confusion;	whatever	the	 dragon	said	to
him,	he	made	no	reply	at	all.
       They	 laid	 John	down	 with	 his	back	 to	the	 granite	door	 pillar,	 his	plaid
folded	beneath	his	 shoulders.	His	 spectacles	caught	the	starlight,	 rather	like
the	silvery	  glow	  of	 the	 dragon’s	 eyes.	Jenny	 seated	herself	 on	 the	 steps
between	him	  and	the	 dragon’s	 talons;	 Gareth	 and	 Trey,	 as	if	  for	  mutual
protection,	sat	opposite	 and	close	together,	staring	 up	in	 wonder	at	 the	thin,
serpentine	form	of	the	Black	Dragon	of	 Nast	Wall.
       In	 time,	 Jenny’s	flawed,	silver-shot	 voice	 broke	the	silence.	“What	 is	 in
the	Deep?”	she	asked.	“What	 is	it	 that	Zyerne	 wants	so	badly	 there?	All	 her
actions	have	 been	 aimed	 toward	 having	 it—her	  hold	 over	  the	King,	  her
attempts	to	seduce	Gareth,	her	desire	for	a	child,	the	siege	of	Halnath,	and	the
summoning	of	the	dragon.”
       She	did	 not	summon	me,	retorted	Morkeleb	 angrily.	 She	could	 not	have
done	that.	She	has	no	hold	upon	my	mind.
       “You’re	  here,	ain’t	you?”	 John	drawled,	and	the	dragon’s	 metallic	claws

237
scraped	upon	the	stone	as	his	head	swung	round.
       Jenny	said	sharply,	“John!	Morkeleb!”
       The	 dragon	 subsided	 with	 a	 faint	 hiss,	 but	 the	 bobs	of	 his	 antennae
twitched	with	 annoyance.
       She	went	on,	“Might	  it	be	that	she	is	herself	summoned?”
       I	 tell	you	 there	is	nothing	there,	the	dragon	said.	Nothing	 save	stone	and
gold,	water	and	darkness.
       “Let’s	 back	up	a	bit,	 then,”	John	said.	“Not	 what	does	Zyerne	want	in	the
Deep,	but	just	what	does	she	want?”
       Gareth	shrugged.	“It	 can’t	be	gold.	You’ve	 seen	how	she	lives.	She	could
have	all	  the	 gold	 in	 the	 Realm	 for	  the	 asking.	 She	has	 the	 King...”	  He
hesitated,	and	then	went	on	calmly,	 “If	 I	 hadn’t	left	 for	 the	north	when	 I	did,
she	would	certainly	 have	had	me,	and	very	probably	a	son	to	rule	through	 for
the	rest	of	her	life.”
       “She	 used	to	 live	 in	 the	Deep,”	 Trey	 pointed	 out.	“It	  seems	that,	ever
since	she	left	it,	she’s	been	trying	to	get	control	 of	it.	 Why	 did	she	leave?	Did
the	gnomes	expel	her?”
       “Not	  really,”	  Gareth	said.	 “That	 is,	 they	 didn’t	 formally	  forbid	 her	 to
enter	the	Deep	at	all	 until	 this	year.	Up	 until	 then	she	could	 come	and	go	in
the	upper	levels,	just	like	any	other	person	from	Bel.”
       “Well	  if	 she’s	shapestrong,	that’s	to	say	she	had	the	run	of	 the	place,	so
long	as	she	stayed	clear	of	the	mage-born,”	John	reasoned,	propping	his	specs
with	one	forefinger.	“And	 what	 happened	a	year	ago?”
       “I	  don’t	 know,”	 Gareth	said.	“Dromar	 petitioned	 my	 father	in	 the	name
of	the	Lord	of	 the	Deep	not	to	let	her—	or	 any	of	the	children	of	 men,	for	that
matter...”
       “Again,	  that’s	a	logical	precaution	against	a	shape-shifter.”
       “Maybe.”	   Gareth	 shrugged.	“I	  didn’t	  think	 of	  it	 then—	 a	 lot	 of	  the
unpopularity	of	 the	gnomes	started	then,	because	of	that	stipulation.	But	 they
said	Zyerne	specifically,	  because	she	had...”	He	 fished	in	 his	 compendious,
ballad-trained	memory	for	 the	exact	wording.	“...	‘defiled	 a	holy	 thing.’”
       “No	 idea	what	it	 was?”

238
       The	 prince	 shook	his	 head.	Like	 John,	 he	looked	 drawn	and	 tired,	 his
shirt	a	fluttering	 ruin	of	 dirt	and	spark	holes,	his	face	sparkling	faintly	 with	 an
almost-invisible	  adolescent	stubble.	 Trey,	 sitting	  beside	him,	  looked	 little
better.	With	her	typical	 practicality,	she	had	carried	a	comb	in	her	reticule	 and
had	combed	out	her	hair,	so	that	it	 hung	past	her	hips	 in	crinkled	 swaths,	the
smooth	sheen	of	its	fantastic	colors	softened	to	 a	stippling	of	 snow	white	 and
violet,	like	 the	pelt	of	 some	fabulous	beast	against	the	matted	nap	of	Gareth’s
cloak.
       ‘“Defiled	   a	holy	thing.”	  Jenny	repeated	thoughtfully.	 “It	 isn’t	 how	 Mab
put	it.	She	said	that	she	had	poisoned	the	heart	of	 the	Deep—but	the	heart	of
the	Deep	is	a	place,	rather	than	an	object.”
       “Is	 it?”	 said	John	curiously.
       “Of	  course.	 I’ve	  been	there.”	  The	 silence	of	  it	 whispered	 along	 her
memory.	“But	as	for	what	 Zyerne	wants...”
       “You’re	  a	witch,	Jen,”	said	John.	“What	do	you	want?”
       Gareth	 looked	shocked	at	the	 comparison,	but	Jenny	only	 thought	 for	 a
moment,	then	said,	“Power.	 Magic.	 The	key	 to	magic	 is	magic.	 My	 greatest
desire,	to	which	I	would	 sacrifice	all	things	else,	is	to	increase	my	skills.”
       “But	 she’s	already	the	strongest	sorceress	in	the	land,”	Trey	protested.
       “Not	 according	 to	Mab.”
       “I	  suppose	there	were	gnome	wizards	 in	 the	Deep	stronger,”	 John	said
interestedly.	“If	   there	hadn’t	 been,	 she	wouldn’t	  have	 needed	to	 summon
Morkeleb.”
       She	did	not	summon	me!	The	dragon’s	tail	lashed	again,	like	a	great	cat’s.
She	could	not.	Her	power	is	not	that	great.
       “Somebody’s	 is,”	 John	remarked.	 “Before	 you	wiped	 out	 the	Deep	and
the	mages	in	it,	the	gnomes	were	strong	enough	to	keep	Zyerne	out.	But	 they
all	perished,	or	at	least	all	the	strong	ones	did...”
       “No,”	  Jenny	said.	“That’s	what	has	puzzled	me.	Mab	said	that	she	herself
was	stronger	than	Zyerne	at	some	time	in	the	past.	That	means	that	either	Mab
grew	weaker,	or	Zyerne	stronger.”
       “Could	  Mab’s	power	 have	been	weakened	in	some	way	when	Morkeleb

239
showed	up?”	John	 glanced	up	at	 the	dragon.	“Would	  that	be	possible?	That
your	magic	would	lessen	someone	else’s?”
       I	 know	nothing	 of	the	magic	of	 humans,	nor	yet	of	the	magic	 of	gnomes,
the	dragon	replied.	Yet	among	us,	there	is	no	taking	away	of	another’s	 magic.
It	is	like	taking	 away	another’s	thoughts	from	him,	and	leaving	him	with	 none.
       “That’s	 another	thing,”	 Jenny	said,	folding	 her	 arms	about	her	drawn-up
knees.	“When	I	 met	Zyerne	yesterday...	My	powers	have	grown,	 but	I	 should
not	have	been	able	to	defeat	her	as	I	did.	She	is	shapestrong—she	should	have
far	more	strength	than	I	did.”	 She	glanced	over	at	Gareth.	“But	she	didn’t	shift
shape.”
       “But	 she	can,”	the	boy	protested.	“I’ve	 seen	her.”
       “Lately?”	  asked	John	suddenly.
       Gareth	and	Trey	looked	at	one	another.
       “Since	 the	 coming	 of	 the	dragon?	Or,	 to	put	 it	 another	way,	 since	she
hasn’t	been	able	to	enter	the	Deep?”
       “But	   either	  way,	  it’s	  inconceivable,”	  Jenny	  insisted.	 “Power	   isn’t
something	 that’s	  contingent	  upon	  any	 place	  or	  thing,	  any	 more	  than
knowledge	is.	Zyerne’s	 power	couldn’t	 have	weakened	any	more	than	Mab’s
could.	 Power	 is	 within	   you—here,	 or	 in	  Bel,	 or	  in	 the	 Winterlands,	  or
wherever	you	 are.	 It	 is	 something	 you	 learn,	 something	 you	 develop.	All
power	must	be	paid	for...”
       “Except	 that	it’s	 never	looked	as	if	 Zyerne	had	paid	for	 hers,”	John	said.
His	glance	went	 from	 Jenny	to	the	dragon	and	back.	 “You	 said	the	magic	of
the	gnomes	is	different.	Is	there	a	way	she	could	have	stolen	power,	Jen?	That
she	could	be	using	 something	she’s	no	 right	 to?	I’m	  thinking	 how	 you	said
she	doesn’t	  know	 about	  Limitations—obviously,	   since	 she	 summoned	 a
dragon	she	can’t	get	rid	of...”
       She	did	not	summon	me!
       “She	 seems	to	 think	  she	did,”	  John	pointed	 out.	 “At	  least	she’s	 kept
saying	how	 she	was	the	 one	who	 kicked	 the	 gnomes	out	of	 the	 Deep.	But
mostly	I’m	 thinking	 about	the	wrinkles	on	her	face.”
       “But	  she	doesn’t	have	any	wrinkles,”	 Trey	objected,	 disconcerted	at	this

240
lightning	change	of	topic.
       “Exactly.	  Why	 doesn’t	 she?	Every	mage	 I’ve	 known—Mab,	  who	 isn’t
that	old	as	gnomes	go,	old	 Caerdinn,	that	crazy	little	 wander-mage	who	 used
to	come	 through	 the	 Winterlands,	 and	 you,	 Jen—the	 marks	of	  power	 are
printed	on	their	 faces.	Though	 it	hasn’t	 aged	you,”	 he	added	quickly,	 with	 a
concern	for	her	vanity	that	made	Jenny	smile.
       “You	 are	right,”	 she	said	slowly.	“Now	  that	you	speak	of	it,	 I	don’t	 think
I’ve	 ever	encountered	 a	mage	that—that	 sweet-looking.	 Maybe	 that’s	 what
first	 troubled	 me.	 And	 Mab	 said	something	 about	 Zyerne	 stealing	secrets.
Zyerne	herself	said	that	when	she	is	able	to	get	into	 the	Deep,	she’ll	 have	the
power	to	 destroy	 us	all.”	  She	frowned,	 some	 other	thought	 tugging	 at	 her
mind.	 “But	 it	 doesn’t	 make	sense.	If	 you	 think	  she	could	 have	gained	 her
powers	by	 studying	  arts	possessed	by	 the	 gnomes—by	 breaking	 into	 and
reading	the	books	 of	their	 deeper	magic—you’re	 wrong.	 I	 searched	through
the	Places	of	Healing	in	quest	of	just	such	books,	and	found	none.”
       “That’s	  a	bit	 odd	 in	 itself,	 isn’t	 it?”	 John	 mused.	“But	 when	 you	 said
power	 isn’t	   contingent	  on	 any	  thing,	  any	  more	  than	 knowledge	  is—
knowledge	can	be	 stored	in	 a	book.	Is	 there	any	 way	power	 can	be	stored?
Can	a	mage	use	another	mage’s	power?”
       Jenny	shrugged.	“Oh,	 yes.	Power	can	be	accumulated	by	breadth	as	well
as	by	depth;	several	mages	can	focus	their	power	together	and	direct	it	toward
a	single	 spell	 that	 lies	 beyond	their	  separate	strengths.	It	 can	 be	done	 by
chanting,	meditating,	 dancing...”	She	broke	off,	 as	the	vision	 rose	once	more
to	her	mind—the	 vision	 of	 the	 heart	of	the	 Deep.	“Dancing...”	  she	repeated
softly,	then	shook	her	head.	“But	in	 any	case,	the	power	is	controlled	by	those
who	raise	it.”
       “Is	 it?”	 asked	John.	“Because	in	Polyborus	it	says...”
       Morkeleb	 cut	 him	off.	 But	if	 she	were	forbidden	the	Deep,	Zyerne	could
have	been	nowhere	near	it	when	the	power	was	raised	that	sent	this	 yearning
unto	me	and	called	me	back.	Nor,	indeed,	could	she	have	been	near	the	Deep
to	conjure	the	 dreams	that	first	 brought	me	here.	And	 no	other	 mages	would
have	combined	to	raise	that	power.

241
       “That’s	  what	 I’m	  trying	  to	 tell	  you!”	  John	 broke	 in.	 “In	  Dotys—or
Polyborus’	Analects—or	maybe	it’s	 the	Elucidus	Lapidarus...”
       “What?”	  demanded	Jenny,	well	aware	that	John	was	perfectly	capable	of
fishing	for	 the	source	of	 reference	for	ten	 minutes	in	the	 jackdaw-nest	of	 his
memory.
       “Dotys—or	  Polyborus—says	that	it	used	to	be	rumored	that	mages	could
use	a	certain	type	 of	 stone	for	 a	power-sink.	 They	 could	call	 power	 into	 it,
generation	after	generation,	 sometimes,	or	they	 could	combine—and	 I	 think
he	mentioned	dancing—and	when	they	needed	great	power,	for	the	defense	of
their	realm	 or	defeat	 of	a	dragon	 or	a	 really	 powerful	 devil,	 they	could	 call
power	out	of	it.”
       They	 looked	 at	 one	another	in	 silence—witch	  and	prince,	 maiden	and
warrior	and	dragon.
       John	went	 on,	“I	 think	what	 the	gnomes	were	guarding—what	lies	in	 the
heart	of	the	Deep—is	a	power	sink.”
       “The	  Stone,”	 Jenny	 said,	 knowing	 it	  for	 truth.	 “They	  swear	 ‘by	 the
Stone’	or	‘by	  the	Stone	in	 the	heart	of	 the	Deep.’	 Even	Zyerne	 does.	In	my
vision,	they	were	dancing	around	it.”
       John’s	 voice	 was	 soft	 in	 the	velvety	  darkness.	“And	  in	 that	 case,	all
Zyerne	would	  have	needed	 to	 steal	was	 the	 key	 to	 unlock	 it.	 If	  she	was
apprenticed	in	 the	 Places	of	  Healing	 near	 there,	that	 wouldn’t	  have	 been
hard.”
       “If	  she’s	mentally	in	contact	with	 it,	she	could	use	it	somewhat,	even	at	a
distance,”	Jenny	 said.	“I	  felt	 it,	 when	 I	 struggled	with	  her—some	power	 I
have	never	felt.	Not	 living,	 like	 Morkeleb—but	 strong	 because	it	is	dead	and
does	not	 care	what	 it	 does.	 It	 must	 be	the	 source	 of	 all	 her	 strength,	for
shapechanging	and	 for	 the	 curse	 she	sent	 to	 the	 gnomes,	 the	 curse	 that
brought	you	here	from	the	north,	Morkeleb.”
       “A	 curse	that’s	still	 holding	 good	whether	she	wants	it	 to	or	not.”	 John’s
spectacles	flashed	in	the	starlight	as	he	grinned.	“But	 she	must	not	be	able	to
wield	it	 accurately	at	a	distance,	even	as	Miss	Mab	 can’t	use	it	against	her.	It
would	explain	 why	 she’s	so	wild	 not	to	 let	them	 get	even	a	chance	of	going

242
back.”
       So	 what	then?	 demanded	Morkeleb	 grimly.	 Did	 your	 estimable	 Dotys,
your	wise	Polyborus,	speak	of	a	way	to	combat	the	magic	of	these	stones?
       “Well,”	   John	 said,	 a	 faint	  grin	 of	  genuine	 amusement	touching	  the
corners	of	his	mouth,	“that	 was	the	whole	point	of	 my	coming	 south,	you	see.
My	 copy	 of	 the	Elucidus	 Lapidarus	 isn’t	  complete.	Almost	  nothing	 in	 my
library	 is.	It’s	 why	 I	agreed	to	 become	a	Dragonsbane	for	the	King’s	  hire	in
the	first	 place—because	we	need	books,	we	need	knowledge.	I’m	 as	much	 a
scholar	as	I	can	be,	but	it	isn’t	easy.”
       With	 the	 size	of	 a	 human	 brain,	 it	 would	 not	 be!	 Morkeleb	  snapped,
irrationally	  losing	  his	  temper.	 You	 are	 no	  more	 scholar	  than	  you	 are
Dragonsbane!
       “But	  I	 never	claimed	 to	 be,”	John	 protested.	“It’s	 just	 there’s	all	 these
ballads,	see...”
       The	 jet	 claws	 rattled	 again	on	 the	 pavement.	Jenny,	exasperated	with
them	both,	began,	“I	really	am	going	 to	let	him	eat	you	this	time...”
       Trey	 put	in	hastily,	 “Could	 you	use	the	Stone	yourself,	Lady	 Jenny?	Use
it	against	Zyerne?”
       “Of	  course!”	Gareth	 bounced	like	a	schoolboy	 on	the	hard	step.	“That’s
it!	Fight	 fire	with	 fire.”
       Jenny	was	silent.	 She	felt	their	 eyes	upon	her—Trey’s,	 Gareth’s,	John’s,
the	crystal	gaze	of	the	dragon	turned	down	at	her	from	 above.	The	thought	of
the	power	stirred	in	 her	mind	 like	lust—Zyerne’s	 power.	The	 key	to	magic	 is
magic...
       She	 saw	the	worry	  in	 John’s	eyes	and	knew	 what	 her	own	 expression
must	look	like.	It	 sobered	her.	“What	are	you	thinking?”
       He	 shook	his	head.	“I	don’t	know,	 love.”
       He	 meant	that	he	would	 not	stand	in	the	 way	of	 any	decision	she	made.
Correctly	 interpreting	  his	 look,	 she	 said	 gently,	 “I	 would	  not	 misuse	 the
power,	John.	I	would	not	become	like	Zyerne.”
       His	 voice	was	pitched	to	her	ears	alone.	“Can	you	know	that?”
       She	started	to	 reply,	then	stilled	 herself.	Shrill	  and	clear	she	heard	Miss

243
Mab’s	voice	 saying,	 She	took	the	 secrets	of	 those	greater	than	 she,	defiled
them,	tainted	them,	poisoned	 the	very	heart	 of	 the	Deep...	She	remembered,
too,	that	sense	of	perverted	 power	that	had	sparkled	 in	the	 lamplight	 around
Zyerne	and	the	luckless	 Bond,	and	 how	the	 touch	of	 the	dragon’s	mind	 had
changed	her.
       “No,”	  she	said	at	last.	“I	  cannot	know.	And	 it	 would	be	stupid	 of	me	 to
meddle	with	 something	 so	powerful	 without	  knowing	 its	 dangers,	even	if	 I
could	figure	out	the	key	by	 myself.”
       “But,”	   Gareth	 protested,	 “it’s	  our	 only	  chance	 of	 defeating	 Zyerne!
They’ll	 be	back—you	know	they	 will!	 We	can’t	stay	holed	up	here	forever.”
       “Could	  we	  learn	 enough	about	 the	 Stone	 for	  you	 to	 circumvent	  its
powers	somehow?”	Trey	 suggested.	“Would	 there	be	a	copy	of	 the	Whatsus
Howeverus	you	talked	about	in	the	Palace	library?”
       Gareth	 shrugged.	His	scholarship	 might	 extend	to	seven	minor	 variants
of	the	ballad	 of	 the	Warlady	and	 the	Red	Worm	 of	Weldervale,	 but	it	 was	a
broken	reed	insofar	as	obscure	encyclopedists	went.
       “There	 would	  be	one	at	 Halnath,	though,	 wouldn’t	  there?”	Jenny	said.
“And	 if	 it	 didn’t	 contain	the	 information,	 there	are	gnomes	there	who	 might
know.”
       “If	  they’d	 tell.”	 John	propped	himself	 gingerly	a	little	  higher	against	the
granite	of	  the	gate	 pillar,	 the	 few	 portions	 of	 his	 shirt	 not	 darkened	 with
bloodstains	very	 white	 in	the	 rising	 moonlight	 against	the	metallic	 glints	 of
his	 doublet.	 “Dromar’s	  lot	  wouldn’t	  even	 admit	  it	 existed.	 They’ve	  had
enough	of	humans	controlling	 the	Stone,	and	I	can’t	say	as	I	blame	them.	But
whatever	happens,”	he	 added,	as	the	others	subsided	from	  their	enthusiasm
into	dismal	 reflection	 once	more,	“our	 next	move	 had	better	be	to	get	 out	of
here.	As	our	 hero	says,	you	know	 Bond	 and	the	King’s	 troops	will	  be	back.
The	only	place	we	can	 go	is	Halnath,	and	maybe	not	there.	How	 tight	 are	the
siege	lines,	Gar?”
       “Tight,”	  Gareth	said	gloomily.	 “Halnath	 is	built	 on	a	series	of	cliffs—the
lower	town,	 the	upper	 town,	 the	University,	 and	the	 Citadel	above	that,	 and
the	only	way	 in	 is	through	the	 lower	town.	 Spies	have	tried	to	 sneak	in	over

244
the	cliffs	 on	the	mountain	side	of	the	city	 and	have	fallen	 to	their	deaths.”	He
readjusted	his	cracked	spectacles.	“And	besides,”	he	went	on,	“Zyerne	 knows
as	well	as	we	do	that	Halnath	is	the	only	place	we	can	go.”
       “Pox.”	  John	glanced	over	at	Jenny,	where	she	sat	against	the	alien	curves
of	the	 dragon’s	complicated	 shoulder	bones.	“For	 something	 that	was	never
any	of	our	business	to	begin	with,	this	is	looking	 worse	and	worse.”
       “I	   could	 go,”	  Trey	 ventured.	  ‘The	 troops	  would	  be	 least	 likely	  to
recognize	me.	I	could	tell	Polycarp...”
       “They’d	  never	let	 you	through,”	 John	said.	“Don’t	  think	 Zyerne	doesn’t
know	 you’re	 here,	Trey;	 and	 don’t	 think	 she’d	 let	 you	 off	 because	you’re
Bond’s	sister	or	that	Bond	would	 risk	Zyerne	so	much	as	pouting	at	him	to	get
you	off.	Zyerne	can’t	 afford	even	one	of	us	returning	to	the	gnomes	with	word
the	dragon’s	left	the	Deep.”
       That,	 Morkeleb	  said	thinly,	 is	 precisely	 our	 problem.	 The	dragon	 has
NOT	left	the	 Deep.	Nor	will	 he,	until	 this	 Zyerne	is	destroyed.	And	I	 will	 not
remain	here	docile,	 to	 watch	 the	gnomes	carrying	 on	 their	 petty	trafficking
with	my	gold.
       “Your	  gold?”	 John	raised	an	eyebrow.	With	 a	swift	 gesture	of	her	 mind
Jenny	stilled	Morkeleb	again.
       Nor	 would	they	allow	 it,	 she	said,	for	the	dragon	alone.	It	 would	 only	be
a	matter	 of	time	 until	 their	 distrust	 of	you	 mastered	them,	and	they	 tried	 to
slay	you.	No—you	must	be	freed.
       Freed!	 The	 voice	 within	 her	 mind	 was	acrid	 as	the	 stench	of	 vinegar.
Freed	to	be	turned	like	 a	beggar	onto	the	roads?	 The	dragon	swung	his	head
away,	the	long	scales	of	his	mane	clashing	softly,	like	 the	searingly	thin	 notes
of	a	wind	 chime.	You	have	done	this	to	me,	wizard	woman!	Before	your	 mind
touched	mine	I	was	not	bound	to	this	place...
       “You	  were	bound,”	 Aversin	 said	 quietly.	 “It’s	 just	 that,	 before	Jenny’s
mind	touched	yours,	you	weren’t	aware	of	it.	 Had	you	tried	to	leave	before?”
       I	 remained	because	it	was	my	will	to	remain.
       “And	  it’s	the	old	 King’s	 will	 to	remain	with	 Zyerne,	though	 she’s	killing
him.	No,	 Morkeleb—she	 got	you	 through	your	 greed,	as	she	got	poor	 Gar’s

245
dad	through	his	 grief	 and	Bond	 through	his	 love.	 If	 we	hadn’t	 come,	you’d
have	stayed	here,	bound	with	spells	to	brood	over	your	hoard	till	you	 died.	It’s
just	that	now	you	know	it.”
       That	 is	not	true!
       True	 or	not,	 Jenny	said,	it	 is	my	bidding,	 Morkeleb,	 that	as	soon	 as	the
sky	grows	 light,	  you	 shall	 carry	 me	 over	 the	 mountain	 to	 the	 Citadel	 of
Halnath,	 so	that	 I	 can	 send	Polycarp	  the	Master	 to	 bring	  these	others	 to
safety	there	through	the	Deep.
       The	 dragon	 reared	himself	 up,	 bristling	  all	 over	 with	 rage.	 His	 voice
lashed	her	mind	like	a	silver	whip.	 I	am	not	your	pigeon	nor	 your	servant!
       Jenny	was	on	 her	feet	now,	too,	looking	 up	 into	the	blazing	 white	deeps
of	his	eyes.	No,	she	said,	holding	 to	 the	crystal	chain	 of	his	 inner	name.	You
are	my	slave,	by	that	which	 you	gave	me	when	I	 saved	your	life.	 And	by	that
which	you	gave	me,	I	tell	you	this	is	what	you	shall	do.
       Their	 eyes	held.	The	 others,	not	hearing	what	 passed	between	their	two
minds,	saw	and	felt	only	the	dragon’s	scorching	 wrath.	Gareth	caught	up	Trey
and	drew	her	back	toward	the	shelter	of	the	gateway;	Aversin	made	a	move	to
rise	and	sank	back	with	a	gasp.	He	angrily	shook	off	 Gareth’s	attempt	to	draw
him	to	 safety,	his	eyes	never	leaving	the	small,	 thin	form	 of	 the	woman	who
stood	before	the	smoking	rage	of	the	beast.
       All	  this	Jenny	was	aware	of,	but	peripherally,	like	the	weave	of	a	tapestry
upon	which	  other	 colors	 are	 painted.	 Her	 whole	 mind	 focused	 in	 crystal
exactness	against	the	mind	 that	 surged	like	 a	 dark	 wave	against	 hers.	The
power	born	 in	 her	 from	  the	touch	 of	 the	 dragon’s	 mind	 strengthened	and
burned,	forcing	him	 back.	Her	understanding	of	his	name	was	a	many-pointed
weapon	in	her	hands.	In	time	 Morkeleb	sank	to	 his	haunches	again,	and	back
to	his	sphinx	position.
       In	 her	mind	 his	 voice	said	softly,	 You	know	you	 do	not	 need	me,	Jenny
Waynest,	to	fly	 over	the	 mountains.	 You	know	the	 form	of	 the	 dragons	and
their	magic.	One	of	them	you	have	put	on	already.
       The	other	I	 might	put	on,	she	replied,	for	you	would	 help	me	in	that,	to	be
free	of	my	will.	But	you	would	 not	help	me	put	it	off	again.

246
       The	 deeps	of	 his	eyes	were	 like	 falling	  into	 the	heart	of	 a	 star.	If	 you
wished	it,	I	would.
       The	 need	in	her	for	power,	to	separate	herself	from	all	 that	had	separated
her	from	its	pursuit,	 shuddered	through	her	like	the	racking	 heat	of	fever.	“To
be	a	mage	you	must	be	a	mage,”	Caerdinn	had	said.
       He	 had	 also	said,	 “Dragons	 do	not	 deceive	 with	 lies,	 but	 with	 truth.”
Jenny	turned	her	eyes	from	 those	cosmic	 depths.	You	say	it	only	 because	in
becoming	a	dragon,	 I	 will	 cease	to	want	 to	hold	 power	 over	you,	 Morkeleb
the	Black.
       He	 replied,	Not	‘only,’	 Jenny	Waynest.
       Like	 a	wraith	he	faded	into	the	darkness.


Though	still	 exhausted	from	 the	battle	at	 the	Gates,	Jenny	did	not	 sleep	that
night.	She	sat	upon	the	steps,	as	she	had	sat	awake	most	of	the	night	 before,
watching	 and	listening—for	   the	 King’s	 men,	 she	told	  herself,	 though	 she
knew	 they	 would	 not	 come.	 She	was	 aware	of	  the	night	  with	 a	 physical
intensity,	the	moonlight	 like	a	rime	 of	molten	 silver	on	every	 chink	and	crack
of	the	scarred	steps	upon	which	she	sat,	turning	to	slips	of	white	 each	knotted
weed-stem	in	the	scuffed	dust	of	the	square	below.	Earlier,	while	she	had	been
tending	to	John	by	 the	fire	 in	the	 Market	Hall,	 the	bodies	of	 the	slain	 rioters
had	vanished	from	the	steps,	though	whether	this	was	due	to	fastidiousness	on
Morkeleb’s	part	or	hunger,	she	wasn’t	sure.
       Sitting	 in	the	cold	stillness	 of	the	night,	she	meditated,	seeking	an	answer
within	 herself.	But	 her	 own	soul	 was	unclear,	torn	 between	the	great	 magic
that	had	always	lain	beyond	her	grasp	and	the	small	joys	she	had	cherished	in
its	stead—the	silence	of	 the	house	on	Frost	Fell,	 the	memory	of	 small	 hands
that	seemed	to	be	printed	on	her	palms,	and	John.
       John,	she	thought,	and	looked	 back	through	the	wide	 arch	of	the	Gate	to
where	he	lay,	wrapped	in	bearskins	beside	the	small	glow	of	the	fire.
       In	   the	  darkness	 she	  made	  out	  his	  shape,	  the	  broad-shouldered
compactness	that	went	so	oddly	with	the	whippet	 litheness	of	his	movements.
She	remembered	the	fears	that	had	driven	her	to	 the	Deep	to	seek	medicines

247
—	that	had	driven	her	first	 to	look	 into	the	dragon’s	silver	eyes.	Now,	as	then,
she	could	scarcely	contemplate	years	of	her	life	 that	did	not—or	 would	not—
include	that	fleeting,	triangular	 smile.
       Adric	  had	 it	 already,	 along	 with	 the	 blithe	 and	 sunny	 half	 of	 John’s
quirky	personality.	 Ian	had	his	sensitivity,	 his	maddening,	insatiable	curiosity,
and	his	intentness.	His	sons,	she	thought.	My	sons.
       Yet	 the	memory	 of	 the	power	 she	had	called	to	 stop	the	lynch	 mob	 on
these	very	 steps	 returned	to	  her,	sweetness	and	 terror	 and	 exultation.	  Its
results	had	horrified	 her,	and	the	weariness	of	 it	still	  clung	to	 her	bones,	but
the	taste	that	lingered	 was	one	 of	 triumph	 at	having	 wielded	 it.	 How	 could
she,	she	wondered,	have	wasted	 all	 those	years	before	 this	beginning?	 The
touch	of	Morkeleb’s	 mind	had	half-opened	a	thousand	doors	within	her.	If	 she
turned	away	 from	  him	 now,	 how	 many	 of	 the	 rooms	 behind	 those	doors
would	she	be	able	to	explore?	The	 promise	of	the	magic	 was	something	only
a	mageborn	could	have	felt;	 the	need,	like	lust	or	 hunger,	something	only	the
mageborn	would	have	understood.	There	was	a	magic	she	had	never	dreamed
of	that	could	be	wrought	from	 the	light	of	 certain	stars,	knowledge	unplumbed
in	the	dark,	 eternal	minds	of	 dragons	and	in	 the	singing	of	 the	whales	in	 the
sea.	The	stone	house	on	 the	 Fell	 that	she	loved	 came	 back	to	 her	like	  the
memory	of	 a	 narrow	 prison;	the	 clutch	 of	 small	 hands	on	her	 skirts,	 of	 an
infant’s	 mouth	 at	 her	breast,	 seemed	for	 a	 time	 nothing	 more	 than	bonds
holding	her	back	from	walking	 through	its	 doors	to	the	moving	air	outside.
       Was	 this	 some	spell	 of	 Morkeleb’s?	 she	wondered,	 wrapping	 the	 soft
weight	of	a	bearskin	more	tightly	 around	her	shoulders	and	gazing	at	the	royal
blue	darkness	of	 the	sky	 above	the	western	ridge.	 Was	it	 something	 he	had
sung	up	out	of	the	depths	of	her	soul,	 so	that	she	would	leave	the	concerns	of
humans	and	free	him	of	his	bondage	to	her?
       Why	did	 you	say,	“Not	‘only,’”	  Morkeleb	 the	Black?
       You	know	that	as	well	as	I,	Jenny	Waynest.
       He	 had	been	invisible	in	 the	darkness.	Now	the	moonlight	 sprinkling	 his
back	was	like	 a	carpet	of	diamonds	and	his	 silver	eyes	were	like	 small,	 half-
shut	moons.	How	 long	 he	had	been	there	she	did	 not	know—the	  moon	had

248
sunk,	the	stars	moved.	His	 coming	had	been	like	 the	floating	 of	 a	feather	on
the	still	night.
       What	 you	give	 to	 them	you	have	taken	 from	yourself.	 When	our	 minds
were	within	one	another,	I	saw	the	struggle	that	 has	tortured	you	all	 your	life.
I	do	not	 understand	the	souls	of	humans,	but	they	have	a	 brightness	to	them,
like	soft	gold.	 You	are	strong	and	 beautiful,	 Jenny	Waynest.	I	would	like	 it	 if
you	would	 become	one	of	 us	 and	live	 among	 us	in	 the	rock	 islands	 of	 the
northern	seas.
       She	shook	her	head.	I	will	 not	turn	against	those	that	I	love.
       Turn	 against?	 The	sinking	 moonlight	 striped	 his	mane	with	 frost	 as	he
moved	his	head.	No.	That	I	 know	you	would	 never	do,	though,	for	 what	their
love	has	done	to	you,	they	would	well	deserve	it	if	 you	did.	And	as	to	this	love
you	speak	of,	I	do	not	know	what	it	is—it	 is	not	a	thing	of	dragons.	But	when	I
am	freed	of	the	spells	that	bind	me	here,	when	I	fly	to	the	north	again,	 fly	with
me.	This	is	something	also	that	I	 have	never	felt—this	wanting	 of	you	 to	be	a
dragon	that	 you	 can	be	 with	 me.	And	 tell	 me,	what	 is	it	 to	 you	if	 this	 boy
Gareth	 becomes	the	 slave	 of	  his	 father’s	 woman	 or	  to	 one	 of	  his	 own
choosing?	What	 is	it	 to	 you	 who	rules	 the	 Deep,	or	 how	 long	 this	 woman
Zyerne	can	go	on	polluting	 her	mind	 and	her	body	until	 she	dies	because	she
no	longer	recalls	 enough	about	her	 own	magic	to	 continue	living?	 What	is	 it
to	you	if	the	Winterlands	are	ruled	 and	defended	by	one	set	of	men	or	another,
or	if	 they	 have	books	to	 read	about	 the	deeds	of	 yet	a	 third?	 It	 is	nothing,
Jenny	Waynest.	Your	powers	are	beyond	that.
       To	leave	them	now	would	be	to	turn	against	them.	They	need	me.
       They	 do	not	need	you,	 the	dragon	replied.	 Had	 the	King’s	 troops	killed
you	upon	these	steps,	it	would	have	been	the	same	for	them.
       Jenny	looked	 up	at	him,	 that	dark	shape	of	power—	 infinitely	 more	 vast
than	the	 dragon	John	 had	 slain	in	  Wyr	 and	infinitely	   more	beautiful.	  The
singing	of	his	soul	 reechoed	in	her	heart,	magnified	by	the	beauty	of	the	gold.
Clinging	 to	 the	daylight	  that	she	knew	 against	 the	calling	 of	 the	 dark,	 she
shook	her	head	again	and	said,	It	would	not	have	been	the	same.
       She	gathered	the	furs	about	her,	rose,	and	went	back	into	the	Deep.

249
       After	 the	sharpness	of	the	night	air,	 the	huge	cavern	felt	stuffy	 and	stank
of	 smoke.	The	 dying	 fire	 threw	  weird	 flickers	 of	 amber	 against	the	 ivory
labyrinth	 of	 inverted	  turrets	above	 and	 glinted	 faintly	  on	 the	 ends	of	 the
broken	lamp	chains	that	hung	down	from	the	vaulted	blackness.	It	was	always
so,	going	from	 free	night	 air	to	the	 frowsty	 stillness	of	indoors,	 but	her	heart
ached	suddenly,	as	if	she	had	given	up	free	air	for	a	prison	forever.
       She	 folded	 the	bearskin,	 laid	 it	 by	the	 campfire,	 and	found	 where	 her
halberd	had	been	leaned	against	the	 few	 packs	they	had	 brought	with	 them
from	the	 camp.	Somewhere	in	the	darkness,	she	heard	movement,	the	sound
of	someone	tripping	 over	a	plaid.	 A	 moment	later	Gareth’s	 voice	said	softly,
“Jenny?”
       “Over	 here.”	 She	straightened	up,	her	pale	face	and	the	metal	buckles	of
her	 sheepskin	jacket	  catching	 the	 low	  firelight.	  Gareth	 looked	 tired	  and
bedraggled	in	his	shirt,	breeches,	and	a	stained	and	scruffy	plaid,	 as	unlike	as
possible	 to	 the	 self-conscious	 young	  dandy	 in	 primrose-and-white	  Court
mantlings	of	 less	than	a	week	ago.	But	then,	she	noted,	there	was	less	in	him
now	than	there	had	been,	even	then,	of	the	gawky	and	earnest	young	man	who
had	ridden	to	the	Winterlands	in	quest	of	his	hero.
       “I	  must	be	going,”	  she	said	softly.	 “It’s	 beginning	 to	 turn	light.	  Gather
what	 kindling	  you	 can,	 in	 case	 the	 King’s	  men	return	  and	you	  have	 to
barricade	yourselves	behind	the	inner	 doors	in	 the	Grand	Passage.	There	are
foul	things	in	 the	darkness.	They	may	come	at	you	when	the	light	is	gone.”
       Gareth	shuddered	wholeheartedly	and	nodded.
       “I’ll	   tell	 Polycarp	 how	 things	stand.	 He	should	 come	back	 here	to	get
you,	if	 they	 didn’t	 blast	 shut	the	 ways	into	 the	 Deep.	If	 I	 don’t	 make	 it	 to
Halnath...”
       The	 boy	 looked	 at	 her,	 the	heroically	  simple	 conclusions	 of	 a	 dozen
ballads	reverberant	in	his	shocked	features.
       She	smiled,	the	pull	 of	 the	dragon	in	her	fading.	She	reached	up	the	long
distance	to	lay	a	hand	on	his	bristly	cheek.	“Look	 after	John	for	me.”
       Then	 she	knelt	 and	kissed	John’s	lips	 and	 his	shut	eyelids.	 Rising,	 she
collected	a	plaid	 and	her	 halberd	and	walked	 toward	 the	clear	slate-gray	 air

250
that	lay	like	water	outside	the	darker	arch	of	the	Gate.
       As	 she	passed	through	it,	 she	heard	a	 faint	 north-country	 voice	 behind
her	protest,	“Look	after	John,	indeed!”

251
                                 CHAPTER	                    XV


LIGHT	WATERED	THE	darkness,	changing	the	air	from	velvet	to	silk.	Cold	cut
into	Jenny’s	hands	and	face,	imbuing	her	with	a	sense	of	strange	and	soaring
joy.	The	high	cirques	and	hanging	valleys	of	the	Wall’s	toothy	summits	were
stained	blue	and	lavender	against	the	charcoal	gray	of	the	sky;	below	her,	mist
clung	like	raveled	wool	to	the	bones	of	the	shadowy	town.	For	a	time	she	was
alone	and	complete,	torn	by	neither	power	nor	love,	only	breathing	the	sharp
air	of	dawn.
       Like	a	shift	in	 perception,	she	became	aware	of	the	dragon,	lying	along
the	bottom	step.	Seeing	her,	he	rose	and	stretched	like	a	cat,	from	nose	to	tail
knob	to	the	tips	of	the	quivering	wings,	every	spine	and	horn	blinking	in	the
gray-white	gloom.
       Wrap	yourself	well,	wizard	woman.	The	upper	airs	are	cold.
       He	sat	back	upon	his	haunches	and,	reaching	delicately	down,	closed
around	her	one	gripping	talon,	like	a	hand	twelve	inches	across	the	back	and
consisting	of	nothing	but	bone	wrapped	in	muscle	and	studded	with	spike	and
horn.	The	claws	lapped	easily	around	her	waist.	She	felt	 no	fear	of	 him;
though	she	knew	he	was	treacherous,	she	had	been	within	his	mind	and	knew
he	would	not	kill	her.	Still,	a	shivery	qualm	passed	through	her	as	he	lifted	her
up	against	his	breast,	where	she	would	be	out	of	the	air-stream.
       The	vast	shadow	of	his	wings	spread	against	the	mauve	gloom	of	the
cliff	behind	them,	and	she	cast	one	quick	glance	down	at	the	ground,	fifteen
feet	below.	Then	she	looked	up	at	the	mountains	surrounding	the	Vale	and	at
the	white,	watching	eye	of	the	moon	on	the	flinty	crest	of	the	ridge,	a	few
days	from	full	and	bright	in	the	western	air	as	the	lamps	of	the	dragon’s	eyes.
       Then	he	flung	himself	upward,	and	all	the	world	dropped	away.
       Cold	sheered	past	her	face,	its	bony	fingers	clawing	through	her	hair.
Through	the	plaids	wrapped	around	her,	she	felt	the	throbbing	heat	of	the
dragon’s	scales.	From	the	sky	she	looked	to	the	earth	again,	the	Vale	like	a

252
well	 of	 blue	shadow,	 the	mountain	 slopes	starting	 to	 take	on	 the	colors	 of
dawn	as	the	sun	brushed	them,	rust	and	purple	and	all	 shades	of	brown	from
the	whitest	dun	to	the	deep	hue	of	coffee,	all	edged	and	trimmed	with	the	dark
lace	of	trees.	The	rain	tanks	north	of	Deeping	caught	the	new	day	like	chips	of
mirror;	 as	the	dragon	passed	over	the	flanks	of	the	mountain,	 circling	 higher,
she	saw	the	bright	leap	of	 springs	among	the	pine	trees,	and	the	white	 spines
of	thrusting	rock.
       The	 dragon	tilted,	 turning	 upon	the	air,	the	vast	 wings	searing	faintly	 at
the	wind.	Occasional	eddies	of	it	whistled	 around	the	spikes	that	defended	the
dragon’s	backbone—some	of	 them	 no	longer	 than	a	finger,	 others	 almost	a
cubit,	dagger-sharp.	In	flight	 the	dragon	seemed	to	be	a	thing	made	of	silk	and
wire,	lighter	 than	his	size	would	 lead	one	to	think,	 as	if	the	flesh	 and	muscle,
like	the	mind	 and	the	shape	of	his	bones,	were	different	 in	 composition	from
all	things	else	upon	the	Earth.
       This	 is	the	realm	of	the	dragons,	 Morkeleb’s	voice	 said	within	 her	mind.
The	roads	of	the	air.	It	is	yours,	for	the	stretching	out	of	 your	hand.
       In	  the	slant	 of	 the	light	  they	 laid	 no	shadow	 upon	 the	ground,	 but	 it
seemed	to	Jenny	that	she	could	almost	 see	the	track	of	 their	passage	written
like	 a	ship’s	 wake	 upon	 the	wind.	  Her	mind	  half-within	  the	dragon’s,	 she
could	sense	the	variations	of	the	air,	updraft	 and	thermal,	as	if	 the	wind	itself
were	of	different	 colors.	With	 the	dragon’s	awareness,	she	saw	other	things	in
the	air	as	well—the	  paths	of	energy	 across	the	face	of	 the	world,	 the	tracks
that	traveled	from	 star	to	star,	like	the	lines	 of	force	 that	were	repeated	in	the
body,	smaller	and	smaller,	in	the	spreads	of	dealt	cards	or	thrown	runes	or	the
lie	of	 leaves	in	water.	She	was	aware	of	 life	 everywhere,	of	 the	winter-white
foxes	and	 hares	in	 the	 patchy	 snowlines	 beneath	the	 thin	 scrum	 of	 cloud
below,	and	of	the	King’s	 troops,	camped	far	down	upon	the	road,	who	pointed
and	cried	out	as	the	dragon’s	dark	shape	passed	overhead.
       They	 crossed	the	flank	 of	 the	mountain	 to	its	 daylight	 side.	Before	and
below	 her,	 she	 saw	 the	  cliff	  and	 hill	  and	  Citadel	 of	  Halnath,	 a	  spiky
conglomerate	of	thrusting	 gray	 ramparts	clinging	 like	 a	mud-built	 swallow’s
nest	to	 the	massive	 shoulder	of	 a	 granite	 cliff.	  From	 its	feet,	 the	 land	 lay

253
crisscrossed	with	wooded	ravines	 to	the	silver	 curve	of	 a	river;	 mist	blended
with	 the	blue	 of	 woodsmoke	to	 veil	 the	 straggling	lines	 of	 tents	and	 guard
posts,	horse	lines	and	trenches	raw	with	 yellow	 mud,	 that	made	up	the	siege
camps.	An	open	ring	of	 battered	ground	lay	 between	the	walls	and	the	camp,
ravaged	by	battle	 and	bristling	 with	 the	burned-out	 shells	of	 the	small	 truck
farms	that	 nestled	around	the	 walls	 of	 any	town.	 Beyond,	 to	 the	north,	 the
green	stretches	of	 the	Marches	 vanished	away	 under	a	 gauze	of	 mists,	 the
horse-	and	cattle-lands	that	were	the	Master’s	fief	and	strength.	From	the	river
marshes	where	pewter	waters	spread	themselves,	a	skein	of	danglefoot	herons
rose	through	the	milky	vapors,	tiny	 and	clear	as	a	pen	sketch.
       There.	 Jenny	pointed	with	 her	 mind	toward	 the	battlements	 of	the	 high
Citadel.	The	central	court	there.	It’s	narrow,	 but	long	enough	for	us	to	land.
       Wind	 and	her	long	hair	lashed	her	eyes	as	the	dragon	wheeled.
       They	have	armored	their	 walls,	the	dragon	said.	Look.
       Men	  were	 running	  about	 the	 ramparts,	 pointing	  and	 waving	  at	 the
enormous	wings	flashing	in	 the	air.	Jenny	glimpsed	catapults	mounted	on	 the
highest	turrets,	 counterweighted	 slings	 bearing	buckets	 that	burst	 suddenly
into	red	flame	and	massive	crossbows	whose	bolts	could	point	nowhere	but	at
the	sky.
       We’ll	 have	to	go	in,	Jenny	said.	I’ll	 protect	you.
       By	 catching	 the	 bolts	 in	 your	 teeth,	 wizard	 woman?	 Morkeleb	  asked
sarcastically,	circling	away	 as	some	over-eager	slinger	slipped	his	ropes	and	a
bucketful	 of	 naphtha	 described	a	 curving	 trajectory,	 flames	 streaming	 like
faded	orange	pennants	against	the	brightness	of	the	new	day.	What	protection
can	you,	a	human,	offer	me?
       Jenny	 smiled	 to	herself,	 watching	 the	naphtha	as	it	 broke	 into	 blazing
lumps	in	falling.	 None	of	 them	landed	in	the	town	 on	the	slopes	below—they
knew	their	 mathematics,	these	defenders	of	Halnath,	 and	how	to	 apply	them
to	ballistics.	 For	 herself,	she	supposed	she	should	have	been	terrified,	  to	be
carried	this	high	above	the	reeling	earth—if	 she	fell,	 she	would	fall	 for	a	long
time	 before	 she	 died.	 But	 whether	 it	  was	 her	 trust	 in	 Morkeleb,	  or	 the
dragon’s	mind	 that	enveloped	hers	in	 the	thoughts	of	 those	who	lived	 in	 the

254
airstream,	she	felt	no	fear	of	it.	Indeed,	she	almost	believed	that,	if	she	were	to
drop,	she	had	only	to	spread	out	her	own	wings,	as	she	did	in	dreams	of	flight.
       Small	 as	toys	on	the	 walls	of	 the	Citadel,	the	 machines	of	defense	were
being	cranked	around	to	 bear	upon	them.	 They	looked,	 at	this	 distance,	like
nothing	so	much	 as	John’s	little	 models.	And	to	think	 I	 grew	impatient	 when
he	insisted	upon	showing	me	how	every	one	of	them	fired.	She	smiled,	half	 to
Morkeleb	and	half	 to	herself.	Swing	north,	 Morkeleb,	 and	come	at	them	from
along	that	ridge.	 The	problem	with	 machines	has	always	been	that	it	requires
only	the	touch	of	a	wizard’s	mind	to	fox	their	 balance.
       There	 were	two	engines	guarding	the	 approach	she	had	set,	a	bolt-firing
catapult	 and	 a	  spring-driven	  sling.	  She	 had	 thrown	  her	  magic	 before,
conjuring	 images	within	  her	mind,	 to	 foul	 the	bowstrings	 of	 bandits	 in	 the
north	and	to	cause	their	feet	to	 find	roots	as	they	ran,	 or	their	swords	to	 stick
in	 their	 sheaths.	Having	 seen	the	 mechanisms	of	 these	weapons	in	 John’s
models,	she	found	this	no	 harder.	Ropes	twisted	in	the	catapult,	 jamming	the
knots	when	 the	triggering	 cord	 was	jerked.	 With	 a	dragon’s	 awareness,	she
saw	a	man	running	in	 panic	along	the	battlements;	he	knocked	 over	a	bucket
into	the	 mechanism	of	 the	 sling	 so	that	it	 could	 not	 be	turned	 to	 aim.	The
dragon	swung	lazily	 from	the	 weapon’s	possible	path,	guided	by	the	touch	of
Jenny’s	mind	 within	  his;	 and	she	felt,	  like	 a	chuckle	 of	 dark	 laughter,	 his
appreciation	for	the	ease	with	which	she	thwarted	the	mechanical	devices.
       You	are	small,	 wizard	woman,	he	said,	amused,	but	a	mighty	defender	of
dragons,	nevertheless.
       Throwing	  her	streaming	hair	 back	from	 her	 eyes,	Jenny	could	see	men
on	the	battlements	below	 them	clearly	 now.	They	 were	clothed	 in	makeshift
uniforms,	the	black,	billowing	  gowns	of	scholars	covered	with	battered	bits	of
armor,	some	 of	 it	 stamped	with	  the	royal	  arms	and	 obviously	 taken	 from
prisoners	or	the	slain.	They	fled	in	all	 directions	as	the	dragon	drew	near,	save
for	 one	man,	 tall,	 red-haired,	 and	thin	 as	 a	scarecrow	 in	 his	ragged	 black
gown,	 who	 was	swinging	  something	to	 bear	 upon	them	 that	 looked	 for	 a
moment	 like	  a	 telescope—a	 metal	 tube	  braced	 upon	 stakes.	 The	 walls
swooped	closer.	At	the	 last	moment	Jenny	saw	harpoons	stacked	beside	him

255
and,	instead	of	glass	in	the	tube’s	mouth,	the	glint	of	a	metal	point.
       The	 lone	defender	had	a	 burning	spill	 in	 one	hand,	lighted	 from	 one	of
the	naphtha	buckets.	He	 was	watching	 them	come	 in,	 taking	aim—Blasting
powder,	thought	 Jenny;	 the	 gnomes	 will	  have	brought	  plenty	 upfront	 the
mines.	She	remembered	John’s	abortive	experiments	with	rockets.
       The	scene	rushed	to	meet	them,	until	every	chipped	stone	of	the	wall	 and
every	patch	 on	the	 scholar’s	 ragged	gown	 seemed	within	 reach	 of	 Jenny’s
hand.	As	he	brought	the	spill	 down	to	the	touch-hole,	 Jenny	used	her	mind	to
extinguish	the	flame,	as	she	would	have	doused	a	candle.
       Then	she	spread	out	her	arms	and	cried,	“STOP!”	at	the	top	of	her	voice.
       He	 froze	  in	 mid-motion,	  the	harpoon	 he	 had	 snatched	from	 the	 pile
beside	him	cocked	back	already	over	his	shoulder,	though	Jenny	could	tell	 by
the	way	he	held	it	that	he	had	never	thrown	 one	before	and	could	not	have	hit
them.	Even	at	that	distance,	she	saw	wonder,	curiosity,	and	delight	on	his	thin
face.	Like	  John,	 she	thought,	 he	 was	 a	 true	 scholar,	fascinated	 with	  any
wonder,	though	it	carried	his	death	upon	its	wings.
       Morkeleb	  braked	 in	 the	 air,	 the	shift	  of	 his	 muscles	 rippling	 against
Jenny’s	back.	All	 men	had	fled	 the	long,	 narrow	court	 of	the	Citadel	 and	the
walls	around	it,	save	that	single	defender.	The	dragon	hung	for	a	moment	like
a	hovering	 hawk,	then	 settled,	delicate	as	a	dandelion	 seed,	to	perch	 on	the
wall	 above	the	shadowy	well	 of	 the	court.	The	 great	hind-talons	 gripped	the
stone	as	the	long	 neck	and	 tail	 counterbalanced,	and	he	stooped	like	 a	 vast
bird	to	set	Jenny	on	her	feet	upon	the	rampart.
       She	 staggered,	her	knees	weak	 from	 shock,	her	 whole	body	 trembling
with	 exhilaration	 and	cold.	 The	tall,	 red-haired	 young	man,	 harpoon	still	 in
one	hand,	moved	forward	along	the	walkway,	black	robe	billowing	  beneath	an
outsize	hauberk	of	chain	mail.	Though	 he	was	clearly	cautious,	Jenny	thought
from	the	way	 he	looked	at	Morkeleb	 that	he	could	have	stood	and	studied	the
dragon	for	hours;	but	 there	was	a	court-bred	politeness	in	the	 way	he	offered
Jenny	his	hand.
       It	 took	her	a	moment	to	remember	to	speak	in	words.
       “Polycarp	 of	 Halnath?”

256
       He	 looked	 surprised	and	 disconcerted	at	hearing	 his	name.	 “I	 am	 he.”
Like	Gareth,	it	 took	 more	than	dragons	or	bandits	to	shake	his	early	 training;
he	executed	a	very	creditable	Dying	Swan	in	spite	of	the	harpoon.
       Jenny	 smiled	 and	 held	 out	 her	 hands	to	 him.	 “I	  am	 Jenny	Waynest,
Gareth’s	friend.”


“Yes,	there	is	a	power	sink	 in	the	heart	of	 the	Deep.”	Polycarp,	Master	 of	the
Citadel	 of	 Halnath	and	 Doctor	 of	 Natural	 Philosophy,	 folded	 long,	 narrow
hands	behind	his	back	and	 turned	from	 the	pointed	 arches	of	the	window	 to
look	at	his	rescued,	oddly	assorted	guests.	“It	is	 what	Zyerne	wants;	what	she
has	always	wanted,	since	first	she	knew	what	it	was.”
       Gareth	 looked	up	 from	 the	ruins	 of	the	 simple	meal	 which	 strewed	the
plain	waxed	boards	of	the	workroom	table.	“Why	 didn’t	 you	tell	 me?”
       The	 bright	 blue	 eyes	flickered	  to	 him.	 “What	 could	 I	  have	said?”	 he
asked.	“Up	until	 a	year	ago	I	wasn’t	even	sure.	And	when	I	was...”	 His	glance
moved	to	 the	gnome	who	 sat	at	the	table’s	 head,	tiny	 and	stooped	and	very
old,	his	eyes	like	 pale	green	glass	beneath	the	long	mane	of	 milk-white	  hair.
“Sevacandrozardus—Balgub,	in	the	tongue	of	men;	 brother	of	the	Lord	 of	the
Deep	who	 was	slain	by	 the	dragon—forbade	 me	 to	speak	of	 it.	 I	 could	not
break	his	confidence.”
       Beyond	 the	tall	windows,	 the	turrets	of	the	lower	 Citadel,	the	University,
and	the	 town	 beneath	could	 be	 glimpsed,	 the	 sunlight	 on	 them	yellow	  as
summer	butter,	  though	 the	 buildings	  below	 were	 already	 cloaked	 in	  the
shadows	of	the	mountain	 as	the	sun	sank	 behind	its	 shoulder.	Sitting	 on	the
end	of	 the	 couch	 where	 John	lay,	 Jenny	 listened	in	  quiet	 to	the	 debating
voices.	Her	body	ached	for	sleep	and	her	mind	for	 stillness,	but	she	knew	that
both	would	be	denied	her.	Neither	the	words	of	the	impromptu	 council	nor	the
recollection	of	 the	trip	 back	through	the	Deep	 with	Polycarp	 and	the	gnomes
to	fetch	 the	others	had	eradicated	from	 her	 thoughts	the	soaring	 memory	of
the	dragon’s	flight.
       She	 knew	 she	ought	 not	 to	 let	 it	 hold	 her	 so.	She	ought	 to	 be	 more
conscious	of	  her	 own	 gladness	that	 they	  were,	 at	least	 for	  the	 moment,

257
relatively	safe	and	more	preoccupied	with	 their	exchange	of	information	  with
the	Master	and	with	plans	for	 how	to	deal	with	 the	Stone	and	its	mistress.	Yet
the	flight	 and	the	memory	of	 the	dragon’s	mind	 had	shaken	her	to	the	bones.
She	could	not	put	that	wild	intoxication	 from	 her	heart.
       The	old	 gnome	was	saying,	“It	has	always	been	forbidden	to	speak	of	the
Stone	to	outsiders.	After	 it	 became	clear	that	the	 girl	 Zyerne	had	heard	of	 it
somehow	and	 had	spied	 upon	 those	who	 used	 it	 and	 learned	its	 key,	 my
brother,	 the	Lord	  of	 the	 Deep,	 redoubled	 the	 anathema.	 It	 has	 from	 the
darkness	of	 time	 been	the	heart	 of	 the	 Deep,	the	 source	of	 power	 for	 our
Healers	and	 mages,	and	has	 made	our	 magic	 so	 great	that	 none	 dared	to
assault	the	Deep	of	 Ylferdun.	 But	 always	we	 knew	its	 danger	as	well—that
the	greedy	could	use	such	a	thing	for	their	own	ends.	And	so	it	was.”
       Jenny	roused	herself	 from	her	 thoughts	to	ask,	“How	  did	you	 know	she
had	used	it?”	Like	 the	others,	she	had	bathed	and	was	now	dressed	like	them
all	in	 the	frayed	 black	gown	 of	a	 scholar	of	the	 University,	 too	large	for	 her
and	belted	 tight	 about	her	 waist.	 Her	 hair,	 still	 damp	 from	 washing,	 hung
about	her	shoulders.
       The	 gnome’s	 light	 eyes	 shifted.	 Grudgingly,	 he	 said,	 “To	 take	 power
from	the	Stone,	there	must	be	a	return.	It	gives	to	those	who	draw	upon	it,	 but
later	it	 asks	back	from	 them.	Those	who	 were	used	to	 wielding	 its	 power—
myself,	Taseldwyn	whom	 you	know	 as	Miss	Mab,	and	others—could	 feel	the
imbalance.	Then	it	corrected	itself,	or	seemed	to.	I	was	content.”	He	shook	his
head,	the	opals	that	pinned	 his	white	 hair	flashing	 in	 the	diffuse	 light	 of	 the
long	room.	“Mab	 was	not.”
       “What	 return	does	it	ask?”
       For	 a	moment	his	 glance	touched	her,	reading	in	 her,	as	Mab	had	done,
the	degree	of	her	power.	Then	he	said,	“Power	 for	 power.	All	 power	must	 be
paid	for,	whether	it	 is	taken	from	 your	own	spirit,	 or	from	 the	holding-sink	 of
others.	We,	 the	 Healers,	 of	  whom	 I	 was	 chief,	  used	to	  dance	for	  it,	 to
concentrate	our	magic	and	feed	it	into	 the	Stone,	that	others	might	 take	of	its
strength	and	not	 have	their	 very	 life-essences	drawn	 from	 them	 by	 it—the
woman	Zyerne	did	 not	know	 how	 to	make	 the	return	of	 magic	to	 it,	 did	not

258
even	learn	that	she	should.	She	was	never	taught	its	use,	but	had	only	sneaked
and	spied	until	she	learned	what	she	thought	was	its	secret.	When	she	did	not
give	back	to	it,	the	Stone	began	to	eat	at	her	essence.”
       “And	  to	feed	it,”	 said	Jenny	softly,	suddenly	understanding	what	she	had
seen	in	the	lamplight	 of	Zyerne’s	room,	 “she	perverted	the	healing	spells	that
can	draw	upon	the	essences	of	others	for	strength.	She	drank,	like	a	vampire,
to	replace	what	was	being	drunk	from	her.”
       In	 the	pale	light	 of	the	 window,	Polycarp	 said,	“Yes,”	 and	Gareth	buried
his	face	 in	 his	hands.	“Even	  as	she	can	draw	 upon	 the	Stone’s	magic	 at	 a
distance,	it	draws	upon	 her.	I	am	glad,”	 he	added,	the	tone	 of	his	light	 voice
changing,	“to	see	you’re	still	 all	right,	 Gar.”
       Gareth	raised	his	head	despairingly.	“Did	 she	try	to	use	you?”
       The	 Master	 nodded,	 his	 thin,	 foxy	 face	 grim.	 “And	  when	 I	 kept	 my
distance	and	made	you	keep	yours,	she	turned	to	Bond,	 who	 was	the	nearest
one	she	could	prey	 upon.	Your	 father...”	 He	fished	 for	 the	kindest	 words	to
use.	“Your	father	was	of	little	 more	use	to	her	by	that	time.”
       The	 prince’s	fist	 struck	the	table	with	 a	violence	 that	startled	them	all—
and	most	of	 all	 Gareth	himself.	 But	 he	 said	nothing,	 and	indeed,	there	 was
little	 he	 could	 say,	 or	 that	 any	 could	 say	 to	 him.	 After	  a	 moment,	 Trey
Clerlock	 rose	from	the	 couch	in	 the	corner,	where	she	had	been	lying	 like	 a
child	playing	 dress-up	in	 her	flapping	 black	 robe,	and	came	over	 to	rest	her
hands	upon	his	shoulders.
       “Is	 there	any	 way	of	 destroying	her?”	 the	girl	 asked,	looking	 across	the
table	to	the	tiny	gnome	and	the	tall	Master	who	had	come	to	stand	at	his	side.
       Gareth	  turned	 to	 stare	 up	 at	  her	 in	 shock,	  having,	 manlike,	  never
suspected	the	ruthless	practicality	of	women.
       “Not	  with	the	power	she	holds	through	 the	King	and	through	the	Stone,”
Polycarp	said.	“Believe	  me,	I	 thought	about	it,	 though	 I	knew	 I	 truly	 would
face	a	charge	of	murder	for	it.”	 A	brief	grin	 flickered	 across	his	face.	“But	as	I
ended	up	facing	one	anyway...”
       “What	  about	destroying	 the	Stone,	then?”	 John	asked,	turning	his	 head
from	where	 he	lay	flat	 on	his	back	 on	a	tall-legged	 sleeping	couch.	Even	the

259
little	he	had	been	able	to	eat	seemed	to	have	done	him	good.	In	his	black	robe,
he	looked	like	 the	corpse	at	a	wake,	washed	and	tended	and	cheerful	with	his
specs	perched	on	the	end	of	his	 long	 nose.	“I’m	 sure	you	 could	find	 a	 good
Stonebane	someplace...”
       “Never!”	  Balgub’s	 wrinkled	 walnut	 face	grew	 livid.	 “It	  is	the	source	of
the	healing	arts	of	 the	gnomes!	The	 source	of	the	strength	 of	the	Deep!	 It	 is
ours...”
       “It	  will	 do	you	 precious	little	 good	if	 Zyerne	gets	her	hands	on	it,”	 John
pointed	out.	 “I	  doubt	she	could	 break	 through	 all	 the	doors	 and	gates	you
locked	behind	 us	on	 our	 way	 up	here	 through	 the	Deep,	 but	if	  the	King’s
troops	manage	to	breach	the	Citadel	wall,	that	won’t	make	much	difference.”
       “If	  Jenny	could	 be	 given	the	 key	to	 the	 use	of	the	 Stone...”	 suggested
Gareth.
       “No!”	   Balgub	and	Jenny	spoke	 at	once.	All	 those	in	 the	Master’s	 long,
scrubbed	stone	workroom,	 John	 included,	 looked	 curiously	 at	the	 witch	 of
Wyr.
       “No	 human	shall	 touch	it!”	 insisted	 the	gnome	with	shrill	 fury.	 “We	saw
the	evil	it	did.	 It	is	for	 the	gnomes,	and	only	for	us.”
       “And	  I	would	 not	touch	 it	if	 I	 could.”	 Jenny	drew	her	knees	up	close	to
her	chest	and	folded	 her	 arms	around	them;	 Balgub,	 in	spite	 of	 his	protest,
looked	 affronted	 that	the	 greatest	treasure	 of	 the	Deep	 should	 be	refused.
Jenny	said,	“According	 to	Mab,	 the	Stone	itself	 has	been	defiled.	Its	powers,
and	the	spells	of	those	that	use	it,	are	polluted	by	what	Zyerne	has	done.”
       “That	  is	 not	 true.”	  Balgub’s	 tight	  little	  face	set	 in	 an	 expression	 of
obstinacy.	  “Mab	    insisted	  that	   the	   Stone’s	  powers	   were	   becoming
unpredictable	and	its	influence	evil	 on	the	minds	of	 those	who	used	it.	By	 the
heart	of	the	Deep,	this	is	not	so,	and	so	I	told	her,	again	and	again.	I	do	not	see
how...”
       “After	  being	fed	chewed-up	human	essences	instead	of	controlled	spells,
it	would	 be	a	wonder	 if	 it	 didn’t	 become	unpredictable,”	 John	said,	with	 his
usual	good-natured	affability.
       The	gnome’s	high	 voice	was	scornful.	“What	 can	a	warrior	know	 of	such

260
things?	A	 warrior	 hired	to	 slay	the	 dragon,	who	has,”	 he	added,	with	 heavy
sarcasm,	“signally	failed	in	 even	that	task.”
       “I	  suppose	you’d	  rather	 he’d	 signally	  succeeded?”	Gareth	 demanded
hotly.	“You’d	 have	had	the	King’s	 troops	coming	 at	you	through	the	 Deep	by
this	time.”
       “Lad.”	  John	reached	patiently	 out	 to	touch	 the	angry	prince’s	 shoulder.
“Let’s	 don’t	 fratch.	 His	opinion	 does	me	 no	harm	 and	shouting	at	 him	 isn’t
going	to	change	it.”
       “The	 King’s	 troops	would	 never	have	found	their	way	 through	the	Deep,
even	with	  the	 gates	unbolted,”	  Balgub	 growled.	 “And	  now	 the	 gates	 are
locked;	if	 necessary	we	will	 seal	them	 with	 blasting	powder—it	 is	 there	and
ready,	within	yards	of	the	last	gate.”
       “If	  Zyerne	was	leading	them,	they	 would	have	found	 the	way,”	Polycarp
returned.	The	links	 of	 the	too-large	mail	 shirt	 he	wore	over	 his	gown	 rattled
faintly	 as	he	folded	 his	arms.	 “She	knows	 the	way	 to	the	 heart	of	 the	Deep
well	 enough	 from	  the	 Deeping	 side.	 As	 you	  all	 saw,	 from	 there	 to	  the
underground	gates	of	the	Citadel	 it’s	 an	almost	 straight	path.	And	 as	for	 the
Stone	not	 having	 been	affected	by	 what	 she	has	put	 into	 it...”	  He	 glanced
down	at	the	stooped	back	and	round	 white	head	of	the	 gnome	perched	in	the
carved	chair	beside	him.	“You	 are	the	only	Healer	who	 escaped	the	dragon	to
come	here,	Balgub,”	 he	said.	“Now	 that	the	dragon	is	 no	longer	in	 the	Deep,
will	 you	go	in	and	use	the	Stone?”
       The	wide	 mouth	tightened,	and	the	green	eyes	did	not	meet	the	blue.
       “So,”	 said	the	Master	softly.
       “I	   do	 not	 believe	 that	 Mab	  was	 right,”	  Balgub	  insisted	 stubbornly.
“Nevertheless,	until	 she,	I,	and	the	remaining	Healers	in	 Bel	can	examine	the
thing,	I	 will	 not	have	it	 tampered	with	for	 good	or	ill.	 If	 it	came	to	saving	 the
Citadel,	or	 keeping	Zyerne	 from	 the	Deep,	yes,	I	 would	 risk	 using	it,	 rather
than	let	her	have	it.”	 Little	 and	white	 as	two	colorless	cave	shrimp,	his	 hands
with	their	 smooth	moonstone	rings	 closed	upon	each	other	on	the	 inkstained
tabletop.	“We	 have	sworn	 that	Zyerne	shall	 never	again	 have	the	use	of	 the
Stone.	Every	 gnome—and	 every	 man...”	  He	 cast	a	 glance	 that	 was	half-

261
commanding,	half-questioning	  up	 at	the	 Master,	 and	Polycarp	 inclined	 his
head	slightly,	“—in	  this	place	will	  die	before	she	lays	 a	hand	upon	what	she
seeks.”
       “And	  considering	 what	her	powers	 will	 be	 like	 if	 she	does,”	Poly	 carp
added,	with	 the	detached	speculation	 of	a	 scholar,	“that	 would	 probably	 be
just	as	well.”


“Jen?”
       Jenny	paused	in	 the	doorway	of	 the	makeshift	 guest	room	to	 which	 she
and	John	 had	been	assigned.	 After	 the	 windy	 ramparts,	 the	 place	smelled
close	and	stuffy,	 as	 the	Market	 Hall	  had	last	 night.	 The	mingled	 scents	of
dusty	paper	and	leather	bindings	of	 the	books	stored	there	compounded	with
the	moldery	 odors	of	 straw	ticks	 that	 had	gone	too	long	 without	 having	 the
straw	changed;	after	the	 grass-and-water	scents	of	the	east	wind,	 they	 made
the	closeness	worse.	The	lumpish	shapes	of	piles	of	 books	heaped	along	two
walls	 and	the	 ghostly	 scaffolding	 of	 scroll	 racks	 lining	 the	 third	 made	her
think	 of	John’s	 overcrowded	study	 in	the	 north;	several	 of	the	 volumes	that
had	been	put	here	to	make	 room	for	 refugees	trapped	by	 the	siege	had	been
taken	from	their	places	and	already	bore	signs	of	John’s	reading.	John	himself
stood	between	the	tall	lights	 of	two	 of	the	pointed	 windows,	visible	 only	 as	a
white	fold	 of	shirt	sleeve	and	a	flash	of	round	glass	in	the	gloom.
       She	said,	“You	shouldn’t	 be	out	of	bed.”
       “I	  can’t	 be	on	 the	broad	of	 my	 back	 forever.”	 Through	 his	fatigue,	 he
sounded	cheerful.	“I	 have	the	feeling	 we’re	 all	 going	to	 be	put	to	 it	again	in
the	near	future,	and	I’d	rather	do	it	on	my	feet	this	 time.”
       He	  was	silent	  for	 a	 moment,	 watching	 her	 silhouette	 in	 the	 slightly
lighter	doorway.
       He	 went	on,	“And	 for	a	woman	who	 hasn’t	slept	more	than	an	hour	or	so
for	three	nights	now,	you’ve	no	room	 to	speak.	What	is	it,	Jen?”
       Like	 a	dragon,	she	thought,	he	has	a	way	of	not	being	 lied	to.	So	she	did
not	 say,	“What	  is	 what?”	 but	 ran	 her	 hands	tiredly	  through	 her	 hair	 and
crossed	to	where	he	stood.

262
       “You’ve	  avoided	speaking	to	me	of	it—not	 that	we’ve	 had	time	to	do	so,
mind.	I	 don’t	feel	 you’re	 angry	with	 me,	but	I	 do	feel	your	 silence.	It’s	 to	do
with	your	power,	isn’t	 it?”
       His	  arm	was	 around	 her	 shoulder,	her	 head	resting	 against	 the	rock-
hardness	of	his	pectoral,	half-uncovered	 by	the	 thin	muslin	 shirt.	 She	should
have	known,	she	told	herself,	that	John	would	guess.
       So	 she	nodded,	unable	to	voice	 the	turmoil	 that	had	been	all	 day	in	 her
mind,	since	the	dragon’s	flight	  and	all	the	 night	before.	Since	sunset	she	had
been	walking	 the	ramparts,	as	if	 it	 were	possible	 to	outwalk	 the	 choice	that
had	stalked	her	now	for	ten	years.
       Morkeleb	 had	offered	 her	the	realms	of	the	dragons,	the	woven	 roads	of
the	air.	All	 the	powers	of	earth	and	sky,	she	thought,	and	all	the	years	of	time.
The	key	 to	 magic	 is	 magic;	 the	 offer	 was	 the	 answer	to	 all	 the	 thwarted
longings	of	her	life.
       “Jen,”	 John	said	softly,	“I’ve	  never	wanted	you	to	be	torn.	I	know	you’ve
never	been	complete	and	I	didn’t	want	to	do	that	to	you.	I	 tried	not	to.”
       “It	  wasn’t	you.”	 She	had	told	herself,	a	hundred	years	ago	it	seemed,	that
it	was	her	choice,	and	so	it	had	been—	the	choice	of	doing	nothing	and	letting
things	go	on	 as	they	were,	or	of	 doing	 something.	And,	 as	always,	her	mind
shrank	from	the	choice.
       “Your	  magic	has	changed,”	he	said.	 “I’ve	 felt	 it	 and	I’ve	 seen	what	it’s
doing	to	you.”
       “It	 is	 calling	me,”	 she	replied.	“If	 I	embrace	it,	I	don’t	 think	I	 would	want
to	let	go,	even	if	I	could.	 It	is	everything	 that	I	have	wanted	and	worth	to	me,	I
think,	everything	 that	I	have.”
       She	 had	said	something	 similar	 to	 him	 long	 ago,	when	 they	 had	both
been	very	young.	In	 his	jealous	possessiveness,	he	had	screamed	at	her,	“But
you	are	everything	that	I	 have	or	want	to	have!”	 Now	his	arms	only	 tightened
around	her,	as	 much,	she	 sensed,	against	her	grief	 as	his	 own,	 though	 she
knew	the	words	he	had	spoken	then	were	no	less	true	tonight.
       “It’s	   your	 choice,	 love,”	  he	said.	 “As	  it’s	  always	 been	your	 choice.
Everything	 you’ve	 given	 me,	you’ve	  given	freely.	 I	 won’t	  hold	you	 back.”

263
Her	cheek	was	pressed	to	his	chest,	so	that	she	only	felt	the	quick	 glint	of	 his
smile	as	he	added,	“As	if	I	ever	could,	anyway.”
       They	  went	 to	  the	 straw	 mattress	 and	 huddle	 of	  blankets,	 the	 only
accommodation	 the	besieged	 Citadel	 had	 been	able	 to	 offer.	  Beyond	 the
windows,	 moisture	glinted	 on	 the	black	 slates	of	 the	crowded	 stone	houses
below;	a	gutter’s	thread	was	like	a	string	 of	diamonds	in	the	moonlight.	 In	the
siege	camps,	bells	were	ringing	 for	 the	midnight	 rites	 of	Sarmendes,	lord	 of
the	wiser	thoughts	of	day.
       Under	 the	warmth	 of	the	 covers,	John’s	body	was	familiar	  against	hers,
as	familiar	as	the	old	temptation	to	let	the	chances	of	pure	power	go	by	for	yet
another	day.	Jenny	was	aware,	as	she	had	always	been,	that	it	was	less	easy	to
think	about	her	choices	when	she	lay	in	his	arms.	But	she	was	still	 there	when
sleep	finally	took	 her,	and	she	drifted	into	ambiguous	and	unresolved	dreams.

264
                                CHAPTER	                    XVI


WHEN	JENNY	WAKENED,	John	was	gone.
       Like	 a	dragon,	in	her	dreams	she	was	aware	of	many	things;	she	had
sensed	him	waking	and	lying	for	a	long	while	propped	on	one	elbow	beside
her,	watching	her	as	she	slept;	she	had	been	aware,	too,	of	him	rising	and
dressing,	and	of	the	slow	painfulness	of	donning	his	shirt,	breeches,	and	boots
and	of	how	the	bandages	pulled	painfully	over	the	half-healed	mess	of	slashes
and	abrasions	on	his	back	and	sides.	He	had	taken	her	halberd	for	support,
kissed	her	gently,	and	gone.
       Still	weary,	she	lay	in	the	tangle	of	blankets	and	straw-ticks,	wondering
where	he	had	gone,	and	why	she	felt	afraid.
       Dread	seemed	to	hang	in	the	air	with	the	stormclouds	that	reared	dark
anvil	heads	above	the	green	distances	north	of	Nast	Wall.	There	was	a	queer
lividness	to	the	light	that	streamed	through	the	narrow	windows,	a	breathless
sense	of	coming	evil,	a	sense	that	had	pervaded	her	dreams...
       Her	dreams,	she	thought	confusedly.	What	had	she	dreamed?
       She	seemed	to	remember	Gareth	and	the	Master	Polycarp	walking	on	the
high	battlements	of	the	Citadel,	both	in	the	billowing	black	robes	of	students,
talking	with	the	old	ease	of	their	interrupted	friendship.	“You	must	admit	it
was	a	singularly	convincing	calumny,”	Polycarp	was	saying.
       Gareth	replied	bitterly,	“I	didn’t	have	to	believe	it	as	readily	as	I	did.”
       Polycarp	grinned	and	drew	from	some	pocket	in	his	too-ample	garments
a	brass	spyglass,	unfolding	its	 jointed	 sections	to	scan	the	 fevered	sky.
“You’re	going	to	be	Pontifex	Maximus	one	day,	Cousin—you	need	practice	in
believing	ridiculous	things,”	And	looking	out	toward	the	road	that	led	south
he	had	stared,	as	if	he	could	not	believe	what	he	saw.
       Jenny	frowned,	remembering	the	cloudy	tangles	of	the	dream.
       The	King,	she	thought—it	had	been	the	King,	riding	up	the	road	toward
the	siege	camps	that	surrounded	the	Citadel.	But	there	had	been	something

265
wrong	 with	 that	 tall,	  stiff	 form	  and	 its	 masklike	 face,	 riding	 through	 the
sulfurous	storm	light.	 An	 effect	of	the	dream?	she	wondered.	Or	had	the	eyes
really	been	yellow—Zyerne’s	 eyes?
       Troubled,	 she	sat	up	and	pulled	on	her	shift.	There	was	a	wash	bowl	 in	a
comer	of	the	room	near	the	window,	the	surface	of	the	water	reflecting	the	sky
like	a	 piece	of	smoked	steel.	Her	 hand	brushed	across	it;	 at	her	bidding,	 she
saw	Morkeleb,	  lying	 in	 the	 small	 upper	 courtyard	 of	 the	 Citadel,	 a	small
square	of	stone	which	 contained	 nothing	save	a	 few	 withered	apple	 trees,	a
wooden	lean-to	that	had	once	held	 gardening	equipment	and	now,	 like	every
other	shelter	in	the	Citadel,	housed	displaced	books.	The	dragon	lay	stretched
out	like	 a	cat	in	the	pallid	 sunlight,	 the	jeweled	bobs	of	 his	antennae	flicking
here	and	there	 as	if	 scenting	 the	welter	 of	 the	 air,	 and	beside	him,	 on	 the
court’s	single	granite	bench,	sat	John.
       The	 dragon	was	saying,	Why	this	curiosity,	Dragonsbane?	 That	you	may
know	us	better,	the	next	time	you	choose	to	kill	one	of	us?
       “No,”	   John	 said.	 “Only	  that	 I	  may	 know	 dragons	 better.	 I’m	  more
circumscribed	than	you,	Morkeleb—by	  a	body	that	wears	out	and	dies	before
the	mind	 has	seen	half	what	it	 wants	to,	 by	a	 mind	that	 spends	half	its	 time
doing	what	it	 would	really	 rather	not,	for	 the	sake	of	the	people	who’re	in	 my
care.	I’m	as	greedy	about	knowledge	as	Jenny	is—as	you	are	for	gold,	maybe
more	so—for	I	know	 I	have	to	snatch	it	where	I	can.”
       The	 dragon	sniffed	in	 disdain,	the	velvet-rimmed	 nostril	 flaring	 to	 show
a	surface	ripple	of	 deeper	currents	of	thought;	 then	he	turned	his	 head	away.
Jenny	knew	she	ought	to	feel	 surprise	at	being	able	to	call	 Morkeleb’s	 image
in	the	water	bowl,	 but	did	not;	though	 she	could	not	have	phrased	it	in	words,
but	only	in	 the	half-pictured	 understandings	of	dragon-speech,	she	knew	why
it	had	 formerly	 been	impossible,	 but	 was	possible	 to	her	 now.	Almost,	  she
thought,	she	could	 have	summoned	his	 image	and	surroundings	 without	 the
water.
       For	 a	 time	 they	were	 silent,	 man	and	dragon,	 and	the	 shadows	of	 the
black-bellied	thunderheads	moved	across	them,	gathering	above	the	Citadel’s
heights.	Morkeleb	 did	not	 look	 the	same	in	the	water	 as	he	did	face	 to	face,

266
but	 it	 was	 a	difference,	 again,	 that	 could	 not	 be	 expressed	by	 any	 but	 a
dragon.	A	stray	wind	 shook	the	boughs	of	the	cronelike	 trees,	and	a	few	spits
of	rain	 speckled	the	pavement	of	 the	long	 court	 below	them.	 At	 its	far	 end,
Jenny	could	 see	the	small	 and	inconspicuous—and	 easily	 defensible—door
that	led	 into	 the	 antechambers	of	the	 Deep.	It	 was	 not	 wide,	 for	 the	trade
between	the	Citadel	 and	the	 Deep	had	 never	been	in	 anything	 bulkier	 than
books	and	gold,	 and	 for	 the	most	 part	 their	 traffic	 had	 been	in	 knowledge
alone.
       Why?	 Morkeleb	asked	at	length.	If,	 as	you	say,	yours	is	 a	life	 limited	 by
the	constraints	 of	 the	 body	and	 the	 narrow	 perimeters	 of	 time,	 if	 you	are
greedy	for	knowledge	as	we	are	for	gold,	why	do	you	give	what	you	have,	half
of	all	that	you	own,	to	others?
       The	 question	 had	risen	like	 a	 whale	 from	 unguessed	depths,	and	John
was	silent	for	a	moment	before	answering.	“Because	it’s	 part	of	being	human,
Morkeleb.	Having	 so	little,	 we	share	among	ourselves	to	make	any	of	it	worth
having.	We	do	what	we	do	 because	the	consequences	of	not	caring	enough	to
do	it	would	be	worse.”
       His	  answer	must	 have	 touched	some	 chord	 in	 the	 dragon’s	 soul,	for
Jenny	felt,	 even	through	 the	distant	 vision,	 the	radiant	 surge	of	 Morkeleb’s
annoyance.	But	the	 dragon’s	 thoughts	sounded	down	 to	 their	 depths	again,
and	he	became	still,	almost	invisible	 against	the	colors	 of	the	stone.	Only	 his
antennae	continued	to	move,	restless,	as	if	troubled	by	the	turmoil	in	the	air.
       A	 thunderstorm?	Jenny	thought,	suddenly	troubled.	In	winter?
       “Jenny?”	 She	looked	up	quickly	 and	saw	the	Master	Polycarp	standing	in
the	tall	slit	 of	the	 doorway.	She	did	not	know	 why	 at	first,	 but	she	shuddered
when	she	saw	hanging	at	his	belt	the	brass	spyglass	he	had	used	in	her	dream.
“I	didn’t	 want	to	wake	you—I	 know	 you’ve	been	without	 sleep...”
       “What	 is	it?”	 she	asked,	hearing	the	trouble	in	his	voice.
       “It’s	  the	King.”
       Her	  stomach	jolted,	  as	if	  she	had	 missed	 one	 step	of	 a	 stairway	 in
darkness,	the	dread	of	her	dream	coalescing	in	her,	suddenly	hideously	real.
       “He	  said	 he’d	 escaped	from	 Zyerne—he	 wanted	 sanctuary	 here,	and

267
wanted	above	all	to	talk	to	Gar.	They	went	off	 together...”
       “No!”	  Jenny	cried,	horrified,	  and	the	young	philosopher	looked	at	her	 in
surprise.	She	snatched	up	and	flung	on	 the	black	robe	 she	had	been	wearing
earlier,	dragging	its	belt	tight.	“It’s	  a	trick!”
       “What...?”
       She	 pushed	her	way	 past	 him,	 shoving	up	 the	 robe’s	too-long	 sleeves
over	her	forearms;	 cold	air	 and	the	 smell	of	 thunder	smote	her	 as	she	came
into	the	open	and	began	to	 run	down	 the	long,	narrow	 stairs.	She	could	hear
Morkeleb	calling	 to	 her,	faint	and	confused	with	 distance;	he	was	waiting	 for
her	in	 the	upper	 court,	his	 half-risen	 scales	glittering	 uneasily	 in	 the	sickly
storm	light.
       Zyerne,	she	said.
       Yes.	I	saw	 her	just	 now,	walking	 with	your	 little	 prince	 to	 the	door	that
leads	down	into	 the	 Deep.	She	was	 in	the	 guise	of	 the	old	 King—they	 had
already	passed	through	the	door	 when	I	 spoke	of	it	 to	Aversin.	 Is	it	 possible
that	the	prince	did	not	know	it,	 as	Aversin	said	to	me?	I	know	that	humans	can
fool	one	another	 with	 the	illusions	 of	 their	 magic,	but	 are	even	his	own	 son
and	his	nephew	whom	 he	raised	 so	stupid	that	 they	could	 not	have	 told	the
difference	between	what	they	saw	and	what	they	knew?
       As	  always,	 his	 words	 came	as	 pictures	 in	 her	 mind—	 the	 old	 King
leaning,	 whispering,	 on	 Gareth’s	 shoulder	for	  support	 as	they	 walked	 the
length	of	 the	 narrow	 court	 toward	 the	 door	 to	the	 Deep,	 the	look	 of	 pity,
involuntary	 repulsion,	and	wretched	guilt	 on	the	boy’s	face—feeling	 repelled,
and	not	knowing	why.
       Jenny’s	heart	began	to	pound.	They	know	the	King	 has	been	ill,	she	said.
No	doubt	she	counted	upon	their	forgiveness	of	any	lapses.	She	will	 go	to	the
Stone,	to	draw	power	from	it,	and	 use	Gareth’s	life	to	replace	it.	Where’s	John
now?	He	has	to...
       He	 has	gone	after	them.
       WHAT?	 Like	  a	dragon,	 the	word	 emerged	 only	 as	a	blazing	 surge	 of
incredulous	wrath.	He’ll	 kill	 himself!
       He	 will	 likely	 be	forestalled,	 Morkeleb	 replied	 cynically.	 But	 Jenny	did

268
not	stay	to	listen.	She	was	already	running	down	the	steep	twist	of	steps	to	the
lower	court.	The	 cobbles	of	the	pavement	there	were	uneven	and	badly	worn,
with	tiny	 spangles	of	vagrant	 rain	glittering	 among	them	 like	 silver	beads	on
some	complex	trapunto;	the	harshness	of	the	stone	tore	at	 her	feet	as	she	ran
toward	that	small,	unprepossessing	door.
       She	flung	 back	to	the	dragon	the	words,	Wait	for	 her	here.	If	she	reaches
the	Stone,	she	will	 have	all	 power	 at	her	 command—I	will	  never	be	able	to
defeat	her,	as	I	did	before.	You	must	take	her	when	she	emerges...
       It	  is	the	 Stone	that	 binds	 me,	the	 dragon’s	 bitter	 voice	 replied	 in	 her
mind.	If	 she	reaches	it,	what	 makes	you	think	 I	shall	 be	able	 to	do	anything
but	her	will?
       Without	 answering	 Jenny	flung	 open	the	door	and	plunged	through	 into
the	shadowy	antechambers	of	the	earth.
       She	had	seen	them	the	previous	 morning,	 when	she	had	passed	through
with	the	gnomes	who	had	gone	to	fetch	John,	Gareth,	and	Trey	from	the	other
side	of	the	Deep.	There	 were	several	rooms	used	for	 trade	and	business,	and
then	a	guardroom,	whose	walls	 were	carved	 to	three-quarters	of	 their	height
from	the	living	  bone	of	the	mountain.	The	 windows,	far	 up	under	the	vaulted
ceilings,	 let	in	 a	 shadowy	blue	 light	 by	 which	 she	could	 just	 see	the	 wide
doors	of	  the	 Deep	 itself,	  faced	 and	backed	 with	  bronze	 and	 fitted	  with
massive	bars	and	bolts	of	iron.
       These	gates	were	still	 locked,	but	 the	man-sized	postern	door	stood	ajar.
Beyond	 it	 lay	 darkness	and	 the	cold	 scent	 of	 rock,	 water,	 and	old	 decay.
Gathering	up	her	robes,	Jenny	stepped	over	the	thick	 sill	 and	hurried	 on,	her
senses	probing	ahead	of	her,	 dragonlike,	 her	eyes	seeking	the	 silvery	 runes
she	had	written	on	the	walls	yesterday	to	mark	her	path.
       The	 first	 passage	was	wide	and	had	once	been	pleasant,	with	basins	and
fountains	 lining	 its	  walls.	 Now	 some	 were	 broken,	 others	 clogged	in	  the
months	of	 utter	neglect;	 moss	clotted	 them	and	water	 ran	shining	 down	 the
walls	 and	along	 the	stone	 underfoot,	 wetting	 the	hem	 of	 Jenny’s	robe	 and
slapping	coldly	 at	 her	ankles.	 As	she	 walked,	her	 mind	 tested	the	darkness
before	her;	retracing	 yesterday’s	route,	she	paused	again	and	again	to	 listen.

269
The	way	 through	 the	Deep	ran	 near	the	Places	of	 Healing,	 but	 not	through
them;	somewhere,	she	would	have	to	turn	aside	and	seek	the	unmarked	ways.
       So	 she	felt	at	the	air,	 seeking	the	living	 tingle	 of	 magic	that	marked	 the
heart	of	the	Deep.	It	 should	lie	lower	 than	her	own	 route,	she	thought,	and	to
her	left.	Her	 mind	returned	uncomfortably	 to	Miss	 Mab’s	words	 about	a	false
step	leaving	  her	to	  die	 of	 starvation	 in	  the	labyrinthine	  darkness.	 If	 she
became	lost,	she	told	 herself,	 Morkeleb	 could	 still	  hear	her,	and	 guide	 her
forth...
       But	  not,	 she	 realized,	 if	  Zyerne	 reached	the	 Stone.	 The	 power	 and
longing	 of	the	 Stone	were	lodged	 in	the	 dragon’s	mind.	 If	 she	got	lost,	 and
Zyerne	reached	the	Stone	and	gained	control	of	Morkeleb,	 there	would	 be	no
daylight	for	 her	again.
       She	 hurried	 her	 steps,	passing	the	 doors	that	 had	 been	raised	for	  the
defense	of	the	Citadel	from	the	Deep,	all	unlocked	now	 by	Gareth	and	the	one
he	supposed	to	be	the	King.	  By	the	 last	of	 them,	she	glimpsed	 the	sacks	of
blasting	powder	that	Balgub	had	spoken	of,	that	final	 defense	in	which	he	had
placed	such	faith.	Beyond	was	a	branching	of	the	ways,	and	she	stopped	again
under	an	arch	carved	to	look	like	 a	monstrous	mouth,	with	 stalactites	of	ivory
grimacing	in	a	wrinkled	 gum	of	 salmon-pink	stone.	Her	instincts	whispered	to
her	that	this	 was	 the	place—two	 tunnels	 diverged	from	 the	 main	one,	 both
going	downwards,	 both	to	 the	left.	 A	little	  way	down	 the	nearer	one,	beside
the	 trickle	  of	  water	 from	  a	 broken	  gutter,	 a	 wet	  footprint	  marked	 the
downward-sloping	stone.
       John’s,	she	guessed,	for	the	print	was	dragged	and	slurred.	Further	along
that	way,	she	saw	the	mark	 of	a	 drier	boot,	 narrower	and	differently	  shaped.
She	saw	the	tracks	again,	 dried	to	 barely	a	sparkle	 of	 dampness	on	the	first
steps	of	a	 narrow	 stair	which	  wound	 like	 a	path	 up	a	 hillslope	 of	 gigantic
stone	mushrooms	in	 an	echoing	cavern,	past	 the	dark	alabaster	mansions	of
the	gnomes,	 to	 a	narrow	 doorway	 in	 a	 cavern	 wall.	 She	 scribbled	 a	rune
beside	the	door	 and	followed,	  through	 a	rock	 seam	whose	walls	 she	could
touch	with	her	outstretched	hands,	downward,	into	the	bowels	of	the	earth.
       In	  the	 crushing	 weight	 of	 the	 darkness,	 she	saw	 the	 faint	 flicker	  of

270
yellow	light.
       She	 dared	 not	 call	 out,	 but	 fled	  soundlessly	 toward	 it.	 The	 air	  was
warmer	here,	unnatural	in	those	clammy	abysses;	she	felt	the	subtle	vibrations
of	  the	  living	   magic	   that	  surrounded	  the	  Stone.	  But	  there	  was	  an
unwholesomeness	in	the	air	now,	like	the	first	smell	of	 rot	in	decaying	meat	or
like	the	 livid	 greenness	that	her	dragon	eyes	had	seen	in	the	poisoned	water.
She	understood	that	Miss	Mab	 had	been	right	 and	Balgub	wrong.	 The	Stone
had	been	defiled.	 The	 spells	 that	had	 been	wrought	 with	 its	 strength	 were
slowly	deteriorating,	 perverted	by	the	poisons	drawn	from	Zyerne’s	mind.
       At	  the	end	of	 a	triangular	 room	 the	size	of	 a	dozen	barns,	she	found	 a
torch,	guttering	 itself	 out	near	the	foot	 of	 a	flight	 of	 shallow	 steps.	The	iron
door	at	 the	 top	stood	 unbolted	 and	ajar,	 and	 across	its	 threshold	John	 lay
unconscious,	scavenger-slugs	 already	 sniffing	  inquiringly	  at	 his	  face	 and
hands.
       Beyond,	 in	the	darkness,	Jenny	heard	Gareth’s	voice	cry,	“Stop!”	 and	the
sweet,	evil	whisper	of	Zyerne’s	laughter.
       “Gareth,”	  the	soft	 voice	 breathed.	“Did	  you	ever	 think	 it	 was	possible
that	you	could	stop	me?”
       Shaken	now	 with	 a	cold	that	 seemed	to	crystallize	at	the	 marrow	of	 her
bones,	Jenny	ran	forward	into	the	heart	of	the	Deep.
       Through	  the	 forest	  of	  alabaster	pillars	  she	 saw	 them,	  the	 nervous
shadows	of	Gareth’s	torch	 jerking	 over	 the	white	 stone	lace	that	surrounded
the	open	floor.	 His	 face	looked	 dead	white	 against	the	black,	 baggy	student
gown	 he	wore;	 his	 eyes	 held	 the	nightmare	  terror	 of	 every	 dream,	every
encounter	with	his	 father’s	mistress,	and	the	knowledge	of	 his	own	 terrifying
weakness.	In	his	 right	 hand	he	 held	the	 halberd	John	 had	been	using	 for	 a
crutch.	John	must	have	warned	him	that	it	 was	Zyerne,	Jenny	thought,	before
he	collapsed.	At	least	Gareth	has	a	weapon.	But	whether	he	would	be	capable
of	using	it	was	another	matter.
       The	 Stone	in	the	center	of	the	onyx	 dancing	floor	 seemed	to	glow	in	 the
vibrating	dark	 with	a	sickly	 corpse	light	 of	its	 own.	The	woman	before	it	 was
radiant,	beautiful	as	the	Death-lady	who	 is	said	to	walk	 on	the	sea	in	times	of

271
storm.	She	 looked	 younger	 than	Jenny	 had	ever	 seen	her,	 with	 the	 virgin
fragility	 of	 a	child	that	 was	both	an	armor	against	Gareth’s	desperation	and	a
weapon	to	pierce	his	flesh	if	not	 his	heart.	But	even	at	her	most	delicate,	there
was	  something	   nauseating	  about	   her,	   like	   poisoned	   marzipan—an
overwhelming,	 polluted	sensuality.	Wind	 that	Jenny	could	not	 feel	seemed	to
lift	 the	soft	 darkness	of	Zyerne’s	 hair	and	the	sleeves	of	 the	frail	 white	 shift
that	was	 all	 that	she	wore.	 Stopping	 on	 the	edge	of	 the	 flow-stone	 glades,
Jenny	realized	that	 she	was	seeing	Zyerne	 as	she	had	once	been,	when	 she
first	 had	come	 to	 this	 place—a	 mageborn	girl-child	   who	 had	run	 through
these	lightless	corridors	  seeking	power,	 as	she	herself	 had	sought	 it	 in	 the
rainy	north;	 trying,	 as	she	herself	had	tried,	 to	 overcome	the	handicap	of	 its
lack	in	whatever	way	she	could.
       Zyerne	 laughed,	her	sweet	mouth	 parting	 to	show	pearls	of	 teeth.	“It	  is
my	destiny,”	she	whispered,	her	small	hands	caressing	the	blue-black	shine	of
the	Stone.	“The	 gnomes	had	no	right	 to	 keep	it	all	 to	 themselves.	It	is	 mine
now.	It	was	meant	to	be	mine	from	the	founding	of	 the	world.	As	 you	were.”
       She	held	out	 her	hands,	and	Gareth	whispered,	“No.”	 His	voice	was	thin
and	desperate	as	the	wanting	of	her	clutched	at	his	flesh.
       “What	  is	 this	No?	 You	 were	made	 for	 me,	Gareth.	 Made	to	 be	 King.
Made	to	be	my	love.	Made	to	father	my	son.”
       Like	  a	 phantom	  in	 a	 dream,	 she	 drifted	  toward	 him	  over	 the	 oily
blackness	of	the	great	floor.	Gareth	slashed	at	her	with	the	torch,	but	 she	only
laughed	again	and	did	not	even	draw	back.	She	knew	he	hadn’t	the	courage	to
touch	her	with	 the	flame.	 He	 edged	toward	her,	the	halberd	 in	his	 hand,	but
Jenny	could	see	his	face	rolling	with	 streams	of	sweat.	His	whole	 body	shook
as	he	summoned	the	 last	of	 his	 strength	to	 cut	 at	her	when	 she	came	near
enough—fighting	  for	 the	 resolution	 to	 do	 that	 and	not	 to	 fling	  down	 the
weapon	and	crush	her	in	his	arms.
       Jenny	 strode	 forward	  from	  the	 alabaster	 glades	 in	 a	 blaze	 of	  blue
witchlight,	 and	her	 voice	cut	 the	palpitant	 air	 like	 a	knife	 tearing	cloth.	 She
cried,	“ZYERNE!”	   and	the	enchantress	spun,	her	eyes	yellow	as	a	cat-devil’s
in	the	white	 blaze	of	the	light,	 as	they	had	been	in	 the	woods.	The	spell	over

272
Gareth	snapped,	and	at	that	instant	 he	swung	the	 halberd	at	her	 with	 all	the
will	 he	had	left.
       She	 flung	  the	spell	  of	 deflection	 at	 him	  almost	 contemptuously;	 the
weapon	rang	and	clattered	on	the	stone	floor.	Swinging	 back	toward	him,	 she
raised	her	hand,	but	Jenny	stepped	forward,	her	wrath	swirling	  about	her	like
woodsmoke	and	phosphorous,	and	flung	  at	Zyerne	a	 rope	of	 white	 fire	 that
streamed	coldly	from	the	palm	of	her	hand.
       Zyerne	 hurled	it	aside,	and	it	 splattered,	sizzling,	on	the	black	pavement.
Her	yellow	 eyes	burned	with	 unholy	light.	 “You,”	  she	whispered.	“I	 told	you
I’d	get	the	Stone—and	I	 told	you	what	 I’d	 do	to	you	when	I	 did,	you	ignorant
bitch.	I’ll	 rot	 the	stinking	bones	of	your	body	for	 what	you	did!”
       A	 spell	 of	 crippling	 and	 ruin	beat	 like	 lightning	 in	 the	close	 air	of	 the
cavern,	and	Jenny	flinched	from	 it,	 feeling	 all	her	defenses	buckle	and	twist.
The	power	Zyerne	 wielded	was	 like	a	 weight,	the	 vast	shadow	she	had	only
sensed	before	turned	now	 to	the	 weight	 of	the	 earth	where	it	 smote	against
her.	Jenny	threw	it	 aside	and	writhed	from	 beneath	it;	 but	for	 a	moment,	she
hadn’t	 the	 strength	 to	 do	 more.	 A	  second	spell	  struck	 her,	 and	 a	 third,
cramping	and	biting	  at	the	muscles	and	 organs	of	 her	body,	smoking	 at	the
hem	of	her	gown.	She	felt	something	 break	within	 her	and	tasted	blood	in	her
mouth;	her	 head	throbbed,	her	 brain	seemed	to	blaze,	 all	 the	oxygen	 in	the
world	was	insufficient	  to	her	lungs.	Under	the	ruthless	battering	 she	could	do
no	more	than	defend	herself;	no	counterspell	 would	come,	no	 way	to	make	it
stop.	And	through	 it	all,	 she	felt	the	weaving	 of	the	death-spells,	swollen	and
hideous	 perversions	 of	  what	  she	  herself	 had	  woven,	  returning	  like	  a
vengeance	to	crush	her	beneath	them.	She	felt	Zyerne’s	mind,	powered	by	the
force	 of	 the	Stone,	 driving	  like	 a	 black	 needle	of	 pain	 into	  hers;	felt	 the
grappling	of	a	poisoned	and	vicious	essence	seeking	her	consent.
       And	 why	not?	she	thought.	Like	 the	black	 slime	of	 bursting	pustules,	all
her	self-hatreds	flowed	 into	 the	 light.	 She	had	murdered	 those	weaker	than
herself;	she	had	hated	her	master;	she	had	used	a	man	who	loved	her	 for	her
own	pleasure	and	had	abandoned	the	sons	of	her	body;	she	had	abandoned	her
birthright	 of	power	 out	of	 sloth	and	fear.	Her	 body	screamed,	and	her	will	 to

273
resist	all	 the	mounting	 agonies	weakened	before	 the	scorching	onslaught	 of
the	mind.	 How	  could	 she	presume	 to	 fight	 the	 evil	 of	  Zyerne,	 when	 she
herself	was	evil	without	 even	the	excuse	of	Zyerne’s	grandeur?
       Anger	  struck	 her	then,	 like	 the	 icy	 rains	 of	 the	Winterlands,	  and	she
recognized	what	 was	 happening	 to	 her	as	 a	 spell.	 Like	 a	 dragon,	 Zyerne
deceived	with	the	truth,	but	it	 was	deception	all	the	same.	Looking	up	she	saw
that	perfect,	evil	 face	 bending	over	 her,	the	golden	eyes	filled	  with	 gloating
fire.	Reaching	out,	Jenny	seized	the	fragile	wrists,	the	very	bones	of	her	hands
hurting	like	  an	old	 woman’s	on	 a	winter	 night;	 but	 she	forced	her	 hands	to
close.
       Grandeur?	 her	mind	 cried,	slicing	 up	once	more	through	the	fog	 of	pain
and	enchantment.	It	is	only	 you	who	see	yourself	as	grand,	Zyerne.	Yes,	I	am
evil,	and	weak,	and	cowardly,	 but,	like	 a	dragon,	 I	know	what	 it	is	 that	I	 am.
You	are	a	creature	of	lies,	of	poisons,	of	small	and	petty	fears—it	is	that	which
will	 kill	 you.	Whether	I	 die	or	 not,	Zyerne,	it	 is	you	who	 will	 bring	 your	own
death	upon	yourself,	not	for	what	you	do,	but	for	 what	you	are.
       She	felt	 Zyerne’s	 mind	 flinch	 at	that.	 With	 a	twist	 of	 fury	 Jenny	broke
the	brutal	grip	 it	 held	upon	hers.	At	 the	same	moment	her	hands	were	struck
aside.	From	her	knees,	she	looked	up	through	the	tangle	of	her	hair,	to	see	the
enchantress’s	face	grow	livid.	Zyerne	screamed	“You!	 You...”	With	 a	piercing
obscenity,	the	sorceress’s	whole	body	was	wrapped	in	the	rags	of	heat	and	fire
and	power.	Jenny,	realizing	the	danger	was	now	to	her	body	rather	than	to	her
mind,	threw	herself	to	the	floor	 and	rolled	 out	of	the	way.	In	the	swirling	 haze
of	heat	and	 power	stood	 a	creature	she	had	never	 seen	before,	hideous	and
deformed,	as	 if	 a	giant	 cave	 roach	had	 mated	with	  a	tiger.	 With	  a	hoarse
scream,	the	thing	threw	itself	upon	her.
       Jenny	 rolled	 aside	 from	 the	 rip	  of	 the	 razor-combed	feet.	 She	 heard
Gareth	cry	her	name,	not	in	 terror	as	he	would	 once	have	done,	and	from	the
corner	of	her	eye	she	saw	him	slide	the	halberd	 across	the	glass-slick	floor	to
her	waiting	hand.	She	caught	the	weapon	just	in	time	to	parry	a	second	attack.
The	metal	of	 the	blade	shrieked	on	the	tearing	 mandibles	as	the	huge	weight
of	the	thing	bore	her	back	against	the	blue-black	Stone.	Then	the	thing	turned,

274
doubling	on	its	tracks	as	Zyerne	had	done	that	evening	in	the	glade,	and	in	her
mind	Jenny	seemed	to	 hear	Zyerne’s	distant	 voice	howling,	  “I’ll	  show	 you!
I’ll	 show	you	all!”
       It	 scuttled	 into	 the	forest	 of	alabaster,	making	 for	 the	dark	 tunnels	that
led	to	the	surface.
       Jenny	started	to	get	 to	her	feet	to	follow	  and	collapsed	at	the	foot	 of	the
Stone.	Her	body	hurt	her	in	every	limb	 and	muscle;	her	mind	felt	 pulped	from
the	ripping	cruelty	 of	 Zyerne’s	spells,	bleeding	still	 from	 her	own	 acceptance
of	what	she	was.	Her	hand,	which	she	could	see	lying	over	the	halberd’s	shaft,
seemed	no	longer	part	 of	her,	 though,	rather	to	 her	surprise,	 she	saw	it	 was
still	 on	the	end	of	 her	arm	and	attached	to	her	 body;	the	brown	 fingers	 were
covered	with	 blisters,	 from	 some	 attack	she	 had	not	 even	felt	 at	 the	 time.
Gareth	was	bending	over	her,	holding	the	guttering	torch.
       “Jenny—Jenny,	  wake	 up—Jenny	 please!	 Don’t	 make	 me	 go	 after	 it
alone!”
       “No,”	  she	managed	to	whisper	and	swallowed	 blood.	Some	instinct	 told
her	the	lesion	within	 her	had	healed,	but	she	felt	sick	and	drained.	She	tried	to
rise	again	and	collapsed,	 vomiting;	 she	felt	 the	boy’s	 hands	hold	 her	steady
even	 though	 they	  shook	 with	   fear.	 Afterward,	   empty	 and	  chilled,	  she
wondered	if	she	would	faint	 and	told	herself	not	to	be	silly.
       “She’s	 going	 to	 get	Morkeleb,”	  she	whispered,	and	propped	 herself	up
again,	her	black	hair	hanging	down	in	 her	face.	“The	power	of	 the	Stone	rules
him.	She	will	 be	able	to	hold	his	mind,	as	she	could	not	hold	mine.”
       She	managed	to	get	to	her	feet,	Gareth	helping	her	as	gently	as	he	could,
and	picked	 up	the	 halberd.	“I	 have	 to	stop	 her	before	 she	gets	clear	of	 the
caverns.	I	defeated	her	mind—while	 the	tunnels	 limit	 her	size,	I	 may	be	able
to	defeat	her	body.	Stay	here	and	help	John.”
       “But...”	  Gareth	 began.	She	shrugged	free	of	 his	 hold	and	made	 for	the
dark	doorway	at	a	stumbling	run.
       Beyond	 it,	 spells	of	 loss	and	confusion	 tangled	the	darkness.	The	runes
that	she	had	traced	as	she’d	followed	John	were	gone,	and	for	a	few	moments
the	subtle	obscurity	of	Zyerne’s	magic	smothered	her	mind	and	made	all	those

275
shrouded	ways	look	the	same.	Panic	knotted	around	her	throat	as	she	thought
of	wandering	 forever	in	 the	darkness;	then	the	part	of	 her	that	had	found	 her
way	through	the	 woods	of	the	Winterlands	 said,	Think.	 Think	and	listen.	 She
released	magic	 from	  her	 mind	  and	 looked	  about	 her	 in	 the	  dark;	 with
instinctive	 woodcraftiness,	 she	had	 taken	back-bearings	 of	 her	route	 while
making	her	rune-markings,	seeing	what	the	landmarks	looked	like	 coming	the
other	way.	 She	 spread	her	 senses	through	 the	 phantasmagoric	 domain	 of
fluted	 stone,	 listening	  for	  the	 echoes	that	  crossed	and	 recrossed	 in	  the
blackness.	She	heard	the	muted	murmur	 of	 John’s	voice	 speaking	to	Gareth
about	doors	the	gnomes	had	meant	 to	bar	and	 the	clawed	scrape	of	 unclean
chitin	somewhere	up	ahead.	She	deepened	her	awareness	and	heard	the	skitter
of	 the	vermin	  of	 the	 caves	as	they	 fled,	 shocked,	 from	 a	 greater	vermin.
Swiftly,	 she	set	off	in	pursuit.
       She	 had	told	 Morkeleb	 to	stand	 guard	over	the	 outer	door.	 She	prayed
now	that	he	had	had	the	sense	not	to,	but	it	 scarcely	mattered	whether	he	did
or	not.	 The	power	 of	 the	Stone	 was	in	 Zyerne—from	 it	 she	had	 drawn	the
deepest	reserves	of	its	strength,	knowing	 that,	 when	the	time	 came	to	pay	 it
back,	she	would	have	lives	 aplenty	at	her	disposal	to	 do	it.	 The	power	of	 the
Stone	was	lodged	in	Morkeleb’s	mind,	 tighter	now	 that	his	mind	and	hers	had
touched.	With	 the	dragon	her	slave,	the	Citadel	 would	 fall,	 and	the	Stone	be
Zyerne’s	forever.
       Jenny	 quickened	once	more	to	 a	jog	 that	felt	 ready	to	 break	her	bones.
Her	bare	feet	splashed	in	the	 trickling	 water,	making	 a	faint,	 sticky	 pattering
among	the	looming	 shapes	of	 the	limestone	 darkness;	her	hands	felt	 frozen
around	the	halberd	 shaft.	How	 long	 a	 start	Zyerne	 had	she	didn’t	 know,	 or
how	fast	the	 abomination	she	had	become	could	 travel.	Zyerne	 had	no	more
power	over	her,	but	she	feared	to	 meet	her	now	and	pit	 her	body	against	that
body.	A	part	of	her	mind	thought	wryly:	  John	should	have	been	doing	this,	not
she—it	was	his	end	of	 the	bargain	to	deal	with	 monsters.	She	smiled	bitterly.
Mab	had	been	right;	there	were	other	evils	besides	dragons	in	the	land.
       She	 passed	a	hillslope	 of	  stone	mushrooms,	an	 archway	 of	 teeth	like
grotesque	daggers.	Her	heart	 pounded	and	her	 chilled	 body	 ached	with	 the

276
ruin	 Zyerne	 had	wrought	  on	her.	 She	ran,	 passing	the	 locks	 and	 bars	the
gnomes	had	set	such	faith	in,	knowing	already	that	she	would	be	too	late.
       In	  the	 blue	 dimness	 of	 the	 vaults	 below	 the	 Citadel,	  she	found	 the
furniture	 toppled	and	scattered,	and	she	forced	 herself	desperately	to	greater
speed.	Through	a	doorway,	she	glimpsed	 a	reflection	 of	the	fevered	 daylight
outside;	 the	stench	 of	 blood	  struck	 her	 nostrils	 even	 as	she	 tripped	 and,
looking	down,	 saw	the	decapitated	body	of	 a	gnome	lying	 in	a	pool	 of	warm
blood	at	 her	feet.	The	 last	room	 of	the	 Citadel	 vaults	was	a	 slaughterhouse,
men	and	gnomes	lying	in	it	 and	in	the	doorway	to	the	outside,	their	 makeshift
black	livery	  sodden	with	 blood,	 the	close	air	 of	 the	room	 stinking	 with	  the
gore	that	splattered	the	walls	and	even	the	ceiling.	From	beyond	the	doorway,
shouting	and	the	stench	of	 burning	 came	to	her;	 and,	stumbling	 through	 the
carnage,	Jenny	cried	out	Morkeleb!	 She	hurled	 the	music	 of	his	 name	like	 a
rope	into	the	sightless	void.	His	 mind	touched	hers,	and	the	hideous	weight	of
the	Stone	pressed	upon	them	both.
       Light	  glared	in	her	 eyes.	She	scrambled	over	the	bodies	in	the	doorway
and	stood,	blinking	  for	 an	instant	 in	 the	lower	 court,	 seeing	all	 around	 the
door	the	paving	 stones	charred	with	a	crisped	muck	 of	blood.	 Before	her	 the
creature	crouched,	 larger	and	 infinitely	   more	hideous	 in	 the	 befouled	 and
stormy	 daylight,	  metamorphosed	 into	  something	 like	  a	 winged	  ant,	 but
without	  an	ant’s	  compact	 grace.	 Squid,	 serpent,	 scorpion,	 wasp—it	  was
everything	 hideous,	but	 no	one	 thing	 in	itself.	  The	screaming	 laughter	that
filled	 her	mind	 was	Zyerne’s	 laughter.	It	 was	Zyerne’s	 voice	that	 she	heard,
calling	 to	Morkeleb	  as	she	had	called	 to	 Gareth,	the	 power	 of	 the	Stone	a
tightening	noose	upon	his	mind.
       The	 dragon	crouched	immobile	 against	the	far	 rampart	of	the	 court.	His
every	spike	and	scale	were	raised	for	battle,	yet	to	Jenny’s	mind	came	nothing
from	 him	 but	grating	 agony.	 The	awful,	 shadowy	 weight	 of	 the	Stone	 was
tearing	at	his	 mind,	 a	power	built	 generation	 after	generation,	fermenting	 in
upon	itself	 and	 directed	 by	Zyerne	 upon	 him	 now,	 summoning	him	 to	 her
bidding,	demanding	 that	he	yield.	 Jenny	felt	 his	 mind	a	knot	 of	 iron	 against
that	imperious	command,	and	she	felt	it	when	the	knot	fissured.

277
       She	 cried	 again,	Morkeleb!	 and	 flung	 herself,	 mind	 and	 body,	toward
him.	Their	 minds	gripped	and	locked.	 Through	his	 eyes,	she	saw	the	horrible
shape	of	the	creature	and	recognized	how	 he	had	known	Zyerne	 through	her
disguise—the	patterning	of	 her	soul	was	unmistakable.	 Peripherally,	she	was
aware	that	this	 was	true	for	 every	 man	and	gnome	 who	cowered	 within	 the
doorways	and	behind	the	protection	of	each	turret;	she	saw	things	as	a	dragon
sees.	The	force	of	the	 Stone	hammered	again	at	her	mind,	 and	yet	 it	had	no
power	over	her,	no	hold	 upon	her.	Through	Morkeleb’s	 eyes,	she	saw	herself
still	 running	toward	 him—toward,	  in	a	 sense,	herself—and	saw	the	creature
turn	to	strike	at	that	small,	flying	 rag	of	black-wrapped	 bones	and	hair	that	she
knew	in	a	detached	way	for	her	own	body.
       Her	 mind	 was	within	 the	dragon’s,	 shielding	him	 from	 the	burning	 grip
of	the	 Stone.	Like	 a	 cat,	the	 dragon	struck,	 and	the	 creature	that	 had	been
Zyerne	wheeled	to	meet	the	unexpected	threat.	Half	within	her	own	 body,	half
within	 Morkeleb’s,	 Jenny	stepped	in	 under	the	sagging,	 bloated	belly	 of	 the
monster	that	loomed	so	 hugely	near	her	and	thrust	 upward	with	 her	halberd.
As	the	 blade	slashed	at	 the	stinking	 flesh,	 she	heard	Zyerne’s	 voice	 in	 her
mind,	 screaming	 at	her	 the	 back-street	 obscenities	of	  a	spoiled	  little	 slut
whom	the	gnomes	had	taken	in	on	account	of	the	promise	of	 her	power.	Then
the	creature	gathered	its	mismated	limbs	beneath	it	and	hurled	 itself	 skyward
out	of	their	way.	From	overhead,	Jenny	felt	the	hot	rumble	of	 thunder.
       Her	 counterspell	 blocked	 the	 bolt	 of	 lightning	  that	 would	 have	 come
hurling	 down	on	 the	court	 an	instant	later;	 she	used	a	dragon-spell,	 such	as
those	who	walked	 the	 roads	of	 the	air	 used	to	allow	 them	 to	 fly	 in	 storms.
Morkeleb	 was	beside	her	then,	her	mind	 shielding	 his	from	 the	 Stone	as	his
body	shielded	 hers	from	 Zyerne’s	 greater	strength.	Minds	 interlinked,	  there
was	no	need	of	words	between	them.	 Jenny	seized	the	knife-tipped	 spikes	of
his	foreleg	as	he	raised	her	to	his	back,	and	she	wedged	herself	uncomfortably
between	the	spearpoints	that	guarded	his	spine.	 More	thunder	 came,	and	the
searing	breathlessness	of	ozone.	She	flung	a	spell	to	turn	 aside	that	bolt,	and
the	lightning—channeled,	 she	saw,	through	 the	 creature	that	hovered	 in	the
livid	 air	 above	 the	 Citadel	 like	 a	 floating	 sack	 of	 pus—struck	 the	tubular

278
harpoon	gun	 on	 the	 rampart.	 It	 exploded	 in	 a	 bursting	 star	 of	 flame	 and
shattered	iron,	and	the	two	 men	who	 were	cranking	 another	catapult	 to	bear
on	the	monster	turned	and	fled.
       Jenny	 understood	then	 that	the	 storm	had	 been	summoned	by	 Zyerne,
called	by	her	powers	through	the	Stone	from	afar,	and	the	Stone’s	magic	gave
her	the	power	to	direct	 the	lightning	 when	 and	where	she	would.	It	 had	been
her	weapon	to	destroy	the	Citadel—the	Stone,	the	storm,	and	the	dragon.
       She	pulled	 off	 her	belt	 and	used	it	 to	lash	 herself	to	the	 two-foot	 spike
before	her.	It	would	 be	little	use	if	 the	dragon	turned	over	in	flight,	  but	would
keep	her	from	being	 thrown	off	 laterally,	 and	that	was	all	 she	could	hope	for
now.	She	knew	her	body	was	exhausted	and	hurt,	but	the	dragon’s	mind	lifted
her	out	of	 herself;	and	in	 any	case,	she	had	no	choice.	She	sealed	herself	off
from	the	pain	and	ripped	the	Limitations	 from	mind	 and	flesh.
       The	dragon	hurtled	 skyward	to	the	thing	waiting	 above.
       Winds	 tore	 at	them,	buffeting	 Morkeleb’s	  wings	so	 that	he	had	to	 veer
sharply	to	 miss	 being	 thrown	 into	  the	highest	 turret	 of	 the	 Citadel.	 From
above	them,	the	 creature	spat	a	 rain	 of	 acid	mucus.	 Green	and	 stinking,	 it
seared	Jenny’s	 face	 and	 hands	like	  poison	 and	 made	 smoking	 tracks	 of
corrosion	 on	the	 steel	 of	 the	dragon’s	 scales.	Furiously	  keeping	 her	mind
concentrated	against	the	searing	agony,	Jenny	cast	her	will	at	the	 clouds,	and
rain	began	to	sluice	down,	 washing	the	stuff	 away	and	half-blinding	 her	with
its	fury.	Long	 black	hair	 hung	stickily	 down	 over	her	shoulders	as	the	dragon
swung	on	the	wind,	 and	she	felt	lightning	 channeling	 again	into	the	hovering
creature	before	 them.	Seizing	 it	 with	  her	mind,	 she	 flung	 it	 back.	 It	 burst
somewhere	between	them,	the	shock	of	it	 striking	 her	bones	like	a	blow.	 She
had	forgotten	she	was	not	a	dragon,	and	that	her	flesh	was	mortal.
       Then	 the	creature	fell	 upon	them,	 its	stumpy	wings	 whirring	  like	a	 foul
bug’s.	The	weight	 of	it	 rolled	the	dragon	in	 the	air	so	that	Jenny	had	to	grasp
the	spikes	 on	either	 side	of	 her,	 below	 the	blades	 and	yet	 still	 cutting	  her
fingers.	 The	 earth	rolled	  and	swung	 below	  them,	 but	 her	eyes	 and	 mind
locked	on	the	thing	above.	Its	stink	 was	overpowering,	and	from	 the	pullulant
mass	of	its	 flesh,	a	sharklike	 head	struck,	biting	  at	the	massive	joints	 of	 the

279
dragon’s	wings,	while	 the	whirlwind	  of	 evil	 spells	sucked	and	ripped	around
them,	tearing	at	their	linked	minds.
       Ichorous	 yellow	  fluid	  burst	from	  the	creature’s	 mouth	 as	it	 bit	 at	 the
spikes	of	the	wing-joints.	  Jenny	slashed	at	the	eyes,	human	and	as	big	as	her
two	fists,	gray-gold	 as	mead—Zyerne’s	eyes.	The	halberd	blade	clove	through
the	flesh—and	from	 among	the	half-severed	 flaps	of	 the	wound,	other	 heads
burst	like	 a	knot	of	 snakes	among	spraying	gore,	tearing	 at	her	robe	and	her
flesh	with	 suckerlike	 mouths.	 Grimly,	 fighting	  a	sense	of	nightmare	 horror,
she	chopped	again,	her	blistered	 hands	clotted	and	running	 with	 slime.	 Half
her	mind	called	from	the	depths	of	the	dragon’s	soul	the	healing-spells	against
the	poisons	she	knew	were	harbored	in	those	filthy	jaws.
       When	 she	slashed	at	the	other	eye,	the	creature	broke	 away	from	 them.
The	pain	of	 Morkeleb’s	 wounds	 as	well	 as	her	own	tore	 at	her	as	he	swung
and	circled	skyward,	and	she	knew	he	felt	the	burning	of	her	ripped	flesh.	 The
Citadel	dropped	away	 below	them;	 rain	poured	 over	them	like	 water	 from	 a
pail.	Looking	 up,	 she	could	see	the	deadly	purplish	 glow	 of	 stored	lightning
rimming	 the	black	pillows	 of	 cloud	so	close	above	their	 heads.	The	battering
of	Zyerne’s	mind	 upon	theirs	lessened	as	the	sorceress	rallied	her	own	spells,
spells	of	wreckage	and	ruin	against	the	Citadel	and	its	defenders	below.
       Mists	 veiled	the	thrusting	 folds	of	 the	land	beneath	them,	the	toy	fortress
and	the	wet,	slate-and-emerald	of	the	meadows	beside	the	white	stream	of	the
river.	Morkeleb	 circled,	 Jenny’s	eyes	within	  his	seeing	all	 things	 with	 clear,
incredible	calm.	Lightning	 streaked	down	by	her	and	she	saw,	as	if	it	had	been
drawn	in	fine	 lines	before	her	eyes,	another	catapult	explode	on	the	ramparts,
and	the	 man	 who	 had	 been	winding	  it	 flung	  backward	 over	 the	 parapet,
whirling	 limply	 down	the	side	of	the	cliff.
       Then	 the	dragon	folded	his	wings	 and	dropped.	Her	mind	in	 Morkeleb’s,
Jenny	felt	no	fear,	clinging	 to	 the	spikes	while	the	wind	 tore	her	sopping	 hair
back	and	her	bloody,	rain-wet	robes	plastered	to	her	body	and	arms.	Her	mind
was	the	 mind	  of	 a	 stooping	  falcon.	 She	 saw,	with	  precise	 pleasure,	 the
sacklike,	threshing	body	that	was	their	target,	felt	the	joy	 of	impending	 impact
as	the	dragon	fisted	his	claws...

280
       The	 jar	 all	  but	 threw	 her	from	  her	 precarious	perch	 on	 the	 dragon’s
backbone.	The	 creature	twisted	 and	 sagged	in	 the	 air,	 then	writhed	  under
them,	grabbing	with	 a	dozen	mouths	 at	Morkeleb’s	 belly	 and	sides,	heedless
of	the	spikes	and	the	monstrous	slashing	of	 the	dragon’s	tail.	 Something	tore
at	Jenny’s	back;	turning,	she	hacked	the	head	off	a	serpentine	tentacle	that	had
ripped	at	her,	 but	she	felt	 the	blood	 flowing	 from	 the	 wound.	Her	 efforts	 to
close	it	 were	fogged	and	 slow.	They	 seemed	to	have	fallen	 into	 a	vortex	 of
spells,	and	the	 weight	of	 the	 Stone’s	strength	dragged	upon	 them,	trying	  to
rend	apart	the	locked	knot	of	their	minds.
       What	 was	human	magic	and	what	 dragon	she	no	longer	knew,	 only	that
they	sparkled	together,	iron	 and	gold,	in	 a	welded	weapon	that	 attacked	both
body	and	mind.	 She	could	feel	 Morkeleb’s	 growing	 exhaustion	and	her	own
dizziness	as	 the	 Citadel	  walls	 and	 the	 stone-toothed	 cliffs	  of	 Nast	  Wall
wheeled	crazily	 beneath	them.	 The	more	 they	hacked	and	 cut	at	 the	awful,
stinking	 thing,	 the	more	 mouths	 and	gripping	 tentacles	 it	 sprouted	and	the
tighter	its	clutch	 upon	them	became.	She	felt	no	more	fear	than	a	beast	might
feel	in	 combat	with	 its	own	 kind,	 but	she	did	feel	 the	growing	 weight	 of	 the
thing	as	it	 multiplied,	 getting	 larger	and	 more	powerful	 as	the	two	 entwined
bodies	thrashed	in	the	sea	of	streaming	rain.
       The	 end,	when	it	 came,	was	a	shock,	like	 the	impact	of	 a	club.	She	was
aware	of	 a	 booming	 roar	 somewhere	in	  the	earth	 beneath	them,	 dull	 and
shaking	 through	 her	 exhausted	singlemindedness;	 then,	 more	 clearly,	 she
heard	a	voice	like	 Zyerne’s	screaming,	multiplied	 a	thousandfold	 through	the
spells	that	suffocated	her	until	it	 axed	through	her	skull	 with	the	rending	 echo
of	indescribable	pain.
       Like	  the	passage	from	one	segment	of	 a	dream	 to	another,	she	felt	 the
melting	 of	  the	 spells	 that	 surrounded	 them	 and	 the	  falling-away	  of	  the
clinging,	 flaccid	 flesh	 and	muscle.	Something	 flashed	beneath	them,	 falling
through	the	rainy	air	 toward	the	wet	 roof	crests	of	the	Citadel	 below,	and	she
realized	that	the	plunging	flutter	 of	streaming	brown	hair	and	white	 gauze	was
Zyerne:
       The	 instantaneous	Get	her	and	 Morkeleb’s	 Let	her	 fall	 passed	between

281
them	like	 a	 spark.	Then	 he	was	plunging	 again,	 as	he	had	 plunged	before,
falconlike,	tracking	 the	falling	 body	with	 his	precise	crystal	eyes	and	plucking
it	from	the	air	 with	the	neatness	of	a	child	playing	jacks.
       Charcoal-gray	 with	 rain,	 the	 walls	of	 the	 Citadel	 court	rose	up	 around
them.	Men,	  women,	 and	 gnomes	were	 everywhere	 on	 the	 ramparts,	 hair
slicked	down	 with	 the	 pouring	 cloudburst	to	 which	 nobody	 was	paying	 the
slightest	attention.	White	smoke	poured	from	 the	narrow	door	that	led	into	the
Deep,	but	all	eyes	were	raised	skyward	to	that	black,	plummeting	form.
       The	 dragon	 balanced	for	 a	moment	 upon	 the	seventy-foot	 span	of	 his
wings,	then	extended	three	of	 his	delicate	legs	to	 touch	the	ground.	 With	the
fourth,	he	laid	Zyerne	on	 the	puddled	stone	pavement,	her	dark	hair	spreading
out	around	her	under	the	driving	rain.
       Sliding	  from	 the	 dragon’s	back,	 Jenny	knew	 at	 once	that	 Zyerne	 was
dead.	Her	mouth	and	eyes	were	open.	Distorted	with	 rage	and	terror,	her	face
could	 be	 seen	 to	 be	 pointy	  and	 shrewish	 with	  constant	 worry	  and	 the
cancerous	addiction	to	petty	angers.
       Trembling	  with	  weariness,	Jenny	leaned	 against	the	 dragon’s	 curving
shoulder.	Slowly,	 the	 scintillant	  helix	 of	 their	 minds	 unlinked.	 The	 rim	 of
brightness	and	color	 that	had	seemed	to	 edge	everything	 vanished	from	 her
vision.	 Living	  things	 had	 solid	  bodies	once	 more,	 instead	 of	 incorporeal
ghosts	of	flesh	through	which	shone	the	shapes	of	souls.
       A	 thousand	pains	 came	back	 to	her—of	 her	 body	 and	of	 the	stripped,
hurting	ruin	 of	 her	mind.	 She	became	aware	of	the	blood	 that	stuck	her	torn
robe	to	her	back	and	ran	down	her	legs	to	her	bare	feet—became	aware	of	all
the	darkness	in	 her	 own	 heart,	 which	 she	had	 accepted	in	 her	 battle	with
Zyerne.
       Holding	  to	the	thorned	scales	for	support,	she	looked	down	 at	the	sharp,
white	face	staring	 upward	at	 her	from	 the	rain-hammered	puddles.	A	 human
hand	steadied	her	elbow,	and	turning,	she	saw	Trey	beside	her,	her	frivolously
tinted	hair	 plastered	with	  wet	 around	her	 pale	face.	 It	 was	the	 closest,	she
realized,	that	she	had	seen	any	human	 besides	herself	come	to	 Morkeleb.	 A
moment	later	Polycarp	joined	 them,	one	arm	wrapped	 in	makeshift	 dressings

282
and	half	his	red	hair	burned	away	by	the	creature’s	first	attack	upon	the	door.
       White	 smoke	 still	 billowed	 from	 the	door	 of	 the	Deep.	Jenny	coughed,
her	lungs	hurting,	in	 the	acrid	fumes.	Everyone	in	 the	court	was	coughing—it
was	as	if	the	Deep	itself	were	in	flames.
       More	  coughing	 came	 from	  within.	  In	  the	 shadowy	 slot,	 two	  forms
materialized,	the	shorter	 leaning	upon	 the	taller.	 From	soot-blackened	faces,
two	pairs	of	spectacle	lenses	flashed	whitely	in	the	pallid	light.
       A	  moment	 later	 they	 emerged	from	  the	smoke	 and	 shadow	 into	 the
stunned	silence	of	the	watching	crowd	in	the	court.
       “Miscalculated	  the	blasting	powder,”	John	explained	apologetically.

283
                              CHAPTER	                    XVII


IT	WAS	NOT	for	several	days	after	John	and	Gareth	blew	up	the	Stone	that
Jenny	began	to	recover	from	the	battle	beneath	and	above	the	Citadel.
       She	had	cloudy	recollections	of	 them	telling	 Polycarp	how	they	 had
backtracked	to	the	room	by	the	gates	where	the	blasting	powder	had	been	left,
while	her	own	consciousness	darkened,	and	a	vague	memory	of	Morkeleb
catching	her	in	his	talons	as	she	fell	and	carrying	her,	catlike,	to	the	small
shelter	in	the	upper	court.	More	clear	was	the	remembrance	of	John’s	voice,
forbidding	the	others	to	go	after	them.	“She	needs	a	healing	we	can’t	give
her,”	she	heard	him	say	to	Gareth.	“Just	let	her	be.”
       She	wondered	how	he	had	known	that.	But	then,	John	knew	her	very
well.
       Morkeleb	healed	her	as	dragons	heal,	leading	the	body	with	the	mind.
Her	body	healed	fairly	quickly,	 the	poisons	burning	themselves	out	of	her
veins,	the	slashed,	puckered	wounds	left	by	the	creature’s	mouths	closing	to
leave	round,	vicious-looking	scabs	the	size	of	her	palm.	Like	John’s	dragon-
slaying	scars,	she	thought,	they	would	stay	with	her	for	what	remained	of	her
life.
       Her	mind	 healed	more	slowly.	 Open	wounds	left	by	 her	battle	 with
Zyerne	remained	open.	Worst	was	the	knowledge	that	she	had	abandoned	the
birthright	of	her	power,	not	through	the	fate	that	had	denied	her	the	ability	or
the	circumstances	that	had	kept	her	from	its	proper	teaching,	but	through	her
own	fear.
       They	are	yours	for	the	stretching-out	of	your	hand,	Morkeleb	had	said.
       She	knew	they	always	had	been.
       Turning	her	head	from	the	shadows	of	the	crowded	lean-to,	she	could	see
the	dragon	lying	 in	the	 heatless	sun	of	the	court,	a	black	 cobra	with	 his
tasseled	head	raised,	his	antennae	flicking	to	listen	to	the	wind.	She	felt	her
soul	streaked	and	mottled	with	the	mind	and	soul	of	the	dragon	and	her	life

284
entangled	with	the	crystal	ropes	of	his	being.
       She	asked	him	once	why	 he	had	remained	at	the	Citadel	to	heal	her.	The
Stone	is	broken—the	ties	that	bind	you	to	this	place	are	gone.
       She	felt	 the	anger	coiled	 within	 him	 stir.	I	 do	not	 know,	wizard	woman.
You	cannot	have	healed	 yourself—I	 did	not	 wish	 to	see	you	broken	 forever.
The	words	in	her	mind	 were	tinted,	not	only	 with	 anger,	but	with	the	memory
of	fear	and	with	a	kind	of	 shame.
       Why?	 she	asked.	You	have	often	said	that	 the	affairs	 of	 humankind	are
nothing	to	dragons.
       His	  scales	rattled	 faintly	  as	 they	 hackled,	 then,	 with	  a	dry	  whisper,
settled	again.	Dragons	 did	not	 lie,	 but	 she	felt	 the	mazes	of	 his	mind	 close
against	her.
       Nor	  are	  they.	But	  I	  have	 felt	 stirring	   in	 me	 things	  that	 I	  do	 not
understand,	since	you	healed	me	and	shared	with	 me	the	song	of	the	 gold	in
the	Deep.	My	 power	has	waked	power	 in	you,	 but	what	 it	is	 in	 you	that	has
waked	its	reflection	in	 me	I	do	not	know,	for	 it	is	not	 a	thing	of	dragons.	 It	let
me	feel	the	grip	 of	 the	Stone,	as	 I	flew	 north—a	 longing	 and	a	 hurt,	 which
before	was	only	my	own	will.	 Now	because	of	it,	I	do	not	want	 to	see	you	hurt
—I	do	not	want	 to	see	you	die,	as	humans	die.	I	want	you	to	come	with	 me	to
the	north,	Jenny;	to	be	one	of	the	dragons,	with	 the	power	for	which	 you	have
always	sought.	 I	want	 this,	 as	much	 as	I	 have	ever	wanted	 the	gold	 of	 the
earth.	I	do	not	know	why.	And	is	it	not	what	 you	want?
       But	 to	that,	Jenny	had	no	reply.
       Long	 before	 he	should	have	been	on	 his	feet,	 John	dragged	himself	 up
the	steps	 to	 the	 high	 court	 to	  see	her,	 sitting	 behind	 her	 on	 the	 narrow
makeshift	cot	in	 her	little	 shelter,	brushing	 her	hair	as	he	used	to	at	the	Hold
on	those	nights	when	she	would	come	there	to	be	with	him	 and	their	sons.	He
spoke	of	 commonplaces,	of	 the	 dismantling	 of	 the	siege	 troops	around	 the
Citadel	and	of	 the	return	of	 the	gnomes	to	the	Deep,	of	 Gareth’s	doings,	and
of	the	assembling	of	the	books	they	 would	take	back	to	 the	north,	demanding
nothing	of	her,	neither	speech,	decision,	nor	thought.	But	it	 seemed	to	her	that
the	touch	of	his	hands	brought	more	bitter	 pain	to	her	than	all	 Zyerne’s	spells

285
of	ruin.
       She	had	made	her	choice,	she	thought,	ten	years	ago	when	first	 they	had
met;	and	had	remade	it	every	 day	since	then.	But	 there	was,	and	always	had
been,	another	choice.	Without	turning	her	head,	she	was	aware	of	the	thoughts
that	moved	behind	the	diamond	depths	of	Morkeleb’s	watching	 eyes.
       When	 he	rose	to	 go,	 she	laid	a	 hand	on	the	 sleeve	of	 his	frayed	 black
robe.	“John,”	  she	 said	 quietly.	 “Will	   you	 do	 something	 for	  me?	 Send	a
message	to	Miss	Mab,	 asking	 her	to	 choose	out	the	 best	volumes	of	 magic
that	she	knows	of,	both	of	the	gnomes	and	of	humankind,	to	go	north	also?”
       He	 regarded	her	for	 a	moment,	where	she	lay	 on	the	rough	paillasse	on
her	narrow	 cot	 which	  for	 four	 nights	 now	 had	 been	her	 solitary	 bed,	 her
coarse	dark	hair	hanging	over	the	whiteness	of	her	shift.	“Wouldn’t	 you	 rather
look	them	out	for	 yourself,	love?	You’re	 the	one	who’s	to	be	using	them,	after
all.”
       She	 shook	her	 head.	His	 back	 was	to	 the	light	  of	 the	open	 court,	 his
features	indistinct	against	the	glare;	she	wanted	to	reach	out	her	hand	to	touch
him,	but	somehow	could	 not	bring	herself	 to	do	so.	In	a	cool	 voice	like	 silver
she	explained,	“The	 magic	of	 the	dragon	 is	in	 me,	John;	it	 is	 not	a	thing	 of
books.	The	books	are	for	Ian,	when	he	comes	into	his	power.”
       John	 said	nothing	 for	a	 moment.	She	wondered	if	 he,	 too,	had	realized
this	about	their	 older	 son.	When	 he	did	 speak,	his	voice	 was	small.	 “Won’t
you	be	there	to	teach	him?”
       She	 shook	 her	 head.	“I	  don’t	  know,	 John,”	 she	 whispered.	 “I	  don’t
know.”
       He	 made	a	 move	 to	lay	 his	 hand	on	 her	shoulder,	 and	she	said,	 “No.
Don’t	touch	me.	Don’t	 make	it	harder	for	me	than	it	 already	is.”
       He	 remained	standing	for	a	moment	longer	before	her,	looking	down	into
her	face.	Then,	obedient,	he	silently	turned	and	left	the	shed.
       She	had	come	to	no	further	conclusion	 by	the	day	of	their	departure	from
the	Citadel,	 to	take	 the	road	 back	to	 the	north.	 She	was	 conscious	of	 John
watching	 her,	when	 he	 thought	she	 wasn’t	 looking;	  conscious	of	 her	 own
gladness	that	he	never	used	the	one	weapon	that	he	must	have	known	would

286
make	her	 stay	with	  him—he	 never	 spoke	to	 her	 of	 their	 sons.	But	 in	 the
nights,	 she	 was	 conscious	 also	 of	 the	 dark	  cobra	 shape	of	  the	 dragon,
glittering	 in	the	moonlight	 of	the	high	court,	or	wheeling	 down	from	 the	black
sky	with	 the	cold	stars	of	winter	 prickling	 upon	his	spines,	as	if	 he	had	flown
through	the	heart	of	the	galaxy	and	come	back	powdered	with	its	light.
       The	morning	 of	their	 departure	was	a	clear	one,	though	bitterly	cold.	The
King	 rode	 up	  from	 Bel	  to	 see	them	 off,	  surrounded	 by	 a	 flowerbed	  of
courtiers,	who	regarded	John	with	awe	and	fear,	as	if	wondering	how	they	had
dared	to	mock	him,	 and	why	 he	had	not	slain	them	 all.	With	 him,	 also,	were
Polycarp	and	Gareth	and	Trey,	hand-fast	like	schoolchildren.	Trey	had	had	her
hair	redyed,	burgundy	 and	gold,	which	 would	 have	looked	 impressive	had	it
been	done	in	the	elaborate	styles	 of	the	 Court	instead	of	 in	 two	plaits	 like	 a
child’s	down	her	back.
       They	 had	brought	with	 them	a	long	line	 of	horses	and	mules,	laden	with
supplies	for	  the	journey	  and	 also	with	  the	 books	 for	 which	 John	 had	 so
cheerfully	 been	prepared	to	 risk	 his	 life.	 John	 knelt	 before	the	 tall,	 vague,
faded	old	man,	thanking	him	 and	swearing	fealty;	 while	Jenny,	clothed	in	 her
colorless	northlands	 plaids,	 stood	to	 one	 side,	feeling	 queerly	 distant	 from
them	all	and	watching	 how	 the	King	 kept	scanning	the	faces	of	 the	courtiers
around	him	with	 the	air	of	 one	who	seeks	someone,	but	no	longer	remembers
quite	who.
       To	  John	 the	 King	  said,	 “Not	   leaving	 already?	  Surely	 it	  was	 only
yesterday	you	presented	yourself?”
       “It	 will	  be	a	long	way	home,	my	lord.”	 John	did	not	mention	the	week	he
had	spent	waiting	 the	 King’s	 leave	to	 ride	forth	  against	the	dragon—it	 was
clear	the	old	man	recalled	little,	 if	anything,	 of	the	preceding	weeks.	“It’s	 best
I	start	before	the	snows	come	on	heavy.”
       “Ah.”	  The	King	 nodded	vaguely	and	turned	away,	leaning	on	the	arms	of
his	tall	son	and	his	nephew	Polycarp.	After	 a	pace	or	two,	he	halted,	frowning
as	something	surfaced	from	 the	murk	 of	 his	 memory,	and	turned	 to	Gareth.
“This	Dragonsbane—he	did	kill	 the	dragon,	after	all?”
       There	 was	no	way	 to	 explain	all	 that	 had	passed,	or	how	lightness	 had

287
been	restored	to	 the	kingdom,	 save	by	 the	 appropriate	channels,	so	 Gareth
said	simply,	“Yes.”
       “Good,”	  said	the	old	man,	nodding	dim	approval.	“Good.”
       Gareth	released	his	arm;	Polycarp,	 as	Master	of	the	Citadel	and	his	host,
led	the	King	 away	to	rest,	the	courtiers	 trailing	 after	like	 a	school	of	 brightly
colored,	ornamental	fish.	From	 among	them	stepped	three	small,	stout	forms,
their	silken	robes	stirring	in	 the	ice	winds	that	played	from	the	soft	new	 sky.
       Balgub,	 the	new	 Lord	 of	the	 Deep	of	 Ylferdun,	 inclined	 his	head;	 with
the	stiff	 unfamiliarity	  of	 one	who	has	seldom	 spoken	the	words,	he	 thanked
Lord	Aversin	the	Dragonsbane,	though	he	did	not	specify	for	 what.
       “Well,	  he	 hardly	 could,	 now,	 could	 he?”	 John	remarked,	 as	the	 three
gnomes	left	 the	court	 in	the	 wake	of	 the	 King’s	 party.	Only	 Miss	 Mab	 had
caught	Jenny’s	eye	and	winked	at	her.	John	went	on,	“If	he	came	out	and	said,
‘Thank	 you	for	 blowing	 up	 the	Stone,’	that	 would	 be	admitting	 that	 he	was
wrong	about	Zyerne	not	poisoning	it.”
       Gareth,	 who	  was	still	  standing	 hand-in-hand	 with	  Trey	 beside	them,
laughed.	“You	know,	I	 think	he	does	admit	it	 in	his	heart,	though	I	don’t	 think
he’ll	 ever	 completely	 forgive	 us	 for	 doing	 it.	 At	 least,	 he’s	civil	  to	 me	 in
Council—	 which	is	 fortunate,	since	I’m	 going	to	 have	to	be	dealing	with	 him
for	a	long	time.”
       “Are	 you?”	 A	flicker	 of	intense	interest	danced	in	John’s	eye.
       Gareth	 was	silent	for	 a	long	 moment,	fingering	 the	stiff	 lace	 of	his	 cuff
and	not	meeting	John’s	 gaze.	When	he	looked	 up	again,	his	 face	was	weary
and	sad.
       “I	 thought	 it	would	 be	different,”	 he	said	quietly.	“I	 thought	 once	Zyerne
was	dead,	he	would	be	all	right.	And	 he’s	better,	he	really	is.”	He	spoke	like	 a
man	trying	 to	convince	himself	 that	a	mended	statue	is	as	beautiful	 as	it	was
before	it	 broke.	“But	  he’s—he’s	so	absentminded.	Badegamus	says	he	can’t
be	trusted	to	 remember	edicts	he’s	 made	from	 one	day	to	 the	next.	 When	I
was	in	Bel,	 we	made	up	a	Council—Badegamus,	 Balgub,	 Polycarp,	Dromar,
and	I—to	sort	 out	what	we	ought	 to	do;	then	I	 tell	Father	to	do	 it—or	 remind
him	it’s	 what	he	was	going	to	 do,	and	he’ll	 pretend	he	remembers.	He	knows

288
he’s	gotten	forgetful,	though	he	doesn’t	quite	remember	why.	Sometimes	he’ll
wake	in	the	 night,	crying	 Zyerne’s	 name	or	my	mother’s.”	  The	young	man’s
voice	turned	momentarily	unsteady.	“But	 what	if	he	never	recovers?”
       “What	 if	 he	never	does?”	John	returned	softly.	“The	Realm	 will	 be	yours
in	 any	case	one	 day,	my	 hero.”	 He	 turned	 away	 and	began	tightening	  the
cinches	of	the	mules,	readying	them	 for	the	trek	 down	through	the	city	 to	the
northward	road.
       “But	  not	 now!”	  Gareth	followed	  him,	 his	 words	making	 soft	 puffs	 of
steam	in	the	morning	 cold.	“I	 mean—I	 never	have	time	for	 myself	 anymore!
It’s	 been	months	 since	 I	 worked	 on	 my	 poetry,	 or	 tried	 to	 complete	 that
southern	variant	of	the	ballad	of	Antara	Warlady...”
       “There’ll	  be	time,	by	 and	by.”	The	Dragonsbane	paused,	resting	his	hand
on	the	arched	neck	of	Battlehammer,	Gareth’s	parting	 gift	 to	him.	 “It	 will	 get
easier,	when	men	know	to	come	to	you	directly	instead	of	to	your	father.”
       Gareth	shook	his	head.	“But	 it	won’t	 be	the	same.”
       “Is	  it	 ever?”	 John	moved	 down	 the	 line,	 tightening	 cinches,	checking
straps	on	 the	 parcels	of	  books—volumes	 of	 healing,	 Anacetus’	 works	  on
greater	and	lesser	demons,	Luciard’s	Firegiver,	books	on	engineering	and	law,
by	gnomes	and	men.	Gareth	followed	  him	silently,	 digesting	 the	fact	that	 he
was	 now,	  for	   all	  intents	  and	  purposes,	  the	 Lord	   of	  Bel,	   with	  the
responsibilities	  of	  the	 kingdom—for	    which	  he	 had	  been	 academically
prepared	under	the	mental	heading	of	“some	 day”—thrust	 suddenly	upon	his
unwilling	 shoulders.	Like	John,	Jenny	thought	pityingly,	 he	would	 have	to	put
aside	the	pursuit	of	 his	love	 of	 knowledge	for	 what	 he	owed	his	 people	and
return	to	it	only	 when	he	could.	The	only	 difference	was	that	his	realm	was	at
peace	and	that	 John	 had	been	 a	year	 younger	 than	 Gareth	was	 when	 the
burden	had	fallen	to	him.
       “And	 Bond?”	 John	asked	gently,	looking	over	at	Trey.
       She	sighed	and	managed	to	smile.	“He	 still	 asks	about	Zyerne,”	she	said
softly.	“He	 really	did	 love	her,	you	know.	He	knows	 she’s	dead	and	he	tries	to
pretend	he	remembers	it	happening	the	way	I	told	 him,	about	her	falling	 off	 a
horse...	But	it’s	 odd.	He’s	 kinder	than	he	 was.	He’ll	 never	be	considerate,	of

289
course,	but	he’s	not	so	quick	or	so	clever,	and	I	think	 he	hurts	people	less.	He
dropped	a	cup	at	luncheon	yesterday—he’s	gotten	very	clumsy—and	 he	even
apologized	to	me.”	 There	was	a	slight	wryness	to	 her	smile,	perhaps	to	cover
tears.	“I	remember	when	he	would	 not	only	have	blamed	me	for	 it,	but	 gotten
me	to	blame	myself.”
       She	 and	Gareth	 had	been	following	   John	down	 the	 line,	 still	 hand	 in
hand,	the	girl’s	 rose-colored	 skirts	bright	 against	the	 pewter	grayness	of	 the
frosted	morning.	 Jenny,	standing	apart,	listened	to	 their	 voices,	but	 felt	as	if
she	saw	them	through	glass,	part	of	a	life	 from	which	 she	was	half-separated,
to	which	she	did	 not	have	to	go	back	unless	she	chose.	And	all	the	while,	 her
mind	listened	 to	the	sky,	 hearing	with	 strange	clarity	 the	voices	 of	the	 wind
around	the	Citadel	towers,	seeking	something...
       She	 caught	John’s	 eye	on	 her	 and	saw	 the	 worry	 crease	between	his
brows;	something	wrung	and	wrenched	in	her	heart.
       “Must	  you	 go?”	 Gareth	 asked	hesitantly,	 and	Jenny,	 feeling	 as	if	  her
thoughts	had	been	read,	 looked	up;	 but	 it	 was	to	 John	that	 he	had	spoken.
“Could	 you	stay	with	 me,	even	for	 a	little	 while?	 It	will	  take	nearly	a	month
for	the	troops	 to	be	ready—you	 could	have	a	 seat	on	the	Council.	 I—I	 can’t
do	this	alone.”
       John	 shook	 his	 head,	leaning	 on	 the	 mule	 Clivy’s	  withers.	 “You	  are
doing	it	alone,	my	 hero.	And	as	for	 me,	I’ve	my	 own	realm	to	 look	after.	I’ve
been	gone	long	as	it	is.”	 He	 glanced	questioningly	 at	Jenny	as	he	spoke,	but
she	looked	away.
       Wind	 surged	down	 around	them,	 crosswise	currents	swirling	 her	 plaids
and	her	hair	like	 the	stroke	of	a	giant	wing.	 She	looked	up	and	saw	the	shape
of	the	dragon	melting	down	from	 the	gray	and	cobalt	of	the	morning	sky.
       She	turned	 from	the	assembled	caravan	in	the	court	 without	 a	word	 and
ran	to	the	 narrow	stair	 that	led	 up	to	 the	walls.	 The	 dark	shape	hung	like	 a
black	kite	on	the	wind,	the	soft	 voice	a	song	in	her	mind.
       By	 my	name	you	have	bidden	 me	go,	Jenny	Waynest,	he	said.	Now	that
you	are	going,	 I	 too	 shall	 depart.	But	 by	your	 name,	I	 ask	 that	you	 follow.
Come	with	me,	to	the	islands	 of	the	dragons	in	 the	northern	 seas.	Come	with

290
me,	to	be	of	us,	now	and	forever.
       She	knew	 in	her	heart	that	it	 would	 be	the	last	time	of	 his	asking;	that	if
she	denied	him	now,	that	door	would	never	open	again.	She	stood	poised	for	a
moment,	between	 silver	 ramparts	 and	 silver	 sky.	 She	 was	aware	 of	 John
climbing	the	steps	behind	her,	his	face	emptied	of	life	 and	his	spectacle	lenses
reflecting	the	 pearly	colors	of	 the	morning	 light;	 was	aware,	through	 him,	of
the	two	little	  boys	waiting	 for	 them	in	 the	crumbling	 tower	 of	 Alyn	 Hold—
boys	she	had	borne	without	 intention	of	 raising,	boys	 she	should	have	loved,
she	thought,	either	more	or	less	than	she	had.
       But	 more	than	them,	she	was	aware	of	 the	dragon,	drifting	 like	 a	ribbon
against	the	 remote	 white	  eye	of	  the	 day	 moon.	 The	 music	 of	  his	 name
shivered	in	her	bones;	the	iron	and	fire	of	his	power	streaked	her	soul.
       To	 be	a	 mage	you	 must	be	 a	mage,	she	thought.	 The	key	 to	 magic	 is
magic.
       She	 turned	and	looked	 back,	 to	see	John	standing	 on	the	 root-buckled
pavement	between	the	barren	apple	trees	behind	her.	Past	him,	she	glimpsed
the	caravan	of	horses	in	the	court	below,	Trey	 and	Gareth	holding	the	horses’
heads	as	they	snorted	and	fidgeted	at	the	scent	of	the	dragon.	For	 a	moment,
the	memory	of	John’s	body	 and	John’s	voice	overwhelmed	her—the	crushing
strength	of	his	muscles	and	the	curious	softness	of	his	 lips,	the	cold	slickness
of	a	leather	sleeve,	and	the	fragrance	of	his	body	mixed	with	 the	more	prosaic
pungence	of	woodsmoke	and	horses	that	permeated	his	scruffy	plaids.
       She	was	aware,	too,	of	the	desperation	and	hope	in	his	eyes.
       She	saw	 the	hope	fade,	and	he	 smiled.	“Go	 if	 you	 must,	love,”	 he	 said
softly.	“I	 said	I	wouldn’t	 hold	you,	and	I	 won’t.	I’ve	 known	 it	for	days.”
       She	shook	 her	head,	wanting	to	 speak,	but	unable	to	make	 a	sound,	her
dark	hair	 swirled	 by	the	 wind	 of	 the	dragon’s	wings.	 Then	she	turned	 from
him,	 suddenly,	 and	ran	 to	 the	 battlements,	 beyond	 which	  the	dragon	 lay
waiting	in	 the	air.
       Her	 soul	made	the	leap	first,	drawing	 power	from	 the	wind	 and	from	the
rope	of	 crystal	 thought	that	 Morkeleb	 flung	 her,	 showing	her	 the	way.	 The
elements	around	the	nucleus	 of	her	 essence	changed,	as	she	shed	the	shape

291
that	she	had	known	 since	her	conception	and	 called	to	her	 another,	different
shape.	She	was	half-conscious	of	spreading	her	arms	against	the	wind	 as	she
strode	forward	over	the	edge	of	the	battlement,	of	the	wind	 in	her	dark	 hair	as
she	sprang	outward	over	the	long	 drop	of	 stone	and	cliff	  and	emptiness.	But
her	mind	was	already	speeding	toward	the	distant	 cloud	peaks,	the	moon,	the
dragon.
       On	 the	 walls	  behind	 her,	she	 was	aware	 of	 Trey	 whispering,	  “She’s
beautiful...”
       Against	 the	fading	day	moon,	the	morning’s	 strengthening	light	caught	in
the	milk-white	 silk	 of	her	spreading	wings	 and	flashed	like	a	spiked	carpet	of
diamonds	along	the	ghost-pale	armor	of	the	white	dragon’s	back	and	sides.
       But	 more	than	of	that,	she	was	conscious	of	John,	Dragonsbane	of	ballad
and	legend,	watching	her	 with	 silent	tears	running	 down	his	 still	 face	as	she
circled	into	 the	waiting	 sky,	like	 a	butterfly	  released	from	his	hand.	Then	 he
turned	from	the	battlements,	to	 the	court	where	the	horses	waited.	Taking	 the
rein	from	the	stunned	Gareth,	he	mounted	Battlehammer	and	rode	through	the
gateway,	to	take	the	road	back	to	the	north.

292
                             CHAPTER	                    XVIII


THEY	FLEW	NORTH	together,	treading	the	woven	roads	of	the	sky.
       The	whole	Earth	lay	below	her,	marked	with	the	long	indigo	shadows	of
morning,	the	 bright	flash	 of	 springing	water,	 and	the	 icy	 knives	of	 the
glaciers.	She	saw	the	patterns	of	the	sea,	with	its	currents	of	green	and	violet,
its	great,	gray	depths,	and	the	scrum	of	white	lace	upon	its	surface,	and	those
of	the	moving	air.	All	things	were	to	her	as	a	dragon	sees	them,	a	net	of	magic
and	years,	covering	the	Earth	and	holding	it	to	all	the	singing	universe	in	a
crystal	web	of	time.
       They	nested	among	the	high	peaks	of	Nast	Wall,	among	the	broken	bone
ends	of	the	world,	looking	eastward	over	the	gorges	where	the	bighorn	sheep
sprang	like	fleas	from	rock	to	rock,	past	dizzying	drops	of	green	meltwater
and	woods	where	the	dampness	coated	each	tree	in	pillows	of	emerald	moss,
and	down	to	the	woods	on	the	foothills	 of	 the	Marches,	where	those	who
swore	fealty	to	the	Master	dwelt.	Westward,	she	could	look	past	the	glacier
that	lay	 like	 a	stilled	 river	 of	 green	and	white	through	 the	gouged	gray
breakers	of	the	 cliffs,	 past	 cold	and	 barren	rocks,	 to	 see	the	Wildspae
gleaming	like	a	sheet	of	brown	silk	beneath	the	steam	of	its	mists	and,	in	the
glimmering	bare	woods	along	its	banks,	make	out	the	lacework	turrets	of
Zyerne’s	hunting	lodge	among	the	trees.
       Like	a	dragon,	she	saw	backward	and	forward	in	time;	and	like	a	dragon,
she	felt	no	passion	at	what	she	saw.
       She	was	free,	to	have	what	she	had	always	sought—	not	only	the	power,
which	the	touch	of	Morkeleb’s	mind	had	kindled	in	her	soul,	but	freedom	to
pursue	that	power,	released	from	the	petty	grind	of	the	work	of	days.
       Her	mind	touched	and	fingered	that	knowledge,	wondering	at	its	beauty
and	its	complexity.	It	was	hers	now,	as	it	had	always	been	hers	for	the	taking.
No	more	would	she	be	asked	to	put	aside	her	meditations,	to	trek	ten	miles	on
foot	over	the	wintry	moors	to	deliver	a	child;	no	more	would	she	spend	the

293
hours	needed	for	the	 study	of	 her	power	 ankle-deep	in	 a	half-frozen	 marsh,
looking	for	 frogwort	 for	Muffle	 the	smith’s	rheumatism.
       No	 more	would	 her	time—and	 her	mind—be	 divided	 between	love	 and
power.
       Far	 off,	 her	dragon’s	 sight	could	 descry	the	 caravan	of	 horses,	making
their	antlike	  way	along	 the	 foothills	 and	 into	 the	woods.	 So	 clear	was	 her
crystal	sight	 that	 she	could	identify	  each	beast	within	  that	train—the	 white
Moon	 Horse,	the	 balky	 roans,	the	stupid	 sorrel	 Cow,	 and	the	 big	liver-bay
Battlehammer—she	saw,	too,	 the	 flash	 of	 spectacle	lenses	and	the	 glint	 of
metal	spikes	on	a	patched	old	doublet.
       He	 was	no	 more	to	her	 now	than	 the	first	 few	 inches	upon	the	 endless
ribbon	of	 dragon	 years.	Like	 the	bandits	 and	the	wretched	 Meewinks—like
his	 and	 her	 sons—he	had	 his	 own	  path	 to	 follow	  through	 the	 labyrinth
patterns	of	darkening	time.	He	 would	go	on	with	 his	fights	 for	 his	people	and
with	 his	dogged	experiments	with	 rock	 salts	and	hot-air	 balloons,	his	 model
ballistas	and	his	 quest	for	 lore	 about	pigs.	 One	day,	 she	thought,	he	 would
take	a	boat	out	to	the	rough	waters	of	 Eldsbouch	Cove	to	search	for	 the	ruins
of	 the	drowned	 breakwater,	 and	she	would	  not	be	 waiting	 for	  him	 on	the
round	pebbles	of	the	 gravel	beach...	He	would	 ride	 out	to	 the	house	beneath
the	standing	 stones	 on	 Frost	 Fell,	 and	 she	 would	 not	  be	standing	 in	  its
doorway.
       In	  time,	 she	knew,	even	 these	memories	 would	 fade.	 She	saw	within
herself,	as	she	had	probed	at	the	souls	of	others.	Trey’s,	she	recalled,	had	been
like	a	clear	 pool,	with	 bright	 shallows	 and	unsuspected	depths.	Zyerne’s	had
been	a	poisoned	flower.	Her	 own	soul	she	saw	also	as	a	flower	 whose	petals
were	turning	 to	steel	 at	their	 outer	edges	but	 whose	heart	was	still	  soft	and
silky	flesh.	In	 time,	it	 would	be	all	steel,	she	saw,	breathtakingly	beautiful	 and
enduring	forever—but	it	 would	cease	to	be	a	flower.
       She	lay	 for	a	long	 time	in	 the	rocks,	motionless	 save	for	the	flick	 of	 her
jeweled	antennae	as	she	scried	the	colors	of	the	wind.
       It	  was	thus	to	 be	 a	dragon,	 she	told	 herself,	to	 see	the	 patterns	of	 all
things	from	the	silence	of	 the	sky.	It	was	thus	to	be	free.	But	 pain	still	 poured

294
from	 some	 broken	 place	 inside	 her—the	 pain	 of	 choice,	  of	 loss,	 and	of
stillborn	 dreams.	She	would	have	wept,	but	there	was	nothing	within	 dragons
that	could	weep.	She	told	herself	that	this	was	the	last	time	 she	would	have	to
feel	this	pain	or	 the	love	that	was	its	source.	It	 was	for	this	immunity	  that	she
had	sought	the	roads	of	the	sky.
       The	 key	to	 magic	is	 magic,	she	thought.	 And	all	 magic,	 all	power,	 was
now	hers.
       But	 within	 her	 some	other	voice	asked,	For	 what	purpose?	Afar	 off	 she
was	aware	of	Morkeleb,	 hunting	 the	great-horned	sheep	in	 the	rocks.	Like	 a
black	bat	of	 steel	lace,	he	passed	as	soundlessly	as	his	own	shadow	over	the
snowfields,	wrapping	 himself	in	the	colors	 of	the	air	to	drop	down	 the	gorges,
the	deceptive	glitter	of	 his	magic	hiding	 him	from	 the	nervous,	stupid	eyes	of
his	prey.	Magic	 was	the	bone	 of	dragon	bones,	the	 blood	of	 their	 blood;	the
magic	of	 the	 cosmos	tinted	 everything	 they	 perceived	 and	everything	 they
were.
       And	 yet,	in	 the	end,	their	magic	 was	sterile,	seeking	nothing	but	 its	own
—as	Zyerne’s	had	been.
       Zyerne,	 Jenny	thought.	 The	 key	 to	magic	 is	 magic.	For	 it	 Zyerne	 had
sacrificed	the	men	who	 loved	her,	the	 son	she	would	have	borne,	and,	in	 the
end,	her	very	humanity—even	as	she	herself	had	done!
       Caerdinn	 had	been	wrong.	 For	all	 his	striving	 to	 perfect	his	 arts,	in	 the
end	he	had	been	nothing	but	a	selfish,	 embittered	old	man,	 the	end	of	a	Line
that	was	failing	 because	it	sought	magic	 for	 magic’s	sake.	The	key	 to	magic
was	not	magic,	 but	the	use	of	 magic;	 it	lay	 not	in	 having,	 but	in	 giving	 and
doing—in	loving,	 and	in	being	loved.
       And	 to	her	mind	 there	rose	the	image	of	John,	sitting	beside	Morkeleb	in
the	high	court	 of	the	Citadel.	 Having	 so	little,	 we	shared	among	ourselves	to
make	any	of	it	worth	 having...	the	consequences	of	not	caring	enough	to	do	it
would	have	been	worse...
       It	  had	 been	 John	 all	 along,	 she	 thought.	  Not	 the	 problem,	  but	 the
solution.
       Shadow	circled	 her,	and	Morkeleb	sank	glittering	 to	the	rocks	at	her	side.

295
The	sun	was	half-down	  the	west	and	threw	 the	 shimmer	of	 the	blue	 glacier
light	over	him	 like	a	sparkling	cloak	 of	flame.
       What	is	 it,	wizard	woman?
       She	said,	Morkeleb,	return	 me	to	being	what	I	was.
       His	 scales	bristled,	 flashing,	and	 she	felt	the	 throb	of	 his	anger	deep	in
her	mind.	Nothing	 can	ever	 return	to	 being	what	 it	was,	wizard	 woman.	You
know	that.	 My	 power	will	  be	within	  you	forever,	nor	 can	 the	knowledge	 of
what	it	is	to	be	a	dragon	ever	be	erased	from	your	mind.
       Even	so,	 she	said.	Yet	I	would	 rather	 live	 as	a	woman	who	 was	once	a
dragon	than	 a	dragon	 who	was	 once	a	woman.	 On	the	steps	of	 the	Deep,	I
killed	with	 fire,	 as	a	dragon	 kills;	 and	 like	a	 dragon,	I	 felt	 nothing.	I	 do	not
want	to	become	that,	Morkeleb.
       Bah,	 Morkeleb	 said.	Heat	smoked	from	 the	thousand	razor	edges	of	 his
scales,	from	the	long	spikes	and	the	folded	silk	of	 his	wings.	Do	not	be	a	fool,
Jenny	Waynest.	All	the	 knowledge	of	 the	dragons,	 all	 their	 power,	is	 yours,
and	all	 the	years	of	 time.	You	will	 forget	 the	loves	of	 the	earth	 soon	and	be
healed.	The	diamond	cannot	 love	the	flower,	 for	 the	flower	 lives	only	 a	day,
then	fades	and	dies.	You	are	a	diamond	now.
       The	flower	 dies,	Jenny	said	softly,	 having	lived.	 The	diamond	will	  never
do	either.	I	do	 not	want	to	 forget,	and	the	healing	 will	 make	me	what	I	 never
wanted	to	be.	Dragons	have	all	the	years	of	time,	Morkeleb,	 but	even	dragons
cannot	roll	 back	 the	flow	 of	days,	 nor	return	 along	 them	to	 find	 again	time
that	they	have	lost.	Let	me	go.
       No!	  His	 head	 swung	 around,	his	 white	  eyes	blazing,	  his	 long	 mane
bristling	 around	the	base	of	his	many	horns.	I	want	 you,	wizard	woman,	more
than	I	have	ever	 wanted	any	gold.	 It	is	 something	that	was	born	 in	me	when
your	mind	touched	mine,	as	my	magic	was	born	in	you.	Having	 you,	I	will	  not
give	you	up.
       She	 gathered	her	haunches	beneath	her	 and	threw	 herself	 out	into	 the
void	 of	  the	 air,	 white	 wings	  cleaving	 the	 wind.	  He	 flung	  himself	  after,
swinging	 down	 the	 gray	cliffs	  and	 waterfalls	 of	 Nast	 Wall,	 their	 shadows
chasing	one	another	over	snow	clefts	dyed	blue	with	 the	coming	 evening	and

296
rippling	 like	 gray	hawks	 over	the	darkness	of	stone	and	 chasm.	Beyond,	the
world	 lay	carpeted	by	 autumn	haze,	red	and	ochre	and	 brown;	and	 from	 the
unleaved	trees	of	the	woods	near	the	river,	Jenny	could	 see	a	single	thread	of
smoke	rising,	far	off	 on	the	evening	wind.
       The	 whiteness	 of	 the	full	  moon	 stroked	her	 wings;	 the	 stars,	through
whose	secret	paths	the	dragons	had	once	come	to	the	earth	 and	along	which
they	would	  one	day	 depart,	 swung	 like	 a	 web	 of	 light	  in	 their	 unfolding
patterns	above.	Her	dragon	sight	descried	the	camp	in	 the	woods	and	a	lone,
small	figure	patiently	 scraping	burned	bannocks	off	 the	griddle,	books	from	 a
half-unpacked	box	stacked	around	him.
       She	 circled	 the	 smoke,	invisible	  in	 the	 colors	 of	 the	air,	 and	 felt	 the
darkness	of	a	shadow	circling	above	her.
       Wizard	 woman,	 said	the	voice	 of	 the	 dragon	in	 her	mind,	 is	 this	 truly
what	you	want?
       She	did	 not	reply,	 but	she	knew	that,	 dragon-wise,	he	felt	 the	surge	and
patterns	of	her	 mind.	She	felt	 his	 bafflement	at	 them,	and	his	 anger,	both	at
her	and	at	something	within	himself.
       At	 length	he	said,	I	 want	you,	Jenny	Waynest.	But	more	than	you,	I	want
your	happiness,	and	this	I	do	not	understand—I	do	not	 want	you	in	grief.	 And
then,	his	anger	lashing	at	 her	like	 a	many-tailed	whip,	 You	have	done	this	 to
me!
       I	  am	 sorry,	 Morkeleb,	 she	 said	 softly.	 What	 you	 feel	 is	 the	 love	 of
humans,	and	a	poor	trade	for	 the	power	that	the	touch	of	your	 mind	gave	me.
It	is	what	 I	learned	first,	 from	 loving	John—both	the	pain	 and	the	fact	that	 to
feel	it	is	better	than	not	to	be	able	to	feel.
       Is	 this	the	pain	that	drives	you?	he	demanded.
       She	said,	Yes.
       Bitter	 anger	sounded	in	his	mind,	like	 the	far-off	 echo	of	the	gold	that	 he
had	lost.	Go,	then,	he	said,	and	she	circled	down	from	 the	air,	a	thing	of	glass
and	lace	and	bone,	invisible	in	the	soft,	smoky	 darkness.	She	felt	the	dragon’s
power	 surround	her	 with	  heat	and	 magic,	 the	 pain	 shimmering	 along	 her
bones.	She	leaned	into	the	fear	 that	melted	her	 body,	as	she	had	leaned	into

297
the	winds	of	flight.
       Then	 there	was	only	weariness	and	grief.	She	knelt	alone	in	the	darkness
of	the	autumn	woods,	 the	night	chill	  biting	into	 all	 the	newly	 healed	wounds
of	her	back	and	arms.	Through	the	warty	gray	 and	white	of	the	tree	boles,	she
could	see	the	red	glow	of	fire	 and	smell	the	familiar	 odors	of	woodsmoke	and
horses;	the	plaintive	 strains	of	 a	 pennywhistle	 keened	thinly	 in	 the	air.	 The
bright	edge	of	 color	 had	vanished	from	 all	 things;	 the	evening	was	raw	 and
misty,	colorless,	 and	very	cold.	 She	shivered	 and	drew	her	 sheepskin	jacket
more	 closely	 about	 her.	The	 earth	 felt	  damp	 where	 her	knees	 pressed	it
through	her	faded	skirts.
       She	 brushed	aside	 the	dark,	 coarse	 mane	of	 her	 hair	 and	 looked	 up.
Beyond	the	bare	lace	of	the	trees,	she	could	see	the	black	dragon	still	circling,
alone	in	the	sounding	hollow	of	 the	empty	sky.
       Her	 mind	touched	his,	 with	 thanks	deeper	than	words.	Grief	came	down
to	her,	grief	and	hurt,	and	rage	that	he	could	feel	hurt.
       It	 is	a	cruel	gift	 you	have	given	me,	wizard	woman,	he	said.	For	you	have
set	me	apart	from	my	own	and	destroyed	the	pleasure	of	my	old	joys;	 my	soul
is	marked	with	this	love,	 though	I	do	not	understand	what	it	 is	and,	like	 you,	I
shall	never	be	able	to	return	to	what	I	 have	been.
       I	 am	sorry,	 Morkeleb,	 she	said	to	him.	 We	change	what	we	touch,	 be	it
magic,	or	 power,	or	another	 life.	Ten	years	ago	I	 would	 have	gone	with	you,
had	I	not	touched	John,	and	been	touched	by	him.
       Like	  an	echo	in	 her	 mind	 she	heard	his	voice.	 Be	happy,	 then,	wizard
woman,	with	this	choice	 that	you	have	made.	I	do	not	understand	the	reasons
for	it,	for	 it	is	not	a	thing	 of	dragons—but	then	neither,	any	longer,	am	I.
       She	felt	 rather	than	 saw	him	vanish,	 flying	 back	in	 the	darkness	toward
the	empty	north.	For	 a	moment	he	passed	before	the	white	disk	 of	the	moon,
skeletal	silk	over	its	stern	face—then	he	was	gone.	Grief	closed	her	throat,	the
grief	 of	 roads	untaken,	of	 doors	 not	 opened,	of	 songs	unsung—the	 human
grief	of	 choice.	In	 freeing	her,	the	dragon,	too,	 had	made	his	choice,	of	 what
he	was	and	would	be.
       We	change	what	we	 touch,	she	thought.	And	 in	that,	she	supposed,	John

298
—and	the	 capacity	to	 love	 and	 to	care	 that	John	had	 given	 her—was,	and
forever	would	be,	Morkeleb’s	 bane.
       She	sighed	and	got	 stiffly	 to	 her	feet,	dusting	the	twigs	 and	leaves	from
her	 skirts.	 The	 shrill,	  sweet	 notes	of	  the	 pennywhistle	 still	  threaded	 the
evening	breeze,	 but	 with	 them	 was	the	 smell	 of	 smoke,	 and	 of	 bannocks
starting	to	burn.	She	hitched	her	plaid	 up	over	her	shoulder	and	started	up	the
path	for	the	clearing.	

299
     A	   Biography	                of	   Barbara	             Hambly


Barbara	Hambly	(b.	1951)	is	a	New	York	Times	bestselling	author	of	fantasy
and	science	fiction,	as	well	as	historical	novels	set	in	the	nineteenth	century.
      Born	in	San	Diego	and	raised	in	the	Los	Angeles	suburb	of	Montclair,
Hambly	attended	college	at	the	University	of	California,	Riverside,	where	she
majored	in	medieval	history,	earning	a	master’s	degree	in	the	subject	in	1975.
Inspired	by	her	childhood	love	of	fantasy	classics	such	as	The	Wonderful
Wizard	of	Oz	and	The	Lord	of	the	Rings,	she	decided	to	pursue	writing	as	soon
as	she	finished	school.	Her	road	was	not	so	direct,	however,	and	she	spent
time	waitressing,	modeling,	working	at	a	liquor	store,	and	teaching	karate
before	selling	her	first	novel,	Time	of	the	Dark,	in	1982.	That	was	the	birth	of
her	Darwath	series,	which	she	expanded	on	in	four	more	novels	over	the	next
two	decades.	More	than	simple	sword-and-sorcery	novels,	they	tell	the	story
of	nightmares	come	to	life	to	terrorize	the	world.	The	series	helped	to
establish	Hambly’s	reputation	as	an	author	of	intelligent	fantasy	fiction.
      Since	the	early	1980s,	when	she	made	her	living	writing	scripts	for
Saturday	morning	cartoons	such	as	Jayce	and	the	Wheeled	Warriors	and	He-
Man,	Hambly	has	published	dozens	of	books	in	several	different	series.
Besides	fantasy	novels	such	as	1985’s	Dragonsbane,	which	she	has	called	one
of	her	favorite	books,	she	has	used	her	background	in	history	to	craft	gripping
historical	fiction.
      The	 inventor	of	 many	different	fantasy	universes,	including	those
featured	in	the	Windrose	Chronicles,	Sun	Wolf	and	Starhawk	series,	and	Sun-
Cross	novels,	Hambly	has	also	worked	in	universes	created	by	others.	In	the
1990s	she	wrote	two	well-received	Star	Wars	novels,	including	the	New	York
Times	bestseller	Children	of	the	Jedi,	while	in	the	eighties	she	dabbled	in	the
world	of	Star	Trek,	producing	several	novels	for	that	series.
      In	1999	she	published	A	Free	Man	of	Color,	the	first	Benjamin	January
novel.	That	mystery	and	its	eight	sequels	follow	a	brilliant	African-American

300
surgeon	who	moves	from	 Paris	to	New	 Orleans	in	the	1830s,	where	 he	must
use	his	wits	to	navigate	the	prejudice	 and	death	that	lurk	around	every	 corner
of	antebellum	Louisiana.	 Hambly	ventured	into	 straight	historical	 fiction	 with
The	Emancipator’s	 Wife,	 a	nuanced	 look	 at	the	 private	 life	  of	 Mary	 Todd
Lincoln,	 which	was	a	finalist	 for	the	2005	Michael	 Shaara	Prize	for	Civil	 War
writing.
       From	 1994	to	1996	Hambly	 was	the	president	of	the	Science	Fiction	and
Fantasy	Writers	of	 America.	Her	 James	Asher	vampire	series	won	the	Locus
Award	for	 best	horror	 novel	 in	1989	 and	the	Lord	 Ruthven	 Award	 in	1996.
She	lives	in	Los	Angeles	with	 an	assortment	of	cats	and	dogs.































       Hambly	with	her	parents	and	older	sister	in	San	Diego,	California,	in	September	1951.

301
Hambly	(right)	with	 her	mother,	sister,	and	brother	in	1955.	For	three	years,	the	family
lived	in	this	thirty-foot	trailer	at	China	Lake,	California,	a	Marine	Base	in	the	middle	of
                                                   the	Mojave	Desert.



























    Hambly	(left),	at	the	age	of	nine,	with	her	brother	and	sister	on	Christmas	in	1960.

302
Hambly’s	graduation	from	high	school,	June	1969.

303
A	self-portrait	that	Hambly	drew	while	studying	abroad	in	France	in	1971.

304
Hambly	dressed	up	for	a	Renaissance	fair.

305
Hambly	at	an	event	for	the	Science	Fiction	and	Fantasy	Writers	of	America.	She	served
                             as	the	association’s	president	from	1994	to	1996.

306
The	“official	wedding	picture”	of	Hambly	and	science-fiction	writer	George	Alec
                                               Effinger,	in	1998.

307
Hambly	with	her	husband,	George,	in	New	Orleans	around	1998.	At	the	time,	she	was
         researching	New	Orleans	cemeteries	for	her	book	Graveyard	Dust	(2002).
























                                   Hambly	at	her	birthday	party	in	2005.

308
Hambly	(right)	with	her	sister,	Mary,	and	brother,	Eddy,	at	a	family	reunion	in	San
                                                   Diego	in	2009.

309
All	rights	reserved	under	International	and	Pan-American	Copyright	Conventions.	By	payment	of	the
required	fees,	you	have	been	granted	the	non-exclusive,	non-transferable	right	to	access	and	read	the
text	of	this	ebook	onscreen.	No	part	of	this	text	may	be	reproduced,	transmitted,	downloaded,
decompiled,	reverse	engineered,	or	stored	in	or	introduced	into	any	information	storage	and	retrieval
system,	in	any	form	or	by	any	means,	whether	electronic	or	mechanical,	now	known	or	hereinafter
invented,	without	the	express	written	permission	of	the	publisher.


This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	Names,	characters,	places,	and	incidents	either	are	the	product	of	the	author’s
imagination	or	are	used	fictitiously.	Any	resemblance	to	actual	persons,	living	or	dead,	businesses,
companies,	events,	or	locales	is	entirely	coincidental.


copyright	©	1985	by	Barbara	Hambly


maps	by	Shelly	Shapiro


cover	design	by	Jason	Gabbert


978-1-4532-1686-6


This	edition	published	in	2011	by	Open	Road	Integrated	Media
180	Varick	Street
New	York,	NY	10014
www.openroadmedia.com

