2
 Begin	 Reading
Table	of	Contents
 Copyright	 Page

3
            For	 Sarah	Burnes,	Julie	Scheina,

                   and	Jennifer	Bailey	Hunt

               because	for	some	silly	reason

they	wouldn't	let	us	put	their	names	on	the	cover.

4
 We	can	easily	forgive	a	child
    who	is	afraid	of	the	dark;
the	real	tragedy	of	life	 is	when
  men	are	afraid	 of	the	light.

                 --PLATO

5
BEFORE	

6
                                                Caster	   Girl



I	used	to	think	our	town,	buried	in	the	South	Carolina	backwoods,	stuck	in	the
muddy	bottom	of	the	Santee	River	valley,	was	the	middle	of	nowhere.	A	place
where	nothing	 ever	 happened	and	nothing	 would	  ever	change.	Just	 like
yesterday,	the	unblinking	sun	would	rise	and	set	over	the	town	of	Gatlin	without
bothering	to	kick	up	so	much	as	a	breeze.	Tomorrow	my	neighbors	would	be
rocking	on	their	porches,	heat	and	gossip	and	familiarity	melting	like	ice	cubes
into	their	sweet	tea,	as	they	had	for	more	than	a	hundred	years.	Around	here,	our
traditions	were	so	traditional	it	was	hard	to	put	 a	finger	on	them.	They	were
woven	into	everything	we	did	or,	more	often,	didn't	do.	You	could	be	born	or
married	or	buried,	and	the	Methodists	kept	right	on	singing.
    Sundays	were	for	church,	Mondays	for	doing	the	marketing	at	the	Stop	&
Shop,	the	only	grocery	store	in	town.	The	rest	of	the	week	involved	a	whole	lot
of	nothing	and	a	little	more	pie,	if	you	were	lucky	enough	to	live	with	someone
like	my	family's	housekeeper,	Amma,	who	won	the	bake-off	at	the	county	fair
every	year.	Old	 four-fingered	Miss	Monroe	 still	 taught	cotillion,	 one	empty
finger	of	her	white-gloved	hand	flapping	as	she	sashayed	down	the	dance	floor
with	the	debutantes.	Maybelline	Sutter	was	still	cutting	hair	at	the	Snip	'n'	Curl,
though	she	had	lost	most	 of	her	 eyesight	around	the	same	time	she	turned
seventy,	and	now	she	forgot	to	put	the	guard	down	on	the	clippers	half	the	time,
shearing	a	skunk	stripe	up	the	back	of	your	head.	Carlton	Eaton	never	failed,	rain
or	shine,	to	open	your	mail	before	he	delivered	it.	If	the	news	was	bad,	he	would
break	it	to	you	himself.	Better	to	hear	it	from	one	of	your	own.
    This	town	owned	us,	that	was	the	good	and	the	bad	of	it.	It	knew	every	inch
of	us,	every	sin,	every	secret,	every	scab.	Which	was	why	most	people	never
bothered	to	leave,	and	why	the	ones	who	did	never	came	back.	Before	I	met
Lena	that	would	have	been	me,	five	 minutes	after	I	graduated	from	Jackson
High.	Gone.
    Then	I	fell	in	love	with	a	Caster	girl.
    She	showed	me	there	was	another	world	within	the	cracks	of	 our	uneven
sidewalks.	One	that	had	been	there	all	along,	hidden	in	plain	sight.	Lena's	Gatlin
was	a	place	where	things	 happened	--	impossible,	supernatural,	life-altering
things.
    Sometimes	life-ending.

7
     While	 regular	folks	 were	 busy	cutting	 back	their	 rosebushes	or	picking	past
worm-eaten	peaches	at	the	roadside	stand,	Light	 and	Dark	 Casters	with	 unique
and	powerful	 gifts	were	locked	 in	an	eternal	 struggle	--	a	supernatural	civil	  war
without	 any	hope	of	 a	 white	flag	 waving.	 Lena's	 Gatlin	 was	home	to	 Demons
and	danger	and	 a	curse	that	 had	marked	 her	 family	 for	 more	 than	 a	hundred
years.	And	the	closer	I	got	to	Lena,	the	closer	her	Gatlin	came	to	mine.
     A	few	 months	ago,	I	believed	nothing	 would	ever	change	in	this	town.	 Now	I
knew	better,	and	I	only	wished	it	 was	true.
     Because	the	second	I	fell	 in	love	 with	a	Caster	girl,	 no	one	I	 loved	was	safe.
Lena	thought	she	was	the	only	one	cursed,	but	she	was	wrong.
     It	was	our	curse	now.

8
2.15	

9
                                          Perpetual	      Peace



The	 rain	dripping	off	 the	brim	 of	Amma's	best	black	hat.	Lena's	bare	knees
hitting	the	thick	mud	in	front	of	the	grave.	The	pinpricks	on	the	back	of	my	neck
that	came	from	standing	too	close	to	so	many	of	Macon's	kind.	Incubuses	--
Demons	who	fed	off	the	memories	and	dreams	of	Mortals,	like	me,	as	we	slept.
The	sound	they	made,	unlike	anything	else	in	the	universe,	when	they	ripped
open	the	last	bit	of	dark	sky	and	disappeared	just	before	dawn.	As	if	they	were	a
pack	of	black	crows,	taking	off	from	a	power	line	in	perfect	unison.
    That	was	Macon's	funeral.
    I	 could	remember	the	details	as	if	it	had	happened	yesterday,	even	though	it
was	hard	to	believe	some	of	it	had	happened	at	all.	Funerals	were	tricky	like	that.
And	life,	  I	 guess.	The	important	parts	you	 blocked	out	 altogether,	but	the
random,	slanted	moments	haunted	you,	replaying	over	and	over	in	your	mind.
    What	 I	 could	remember:	Amma	waking	me	up	in	 the	dark	 to	get	to	 His
Garden	of	Perpetual	Peace	before	dawn.	Lena	frozen	and	shattered,	wanting	to
freeze	and	shatter	everything	around	her.	Darkness	in	the	sky	and	in	half	the
people	standing	around	the	grave,	the	ones	who	weren't	people	at	all.
    But	 behind	all	that,	there	was	something	I	couldn't	remember.	It	was	there,
lingering	in	the	back	of	my	mind.	I	 had	been	trying	to	think	of	it	 since	Lena's
birthday,	her	Sixteenth	Moon,	the	night	Macon	died.
    The	only	thing	I	knew	was	that	it	was	something	I	needed	to	remember.




The	morning	of	the	funeral	it	was	pitch-black	outside,	but	patches	of	moonlight
were	shining	through	the	clouds	into	my	open	window.	My	room	was	freezing,
and	I	didn't	care.	I	had	left	my	 window	open	the	last	two	nights	since	Macon
died,	like	he	might	just	show	up	in	my	room	and	sit	down	in	my	swivel	chair	and
stay	awhile.
    I	 remembered	the	night	I	saw	him	standing	by	my	window,	in	the	dark.	That's
when	I	found	out	what	he	was.	Not	a	vampire	or	some	mythological	creature
from	a	book,	as	I	had	suspected,	but	a	real	Demon.	One	who	could	have	chosen
to	feed	on	blood,	but	chose	my	dreams	instead.
    Macon	Melchizedek	Ravenwood.	To	the	folks	around	here,	he	was	Old	Man

10
Ravenwood,	the	town	recluse.	He	was	also	Lena's	uncle,	and	the	only	 father	she
had	ever	known.
     I	 was	getting	dressed	in	the	 dark	when	I	 felt	 the	warm	 pull	 from	inside	 that
meant	Lena	was	there.
     L?
     Lena	spoke	up	from	 the	depths	of	my	 mind,	as	close	as	anyone	could	be	and
about	 as	 far	  away.	  Kelting,	   our	 unspoken	  form	  of	  communication.	  The
whispering	language	 Casters	like	her	 had	shared	long	 before	my	 bedroom	had
been	declared	south	 of	 the	Mason-Dixon	  Line.	 It	 was	 the	 secret	language	of
intimacy	and	necessity,	born	in	a	time	when	being	different	 could	get	you	burned
at	the	stake.	It	 was	a	language	we	shouldn't	 have	been	able	to	 share,	because	I
was	a	 Mortal.	  But	  for	 some	 inexplicable	  reason	we	 could,	  and	 it	 was	 the
language	we	used	to	speak	the	unspoken	and	the	unspeakable.
     I	can't	do	this.	 I'm	not	going.
     I	 gave	up	 on	 my	 tie	 and	sat	 back	down	 on	 my	 bed,	 the	ancient	 mattress
springs	crying	out	beneath	me.
     You	have	to	go.	You	won't	forgive	yourself	if	 you	don't.
     For	a	second,	she	didn't	respond.
     You	don't	know	how	it	feels.
     I	do.
     I	remembered	when	I	was	the	one	sitting	on	my	 bed	afraid	to	get	up,	afraid	to
put	on	my	suit	 and	join	the	prayer	circle	 and	sing	Abide	With	 Me	and	ride	in	 the
grim	 parade	of	headlights	 through	town	 to	 the	cemetery	 to	bury	 my	 mother.	 I
was	afraid	it	 would	 make	it	real.	 I	couldn't	 stand	to	think	 about	it,	 but	I	 opened
my	mind	and	showed	Lena....
     You	can't	 go,	but	you	 don't	have	a	 choice,	because	Amma	puts	her	hand	on
your	arm	 and	 leads	you	into	 the	 car,	into	 the	 pew,	into	 the	pity	 parade.	 Even
though	it	 hurts	 to	move,	 like	your	 whole	 body	aches	from	 some	kind	 of	 fever.
Your	eyes	stop	on	the	mumbling	faces	in	front	of	you,	but	you	can't	 actually	hear
what	anyone	is	saying.	Not	over	the	screaming	in	 your	head.	So	you	let	them	put
their	 hand	on	 your	arm,	 you	 get	in	 the	car,	 and	 it	 happens.	Because	you	can
make	it	through	this	if	someone	says	you	can.
     I	put	my	 head	in	my	hands.
     Ethan	--
     I'm	saying	you	can,	L.
     I	shoved	my	 fists	into	 my	eyes,	and	they	were	wet.	I	 flipped	 on	my	light	 and
stared	at	the	bare	bulb,	refusing	to	blink	until	I	 seared	away	the	tears.
     Ethan,	I'm	scared.
     I'm	right	 here.	I'm	not	going	 anywhere.

11
     There	weren't	any	more	 words	as	I	went	 back	to	fumbling	 with	 my	 tie,	but	 I
could	feel	Lena	there,	as	if	 she	was	sitting	in	 the	corner	of	 my	room.	 The	house
seemed	empty	with	 my	 father	 gone,	and	I	 heard	Amma	 in	 the	 hall.	 A	 second
later,	she	was	 standing	quietly	  in	 the	doorway	 clutching	  her	good	 purse.	Her
dark	eyes	searched	mine,	and	her	tiny	frame	seemed	tall,	though	she	didn't	 even
reach	my	shoulder.	She	was	the	grandmother	I	never	had,	and	the	only	 mother	I
had	left	now.
     I	 stared	at	the	empty	 chair	 next	to	 my	window,	  where	she	had	laid	 out	 my
good	suit	 a	little	 less	than	 a	year	ago,	then	 back	into	 the	bare	lightbulb	  of	 my
bedside	lamp.
     Amma	 held	 out	her	 hand,	and	 I	handed	 her	my	 tie.	 Sometimes	it	 felt	 like
Lena	wasn't	the	only	one	who	could	read	my	mind.




I	offered	Amma	 my	arm	as	we	made	our	way	up	the	muddy	hill	 to	His	Garden	of
Perpetual	Peace.	The	sky	was	dark,	 and	the	rain	 started	before	we	 reached	the
top	of	the	rise.	Amma	 was	in	her	most	respectable	funeral	dress,	with	a	wide	 hat
that	shielded	 most	of	 her	 face	from	  the	rain,	 except	for	  the	bit	 of	 white	 lace
collar	 escaping	beneath	 the	brim.	  It	 was	 fastened	at	 the	 neck	 with	 her	 best
cameo,	a	sign	of	 respect.	I	had	seen	it	 all	last	 April,	 just	 as	I	had	felt	 her	good
gloves	on	my	 arm,	supporting	 me	up	this	 hill	 once	before.	 This	time	 I	 couldn't
tell	which	 one	of	us	was	doing	the	supporting.
     I	 still	 wasn't	 sure	why	 Macon	 wanted	to	 be	buried	 in	 the	Gatlin	 cemetery,
considering	the	way	folks	 in	this	town	 felt	about	him.	 But	according	to	Gramma,
Lena's	grandmother,	Macon	 left	 strict	 instructions	 specifically	 requesting	to	 be
buried	 here.	He	 purchased	the	 plot	  himself,	 years	 ago.	Lena's	 family	  hadn't
seemed	happy	about	it,	but	Gramma	had	put	her	foot	 down.	They	 were	going	to
respect	his	wishes,	like	any	good	Southern	family.
     Lena?	I'm	here.
     I	know.
     I	could	 feel	my	voice	 calming	her,	as	if	I	 had	wrapped	my	arms	around	her.	I
looked	up	the	hill,	 where	the	awning	for	the	graveside	service	would	be.	It	would
look	the	same	as	any	other	Gatlin	 funeral,	 which	 was	ironic,	 considering	it	 was
Macon's.
     It	 wasn't	 yet	 daylight,	  and	I	  could	 barely	 make	 out	 a	few	  shapes	in	 the
distance.	They	were	all	 crooked,	all	 different.	 The	ancient,	uneven	rows	 of	tiny
headstones	standing	at	the	graves	of	children,	 the	overgrown	 family	 crypts,	 the

12
crumbling	 white	  obelisks	 honoring	 fallen	  Confederate	soldiers,	 marked	 with
small	brass	crosses.	Even	General	Jubal	A.	Early,	whose	statue	watched	over	the
General's	Green	 in	 the	 center	of	 town,	  was	buried	 here.	 We	 made	 our	 way
around	the	family	  plot	of	 a	few	 lesser-known	 Moultries,	 which	 had	been	there
for	so	long	the	smooth	magnolia	 trunk	at	the	edge	of	the	plot	 had	grown	into	 the
side	of	the	tallest	stone	marker,	making	them	indistinguishable.
     And	 sacred.	They	 were	all	 sacred,	which	 meant	we	 had	reached	the	oldest
part	of	the	graveyard.	I	knew	 from	my	 mother,	the	first	word	 carved	into	any	old
headstone	in	Gatlin	 was	Sacred.	But	 as	we	got	 closer	and	my	 eyes	adjusted	to
the	darkness,	I	knew	 where	the	 muddy	gravel	 path	was	leading.	 I	 remembered
where	it	  passed	the	 stone	 memorial	 bench	 at	 the	 grassy	slope,	 dotted	 with
magnolias.	I	 remembered	my	 father	 sitting	 on	 that	 bench,	unable	to	 speak	or
move.
     My	 feet	wouldn't	 go	any	farther,	because	they	had	figured	out	the	same	thing
I	had.	Macon's	 Garden	of	Perpetual	Peace	was	only	 a	magnolia	 away	from	 my
mother's.
     The	twisting	roads	run	 straight	between	us.
     It	 was	 a	 sappy	 line	 from	  an	even	 sappier	 poem	 I	 had	 written	 Lena	 for
Valentine's	Day.	But	 here	in	the	graveyard,	it	was	true.	Who	would	 have	thought
our	parents,	or	 the	 closest	thing	 Lena	 had	to	 one,	would	  be	neighbors	 in	 the
grave?
     Amma	took	 my	hand,	leading	me	to	Macon's	massive	plot.	"Steady	now."
     We	stepped	inside	the	waist-high	 black	railing	 around	his	gravesite,	which	 in
Gatlin	was	reserved	for	 the	perimeters	of	only	 the	best	plots,	like	 a	white	 picket
fence	for	the	dead.	Sometimes	it	actually	was	a	white	 picket	fence.	This	one	was
wrought	iron,	 the	crooked	door	 shoved	open	into	the	 overgrown	grass.	Macon's
plot	seemed	to	carry	with	it	an	atmosphere	of	its	own,	like	 Macon	himself.
     Inside	 the	railing	  stood	Lena's	family:	  Gramma,	 Aunt	 Del,	 Uncle	 Barclay,
Reece,	Ryan,	and	Macon's	mother,	Arelia,	under	the	black	canopy	on	one	side	of
the	carved	black	 casket.	On	the	 other	side,	 a	group	of	 men	 and	a	woman	 in	a
long	black	coat	kept	their	distance	from	 both	the	casket	and	the	canopy,	standing
shoulder	to	 shoulder	in	 the	rain.	 They	 were	all	 bone-dry.	 It	 was	like	 a	church
wedding	split	 by	an	aisle	down	 the	middle,	 where	the	relatives	of	 the	bride	 line
up	opposite	the	relatives	of	 the	groom	like	 two	 warring	 clans.	There	was	an	old
man	at	one	end	of	 the	casket,	standing	 next	to	 Lena.	Amma	 and	I	 stood	at	the
other	end,	just	inside	the	canopy.
     Amma's	grip	 on	my	arm	tightened,	and	she	pulled	the	gold	 charm	she	always
wore	out	from	 underneath	her	blouse	and	rubbed	it	 between	her	fingers.	 Amma
was	more	than	superstitious.	 She	was	a	Seer,	from	 generations	of	 women	who

13
read	tarot	cards	and	communed	with	spirits,	and	Amma	had	a	charm	or	a	doll	for
everything.	This	 one	was	for	protection.	 I	 stared	at	the	Incubuses	in	front	 of	us,
the	rain	running	 off	 their	 shoulders	without	 leaving	 a	trace.	 I	hoped	 they	were
the	kind	that	only	fed	on	dreams.
     I	 tried	 to	  look	 away,	 but	 it	  wasn't	easy.	 There	 was	 something	 about	an
Incubus	that	drew	you	in	 like	a	spider's	web,	like	 any	good	predator.	In	the	dark,
you	couldn't	see	their	black	eyes,	and	they	almost	looked	 like	a	bunch	of	 regular
guys.	A	 few	 of	them	 were	dressed	the	way	 Macon	 always	had,	 dark	suits	and
expensive-looking	overcoats.	One	or	two	 looked	more	like	 construction	 workers
on	their	 way	 to	 get	 a	 beer	after	 work,	 in	 jeans	 and	work	  boots,	their	  hands
shoved	in	the	pockets	 of	their	 jackets.	The	 woman	was	probably	 a	Succubus.	I
had	read	about	them,	mostly	 in	comics,	 and	I	thought	 they	were	just	 old	wives'
tales,	like	werewolves.	But	 I	knew	 I	was	wrong	 because	she	was	standing	in	the
rain,	dry	as	the	rest	of	them.
     The	Incubuses	were	 a	sharp	contrast	to	 Lena's	family,	 cloaked	 in	iridescent
black	fabric	that	caught	what	little	 light	 there	was	and	refracted	it,	as	if	they	were
the	source	themselves.	I	had	 never	seen	them	like	 this	 before.	It	 was	a	strange
sight,	 especially	  considering	 the	 strict	  dress	 code	 for	  women	  at	 Southern
funerals.
     In	 the	center	 of	 it	 all	 was	Lena.	 The	way	 she	 looked	was	 the	opposite	 of
magical.	She	stood	in	front	 of	the	casket	with	 her	fingers	quietly	 resting	upon	it,
as	if	 Macon	  was	somehow	 holding	  her	hand.	 She	 was	dressed	in	  the	same
shimmering	material	 as	the	rest	of	her	family,	 but	 it	hung	 on	her	like	 a	shadow.
Her	black	 hair	was	twisted	 into	 a	tight	 knot,	 not	a	trademark	curl	 in	 sight.	She
looked	broken	and	out	 of	place,	 like	she	was	standing	 on	the	wrong	 side	of	the
aisle.
     Like	 she	belonged	with	Macon's	other	family,	 standing	in	the	rain.
     Lena?
     She	lifted	 her	head,	and	her	eyes	met	mine.	Since	her	birthday,	 when	one	of
her	eyes	had	turned	 a	shade	of	 gold	while	  the	other	remained	 deep	green,	the
colors	had	 combined	 to	create	 a	shade	unlike	 anything	 I'd	 ever	 seen.	Almost
hazel	at	times,	 and	unnaturally	 golden	at	others.	 Now	 they	looked	 more	hazel,
dull	and	pained.	I	couldn't	stand	it.	I	 wanted	to	pick	her	up	and	carry	her	away.
     I	 can	 get	 the	 Volvo,	  and	 we	 can	 drive	  down	 the	 coast	 all	  the	 way	 to
Savannah.	We	can	hide	out	at	my	Aunt	Caroline's.
     I	took	 another	step	closer	to	her.	Her	family	  was	crowded	around	the	casket,
and	I	couldn't	get	to	Lena	without	 walking	 past	the	line	of	Incubuses,	but	I	 didn't
care.
     Ethan,	stop!	It's	not	 safe	--

14
     A	 tall	Incubus	with	 a	scar	running	 down	the	length	of	 his	face,	like	 the	mark
of	a	savage	animal	attack,	turned	his	head	to	look	at	me.	The	air	seemed	to	ripple
through	the	space	between	us,	like	 I	had	chucked	 a	stone	into	a	lake.	 It	hit	 me,
knocking	 the	wind	 out	of	 my	 lungs	as	if	 I'd	 been	punched,	but	I	 couldn't	 react
because	I	felt	paralyzed	--	my	limbs	numb	and	useless.
     Ethan!
     Amma's	eyes	narrowed,	but	before	she	could	take	a	step	the	Succubus	put	her
hand	on	Scarface's	shoulder	and	squeezed	it,	 almost	imperceptibly.	  Instantly,	 I
was	released	from	 his	hold,	 and	the	 blood	 rushed	back	into	 my	 limbs.	 Amma
gave	her	a	grateful	 nod,	but	 the	woman	 with	 the	long	 hair	and	 the	longer	 coat
ignored	her,	disappearing	back	into	line	with	 the	rest	of	them.
     The	Incubus	with	 the	brutal	scar	turned	and	winked	 at	me.	I	got	the	message,
even	without	the	words.	See	you	in	your	dreams.
     I	 was	 still	 holding	  my	 breath	when	 a	 white-haired	 gentleman,	 in	 an	 old-
fashioned	suit	 and	 string	 tie,	 stepped	up	to	 the	 coffin.	  His	 eyes	were	 a	dark
contrast	to	his	 hair,	which	 made	him	 seem	like	 some	creepy	character	from	 an
old	black	and	white	movie.
     "The	Gravecaster,"	Amma	whispered.	He	looked	 more	like	the	gravedigger.
     He	 touched	the	 smooth	black	 wood,	 and	 a	carved	 crest	on	 the	 top	of	 the
coffin	 began	to	glow	 with	 a	golden	light.	 It	 looked	 like	 some	old	coat	of	 arms,
the	kind	 of	 thing	 you	saw	 at	a	museum	or	 in	 a	castle.	I	 saw	 a	tree	with	 great
spreading	boughs,	and	a	bird.	Beneath	it	 there	was	a	carved	sun,	and	a	crescent
moon.
     "Macon	 Ravenwood	of	the	House	of	Ravenwood,	of	 Raven	and	Oak,	Air	and
Earth.	Darkness	 and	Light."	  He	 took	 his	 hand	from	  the	coffin,	  and	the	 light
followed,	leaving	 the	casket	dark	again.
     "Is	that	Macon?"	 I	whispered	to	Amma.
     "The	light's	 symbolic.	There's	nothin'	 in	that	box.	Wasn't	anythin'	 left	to	bury.
That's	the	way	with	 Macon's	kind	--	 ashes	to	ashes	and	dust	to	dust,	like	us.	Just
a	whole	lot	quicker."
     The	Gravecaster's	voice	 rose	up	again.	 "Who	 consecrates	this	soul	 into	 the
Otherworld?"
     Lena's	family	 stepped	forward.	"We	do,"	they	said	in	 unison,	everyone	except
Lena.	She	stood	there	staring	down	at	the	dirt.
     "As	do	we."	 The	Incubuses	moved	closer	to	the	casket.
     "Then	let	 him	be	Cast	to	the	world	 beyond.	Redi	in	pace,	ad	Ignem	 Atrum	ex
quo	venisti."	 The	 Gravecaster	held	 the	light	  high	 over	his	 head,	and	 it	 flared
brighter.	"Go	 in	 peace,	back	to	the	Dark	 Fire	from	 where	you	 came."	He	threw
the	light	into	 the	air,	and	sparks	showered	down	onto	the	coffin,	 searing	into	 the

15
wood	where	they	fell.	 As	 if	 on	cue,	Lena's	family	 and	the	Incubuses	threw	their
hands	into	the	 air,	 releasing	tiny	 silver	 objects	not	 much	 bigger	than	 quarters,
which	 rained	down	 onto	 Macon's	coffin	  amidst	the	 gold	 flames.	The	 sky	 was
starting	to	change	color,	from	 the	black	 of	night	 to	the	blue	before	the	sunrise.	I
strained	to	see	what	the	objects	were,	but	it	was	too	dark.
     "His	 dictis,	solutus	est.	With	these	words,	he	is	free."
     An	 almost	blinding	 white	 light	 emanated	from	the	casket.	I	 could	barely	 see
the	Gravecaster	a	few	feet	in	front	 of	me,	as	if	 his	voice	was	transporting	us	and
we	were	no	longer	standing	over	a	gravesite	in	Gatlin.
     Uncle	Macon!	 No!
     The	light	 flashed,	 like	 lightning	 striking,	 and	died	 out.	We	 were	all	 back	in
the	circle,	 looking	  at	a	 mound	of	 dirt	  and	flowers.	 The	 burial	 was	over.	 The
coffin	was	gone.	Aunt	 Del	put	her	arms	protectively	around	Reece	and	Ryan.
     Macon	was	gone.
     Lena	fell	 forward	onto	her	knees	in	the	muddy	grass.
     The	gate	around	Macon's	plot	slammed	shut	behind	her,	without	so	much	as	a
finger	touching	it.	 This	wasn't	over	for	her.	No	 one	was	going	anywhere.
     Lena?
     The	rain	 started	to	pick	 up	almost	 immediately,	 the	weather	still	 tethered	to
her	powers	as	a	Natural,	 the	ultimate	elemental	 in	the	Caster	world.	 She	pulled
herself	to	her	feet.
     Lena!	This	isn't	 going	to	change	anything!
     The	air	filled	 with	 hundreds	of	cheap	white	carnations	and	plastic	flowers	and
palmetto	fronds	 and	flags	from	 every	grave	 visited	in	 the	last	 month,	all	 flying
loose	in	the	air,	 tumbling	 airborne	down	 the	hill.	 Fifty	 years	from	 now,	folks	 in
town	 would	 still	 be	 talking	 about	 the	day	 the	 wind	 almost	 blew	 down	 every
magnolia	in	His	 Garden	of	Perpetual	Peace.	The	gale	came	on	so	fierce	and	fast,
it	was	a	slap	in	the	face	to	everyone	there,	a	hit	so	hard	you	had	to	stagger	to	stay
on	your	feet.	Only	 Lena	stood	 straight	and	tall,	 holding	fast	 to	the	stone	marker
next	to	her.	Her	hair	had	unraveled	from	its	awkward	 knot	and	whipped	in	the	air
around	her.	She	was	no	longer	all	darkness	and	shadow.	She	was	the	opposite	--
the	one	bright	 spot	in	 the	storm,	as	if	 the	yellowish-gold	  lightning	  splitting	 the
sky	 above	 us	 was	  emanating	 from	  her	 body.	  Boo	  Radley,	 Macon's	  dog,
whimpered	and	flattened	his	ears	at	Lena's	feet.
     He	wouldn't	 want	this,	L.
     Lena	put	her	 face	in	her	hands,	and	a	sudden	gust	blew	the	canopy	 out	from
where	it	was	staked	in	the	wet	earth,	sending	it	tumbling	backward	down	 the	hill.
     Gramma	 stepped	in	 front	 of	 Lena,	 closed	 her	 eyes,	and	touched	 a	 single
finger	to	 her	granddaughter's	cheek.	The	moment	she	touched	Lena,	everything

16
stopped,	and	I	 knew	 Gramma	 had	used	 her	abilities	  as	an	Empath	 to	 absorb
Lena's	powers	temporarily.	  But	 she	couldn't	 absorb	Lena's	 anger.	None	 of	 us
were	strong	enough	to	do	that.
     The	wind	 died	 down,	 and	the	rain	 slowed	 to	a	 drizzle.	Gramma	 pulled	 her
hand	away	from	Lena	and	opened	her	eyes.
     The	Succubus,	looking	unusually	 disheveled,	stared	up	at	the	sky.	"It's	almost
sunrise."	The	sun	was	beginning	to	 burn	its	way	 up	through	the	clouds	and	over
the	horizon,	scattering	 odd	splinters	of	 light	 and	life	 across	the	uneven	rows	 of
headstones.	Nothing	else	had	to	be	said.	The	Incubuses	started	to	dematerialize,
the	sound	of	suction	filling	 the	air.	Ripping	 was	how	I	thought	of	 it,	the	way	they
pulled	open	the	sky	and	disappeared.
     I	 started	to	walk	 toward	 Lena,	but	 Amma	 yanked	my	 arm.	 "What?	They're
gone."
     "Not	 all	a	them.	Look	--"
     She	was	right.	At	 the	edge	of	the	plot,	there	was	only	one	Incubus	remaining,
leaning	against	a	weathered	headstone	adorned	with	a	weeping	angel.	He	looked
older	than	I	 was,	maybe	nineteen,	with	 short,	black	 hair	and	the	same	pale	skin
as	the	rest	 of	 his	kind.	 But	 unlike	  the	other	 Incubuses,	he	hadn't	 disappeared
before	the	dawn.	As	I	 watched	him,	he	moved	out	from	 under	the	shadow	of	the
oak	directly	into	 the	bright	morning	 light,	 with	his	 eyes	closed	and	his	face	tilted
toward	the	sun,	as	if	it	was	only	shining	 for	him.
     Amma	was	wrong.	 He	couldn't	be	one	of	them.	 He	stood	there	basking	in	the
sunlight,	an	impossibility	 for	 an	Incubus.
     What	was	he?	And	what	was	he	doing	here?
     He	moved	 closer	and	caught	 my	eye,	 as	if	 he	could	feel	 me	watching	 him.
That's	when	I	saw	his	eyes.	They	weren't	the	black	eyes	of	an	Incubus.
     They	were	Caster	green.
     He	stopped	in	 front	 of	 Lena,	jamming	 his	 hands	in	 his	pockets,	tipping	  his
head	slightly.	 Not	 a	bow,	but	 an	awkward	 show	of	 deference,	which	 somehow
seemed	more	honest.	He	had	crossed	the	invisible	aisle,	and	in	a	moment	of	real
Southern	gentility,	 he	 could	have	 been	the	son	of	 Macon	 Ravenwood	himself.
Which	made	me	hate	him.
     "I'm	 sorry	for	your	 loss."
     He	 opened	her	 hand	and	 placed	 a	small	 silver	  object	in	  it,	 like	 the	 ones
everyone	had	thrown	onto	Macon's	casket.	Her	fingers	closed	around	it.	 Before	I
could	move	 a	muscle,	the	unmistakable	ripping	  sound	tore	through	 the	air,	and
he	was	gone.
     Ethan?
     I	saw	her	legs	begin	to	buckle	under	the	weight	 of	the	morning	--	 the	loss,	the

17
storm,	even	the	final	rip	 in	the	sky.	By	 the	time	I	 made	it	to	her	side	and	slid	my
arm	under	her,	she	was	gone,	too.	I	carried	her	down	the	sloping	hill,	 away	from
Macon	and	the	cemetery.
     She	slept	curled	in	 my	bed,	on	and	off,	 for	 a	night	 and	a	day.	She	had	a	few
stray	twigs	 matted	in	her	 hair,	and	her	face	 was	still	 flecked	with	 mud,	 but	she
wouldn't	 go	home	to	Ravenwood,	 and	no	one	asked	her	to.	 I	had	given	 her	my
oldest,	softest	sweatshirt	 and	wrapped	 her	in	 our	thickest	 patchwork	 quilt,	 but
she	never	stopped	shivering,	even	in	 her	sleep.	Boo	 lay	 at	her	feet,	and	 Amma
appeared	in	the	doorway	every	 now	and	then.	 I	sat	in	 the	chair	by	 the	window,
the	one	I	 never	sat	 in,	and	 stared	out	at	 the	sky.	 I	 couldn't	 open	it,	 because	a
storm	was	still	brewing.
     As	Lena	was	sleeping,	her	fingers	 uncurled.	In	 them	was	a	tiny	 bird	made	of
silver,	a	 sparrow.	A	 gift	 from	 the	stranger	at	 Macon's	funeral.	 I	tried	 to	 take	it
from	her	hand	just	as	her	fingers	tightened	around	it.
     Two	months	later,	 and	I	still	 couldn't	look	at	a	bird	 without	 hearing	the	sound
of	the	sky	ripping	 open.

18
4.17	

19
                                            Burnt	     Waffles



Four	eggs,	four	strips	of	bacon,	a	basket	of	scratch	biscuits	(which	by	Amma's
standard	meant	a	spoon	had	never	touched	the	batter),	three	kinds	of	freezer	jam,
and	a	slab	of	butter	drizzled	with	honey.	And	from	the	smell	of	 it,	across	the
counter	buttermilk	batter	was	separating	into	squares,	turning	crisp	in	the	old
waffle	iron.	For	the	last	two	 months,	Amma	had	been	cooking	night	and	day.
The	counter	was	 piled	high	 with	 Pyrex	 dishes	--	 cheese	grits,	green	bean
casserole,	fried	chicken,	and	of	course,	Bing	cherry	salad,	which	was	really	a
fancy	name	for	a	Jell-O	mold	with	cherries,	pineapple,	and	Coca-Cola	in	it.	Past
that,	I	 could	 make	out	a	 coconut	cake,	orange	rolls,	and	 what	looked	 like
bourbon	bread	pudding,	but	I	knew	there	was	more.	Since	Macon	died	and	my
dad	left,	Amma	kept	cooking	and	baking	and	stacking,	as	if	she	could	cook	her
sadness	away.	We	both	knew	she	couldn't.
    Amma	 hadn't	gone	this	 dark	 since	my	 mom	died.	 She'd	known	Macon
Ravenwood	a	lifetime	longer	than	I	had,	even	longer	than	Lena.	No	matter	how
unlikely	or	unpredictable	their	relationship	was,	it	had	meant	something	to	both
of	 them.	They	were	 friends,	though	I	  wasn't	sure	either	of	 them	 would've
admitted	it.	But	I	 knew	the	truth.	Amma	was	wearing	it	all	over	her	face	and
stacking	it	all	over	our	kitchen.
    "Got	 a	call	from	Dr.	Summers."	My	dad's	psychiatrist.	Amma	didn't	look	up
from	the	waffle	iron,	and	I	didn't	point	out	that	you	didn't	actually	need	to	stare
at	a	waffle	iron	for	it	to	cook	the	waffles.
    "What'd	 he	say?"	I	studied	her	back	from	my	seat	at	the	old	oak	table,	her
apron	strings	tied	in	the	middle.	I	remembered	how	many	times	I	had	tried	to
sneak	up	on	her	and	untie	those	strings.	Amma	was	so	short	they	hung	down
almost	as	long	as	the	apron	itself,	and	I	thought	about	that	for	as	long	as	I	could.
Anything	was	better	than	thinking	about	my	father.
    "He	thinks	your	daddy's	about	ready	to	come	home."
    I	 held	 up	my	 empty	glass	and	stared	through	it,	 where	things	looked	as
distorted	as	they	really	were.	My	dad	had	been	at	Blue	Horizons,	in	Columbia,
for	two	 months.	After	 Amma	found	 out	about	the	nonexistent	book	he	was
pretending	to	write	all	year,	and	the	"incident,"	which	is	how	she	referred	to	my
dad	nearly	jumping	off	a	balcony,	she	called	my	Aunt	Caroline.	My	aunt	drove
him	to	Blue	Horizons	that	same	day	--	she	called	it	a	spa.	The	kind	of	spa	you

20
sent	your	 crazy	relatives	 to	 if	 they	needed	what	 folks	 in	 Gatlin	 referred	 to	 as
"individual	 attention,"	 or	what	everyone	outside	of	the	South	would	 call	therapy.
     "Great."
     Great.	I	 couldn't	see	my	dad	coming	home	to	Gatlin,	 walking	 around	town	in
his	duck	pajamas.	There	was	enough	crazy	around	here	already	between	Amma
and	me,	wedged	in	between	the	cream-of-grief	 casseroles	I'd	be	dropping	 off	 at
First	Methodist	around	dinnertime,	 as	I	did	almost	every	night.	 I	wasn't	an	expert
on	feelings,	but	 Amma's	were	all	 stirred	up	in	 cake	batter,	and	she	wasn't	about
to	share	them.	She'd	rather	give	away	the	cake.
     I	tried	 to	talk	 to	her	about	it	 once,	the	day	after	 the	funeral,	but	she	had	shut
down	 the	conversation	 before	 it	 even	 started.	"Done	  is	done.	 Gone	 is	 gone.
Where	Macon	Ravenwood	is	now,	not	 likely	 we'll	ever	see	him	again,	not	in	 this
world	 or	the	Other."	 She	sounded	like	 she'd	made	her	peace	with	 it,	 but	here	I
was,	two	months	later,	still	 delivering	 cakes	and	casseroles.	She	had	lost	the	two
men	in	her	life	 the	same	night	--	my	 father	and	Macon.	My	 dad	wasn't	dead,	but
our	kitchen	 didn't	make	those	kinds	 of	 distinctions.	Like	 Amma	 said,	gone	was
gone.
     "I'm	 makin'	waffles.	 Hope	you're	hungry."
     That	was	probably	 all	 I'd	hear	from	 her	this	 morning.	I	 picked	up	 the	carton
of	chocolate	milk	 next	to	my	 glass	and	poured	it	full	 out	of	habit.	Amma	 used	to
complain	when	I	 drank	chocolate	milk	 at	breakfast.	Now	she	would	 have	cut	me
up	a	 whole	Tunnel	 of	 Fudge	 cake	without	 a	 word,	 which	 only	 made	me	 feel
worse.	Even	more	telling,	the	Sunday	edition	 of	the	New	York	Times	wasn't	open
to	the	crossword,	and	her	black,	extra-sharp	#2	pencils	were	hidden	away	in	their
drawer.	Amma	 was	 staring	out	 the	kitchen	 window	  at	the	 clouds	choking	 the
sky.
     L.	 A.	C.	 O.	N.	 I.	 C.	Seven	across,	which	means	I	 don't	have	to	 say	a	thing,
Ethan	Wate.	That's	what	Amma	would	have	said	on	any	other	day.
     I	took	 a	gulp	of	 my	chocolate	milk	 and	almost	choked.	Sugar	was	too	 sweet,
and	Amma	was	too	quiet.	That's	how	I	knew	things	 had	changed.
     That,	and	the	burnt	waffles	smoking	 in	the	waffle	 iron.




I	should	have	been	on	my	 way	to	 school,	but	instead	I	 turned	onto	Route	 9	and
headed	for	  Ravenwood.	 Lena	 hadn't	 been	 back	 to	 school	 since	 before	 her
birthday.	 After	  Macon's	 death,	 Principal	 Harper	 had	 generously	 granted	 her
permission	to	 work	 at	 home	with	  a	tutor	 until	  she	felt	 up	 to	coming	 back	 to

21
Jackson.	Considering	he	had	helped	 Mrs.	Lincoln	  in	her	 campaign	to	 get	Lena
expelled	after	the	 winter	 formal,	 I'm	sure	he	was	 hoping	that	 would	be	 the	day
after	never.
     I	admit,	 I	 was	a	little	 jealous.	Lena	didn't	 have	to	listen	to	 Mr.	 Lee	drone	on
about	the	War	 of	Northern	 Aggression	and	 the	plight	 of	the	 Confederacy	or	sit
on	the	Good-Eye	Side	 in	English.	 Abby	 Porter	and	I	 were	the	only	 ones	sitting
there	now,	 so	we	 had	to	 answer	all	 the	Dr.	 Jekyll	 and	 Mr.	 Hyde	 questions	in
class.	What	 prompts	Dr.	  Jekyll	 to	 turn	into	  Mr.	 Hyde?	 Were	they	 really	 any
different	after	all?	 Nobody	had	the	slightest	clue,	which	 was	the	reason	everyone
on	Mrs.	English's	glass-eye	side	was	sleeping.
     But	 Jackson	wasn't	the	same	without	  Lena,	at	least	 not	for	 me.	That's	 why
after	two	 months,	 I	was	 begging	her	 to	 come	back.	Yesterday,	 when	 she	said
she'd	think	about	it,	I	told	 her	she	could	think	about	it	on	the	way	to	school.


I	found	myself	 back	at	the	fork	in	 the	road.	It	was	our	old	road,	mine	 and	Lena's.
The	one	that	had	taken	me	off	 Route	9	and	up	to	 Ravenwood	the	night	 we	met.
The	first	 time	 I	 realized	 she	was	the	 same	girl	 I'd	 been	dreaming	 about,	long
before	she	ever	moved	to	Gatlin.
     As	 soon	as	 I	 saw	the	 road,	I	 heard	 the	song.	 It	 drifted	 into	 the	 Volvo	  as
naturally	as	if	I	 had	turned	on	the	radio.	Same	song.	Same	words.	Same	as	it	had
for	the	last	two	months	--	when	I	 turned	on	my	iPod,	stared	at	the	ceiling,	or	read
a	single	page	of	Silver	Surfer	over	and	over,	without	even	seeing	it.
     Seventeen	Moons.	It	was	always	 there.	I	tried	 turning	 the	dials	on	 the	radio,
but	it	didn't	 matter.	Now	 it	was	playing	 in	my	 head	instead	of	coming	out	 of	the
speakers,	as	if	someone	was	Kelting	the	song	to	me.


          Seventeen	moons,	seventeen	years,
          Eyes	where	Dark	or	Light	 appears,
          Gold	for	 yes	and	green	for	no,
          Seventeen	the	last	to	know	...


     The	song	was	gone.	I	knew	better	than	to	ignore	it,	 but	I	also	knew	how	 Lena
acted	every	time	I	tried	to	bring	 it	up.
     "It's	a	song,"	she	would	say	dismissively.	 "It	 doesn't	mean	anything."
     "Like	 Sixteen	Moons	didn't	 mean	anything?	 It's	about	us."	 It	 didn't	matter	 if
she	knew	it	 or	even	if	 she	agreed.	Either	way,	 it	 was	the	moment	Lena	 usually

22
switched	from	defense	to	offense,	and	the	conversation	veered	off	track.
     "You	 mean	it's	about	me.	Dark	 or	Light?	 Whether	 or	not	I'm	 going	 to	go	all
Sarafine	on	you?	If	you've	 already	decided	I'm	going	 Dark,	why	 don't	you	admit
it?"
     At	 that	 point,	 I	 would	 say	something	 stupid	 to	change	the	 subject.	Until	  I
learned	not	 to	say	 anything	 at	all.	  So	we	 didn't	 talk	 about	the	 song	that	 was
playing	in	my	 head,	same	as	it	was	in	hers.
     Seventeen	Moons.	We	couldn't	avoid	it.
     The	song	had	 to	be	about	 Lena's	Claiming,	 the	moment	 she	would	 become
Light	 or	Dark	 forever.	 Which	 could	 only	mean	one	 thing:	 she	wasn't	Claimed.
Not	yet.	Gold	 for	 yes	and	green	for	no?	I	knew	 what	the	song	meant	--	the	 gold
eyes	of	a	Dark	Caster	or	the	green	eyes	of	a	Light	 one.	Since	the	night	of	Lena's
birthday,	her	Sixteenth	Moon,	 I	had	tried	 to	tell	myself	 it	 was	all	over,	that	Lena
didn't	have	to	be	Claimed,	 that	she	was	some	kind	of	exception.	 Why	couldn't	 it
be	different	for	 her,	since	everything	else	about	her	seemed	to	be	so	exceptional?
     But	it	 wasn't	different.	 Seventeen	Moons	was	proof.	I'd	 heard	Sixteen	Moons
for	months	before	Lena's	birthday,	a	harbinger	of	things	 to	come.	Now	the	words
had	changed	again,	and	I	 was	faced	 with	 another	eerie	prophecy.	 There	was	a
choice	to	be	made,	and	Lena	hadn't	made	it.	The	songs	never	lied.	At	 least,	they
hadn't	yet.
     I	 didn't	 want	to	 think	 about	it.	 As	 I	 headed	up	the	 long	 rise	leading	 to	the
gates	of	 Ravenwood	 Manor,	 even	 the	 grinding	 sound	 of	 the	 tires	 on	 gravel
seemed	to	repeat	the	one	 inescapable	truth.	If	  there	was	a	Seventeenth	Moon,
then	it	had	all	been	for	nothing.	Macon's	death	had	been	for	nothing.
     Lena	would	 still	 have	 to	Claim	 herself	 for	 Light	 or	Dark,	 deciding	 her	fate
forever.	There	 was	no	 turning	 back	for	 Casters,	no	changing	 sides.	And	 when
she	finally	 made	her	choice,	half	 her	family	 would	 die	 because	of	it.	The	 Light
Casters	or	the	Dark	 Casters	--	the	 curse	promised	only	 one	side	could	 survive.
But	 in	 a	family	  where	 generations	of	 Casters	had	no	 free	 will	  and	had	 been
Claimed	for	 Light	 or	 Dark	on	 their	own	 sixteenth	birthdays	 without	 any	say	 in
the	matter,	how	was	Lena	supposed	to	make	that	kind	of	choice?
     All	 she	had	wanted,	her	whole	life,	 was	to	 choose	her	own	destiny.	Now	 she
could,	and	it	was	like	some	kind	of	 cruel	cosmic	joke.
     I	  stopped	 at	  the	  gates,	 turned	 off	   the	 engine,	  and	  closed	 my	  eyes,
remembering	--	 the	rising	 panic,	 the	 visions,	the	 dreams,	the	song.	 This	 time,
Macon	wouldn't	 be	there	to	steal	away	the	unhappy	 endings.	There	was	nobody
left	to	get	us	out	of	trouble,	and	it	 was	coming	fast.

23
4.17	

24
                                          Lemons	    and	  Ash



When	 I	pulled	up	 in	front	of	 Ravenwood,	Lena	was	sitting	on	the	crumbling
veranda,	waiting.	She	was	wearing	an	old	button-down	shirt	and	jeans	and	her
beat-up	Chuck	Taylors.	For	a	second,	it	seemed	as	if	it	 could've	been	three
months	ago	and	today	was	just	another	day.	But	she	was	also	wearing	one	of
Macon's	pinstriped	vests,	and	it	wasn't	the	same.	Now	that	Macon	was	gone,
something	about	Ravenwood	felt	 wrong.	Like	  going	to	 the	 Gatlin	 County
Library	if	 Marian,	its	 only	librarian,	wasn't	there,	or	to	 the	DAR	 without	the
most	important	daughter	of	the	Daughters	of	the	American	Revolution	herself,
Mrs.	Lincoln.	Or	to	my	parents'	study	without	my	mom.
    Ravenwood	looked	worse	every	time	I	came.	Staring	out	at	the	archway	of
weeping	willows,	it	was	hard	to	imagine	the	garden	had	deteriorated	so	quickly.
Beds	of	the	same	kinds	of	flowers	Amma	had	painstakingly	taught	me	to	weed
as	a	kid	were	fighting	for	space	in	the	dry	earth.	Beneath	the	magnolias,	clusters
of	hyacinth	were	tangled	with	hibiscus,	and	heliotrope	infested	the	forget-me-
nots,	as	if	 the	garden	itself	 was	in	 mourning.	Which	 was	entirely	 possible.
Ravenwood	Manor	had	always	seemed	to	have	a	mind	of	its	own.	Why	should
the	gardens	be	any	different?	The	weight	of	Lena's	grief	probably	wasn't	helping.
The	house	was	a	mirror	for	her	moods,	the	same	way	it	had	always	been	for
Macon's.
    When	 he	died,	 he	left	 Ravenwood	to	 Lena,	and	sometimes	I	 wondered
whether	it	would	have	been	better	if	he	hadn't.	The	house	was	looking	bleaker	by
the	day,	instead	of	better.	Every	time	I	drove	up	the	hill,	I	found	myself	holding
my	breath,	waiting	 for	 the	smallest	sign	of	 life,	 something	new,	something
blooming.	Every	time	I	reached	the	top,	all	I	saw	were	more	bare	branches.
    Lena	climbed	into	the	Volvo,	a	complaint	already	on	her	lips.	"I	don't	want	to
go."
    "No	 one	wants	to	go	to	school."
    "You	 know	what	I	mean.	That	place	is	awful.	I'd	rather	stay	here	and	study
Latin	all	day."
    This	 wasn't	going	to	be	easy.	How	could	I	convince	her	to	go	somewhere	I
didn't	even	want	 to	 go?	High	 school	sucked.	It	 was	a	 universal	truth,	and
whoever	said	these	were	supposed	to	be	the	best	years	of	your	life	was	probably
drunk	or	delusional.	I	 decided	reverse	psychology	was	my	only	shot.	"High

25
school	is	supposed	to	be	the	worst	years	of	your	life."
     "Is	that	so?"
     "Definitely.	  You	have	to	come	back."
     "And	 that	will	 make	me	feel	better	how,	exactly?"
     "I	 don't	 know.	 How	 about,	it's	 so	bad,	it'll	  make	the	 rest	of	 your	life	  seem
great	in	comparison?"
     "By	 your	logic,	 I	should	spend	the	day	with	Principal	Harper."
     "Or	try	 out	for	cheerleading."
     She	 twirled	 her	 necklace	 around	 her	 finger,	  her	 distinctive	 collection	  of
charms	knocking	against	each	other.	"It's	tempting."	 She	smiled,	almost	a	laugh,
and	I	knew	she	was	going	with	me.


Lena	rested	her	shoulder	against	mine	the	whole	way	to	school.	But	when	we	got
to	the	parking	 lot,	 she	couldn't	 bring	herself	 to	get	 out	of	 the	car.	 I	didn't	 dare
turn	off	the	engine.
     Savannah	Snow,	 the	queen	of	 Jackson	 High,	 walked	 past	us,	 hitching	 her
tight	 T-shirt	 above	her	 jeans.	Emily	 Asher,	 her	second	in	 command,	 followed
behind,	texting	as	she	slid	between	cars.	Emily	saw	us	and	grabbed	Savannah	by
the	arm.	They	stopped,	the	response	of	any	Gatlin	girl	 whose	mamma	had	raised
her	right,	when	faced	with	 a	relative	of	 the	recently	departed.	Savannah	clutched
her	books	to	her	chest,	shaking	her	head	at	us	sadly.	It	was	like	 watching	 an	old
silent	movie.
     Your	uncle's	in	a	better	 place	now,	Lena.	He's	up	at	the	pearly	gates,	where	a
chorus	a	angels	is	leadin'	him	to	his	ever-lovin'	 Maker.
     I	translated	for	Lena,	but	she	already	knew	what	they	were	thinking.
     Stop	it!
     Lena	slid	her	battered	spiral	notebook	in	front	 of	her	face,	trying	 to	disappear.
Emily	 held	up	her	hand,	a	timid	 half-wave.	Giving	 us	our	space,	letting	us	know
she	was	not	only	  well	 bred	but	 sensitive.	I	 didn't	 have	to	 be	a	mind	 reader	to
know	what	she	was	thinking	either.
     I'm	 not	comin'	 over	 there,	 because	I'm	a	 lettin'	 you	 grieve	in	 peace,	sweet
Lena	Du-channes.	But	I	will	 always,	and	I	 do	mean	always,	be	here	for	you,	like
the	Good	Book	and	my	mamma	taught	me.
     Emily	 nodded	 to	Savannah,	and	 the	two	 of	 them	walked	 slowly	  and	sadly
away,	as	 if	  they	 hadn't	started	 the	 Guardian	 Angels,	 Jackson's	version	 of	  a
neighborhood	watch,	 a	few	 months	ago	 with	 the	sole	 purpose	of	 getting	Lena
kicked	out	of	school.	In	 a	way,	this	was	worse.	Emory	ran	to	catch	up	with	 them,
but	he	saw	us	and	slowed	to	a	somber	walk,	rapping	on	the	hood	of	my	 car	as	he

26
walked	by.	He	 hadn't	said	a	word	to	me	in	 months,	but	now	 he	was	showing	his
support.	They	were	all	so	full	 of	crap.
     "Don't	 say	 it."	 Lena	 had	rolled	 herself	 down	 into	 a	ball	 in	 the	passenger's
seat.
     "Can't	 believe	 he	didn't	 take	 off	 his	cap.	 His	 mamma's	gonna	kick	  the	tar
outta	him	when	 he	gets	home."	I	 turned	off	 the	engine.	"Play	 this	right	 and	you
might	make	the	cheer	squad	after	all,	sweet	Lena	Du-channes."
     "They're	 ...	they're	such	--"	 She	was	so	angry	for	 a	minute	I	 regretted	saying
it.	But	 it	 was	 going	to	 be	happening	 all	 day,	and	I	 wanted	 her	to	 be	prepared
before	she	set	foot	in	the	halls	of	Jackson.	I	had	spent	too	much	time	 being	Poor
Ethan	Wate	Whose	Mamma	Died	Just	Last	Year	not	to	know	that.
     "Hypocrites?"	 That	was	an	understatement.
     "Sheep."	That,	too.	 "I	 don't	want	to	be	in	 their	squad,	and	I	 don't	want	a	seat
at	 their	 table.	 I	  don't	 want	 them	 to	  even	look	  at	 me.	 I	  know	 Ridley	  was
manipulating	them	 with	 her	powers,	but	 if	 they	hadn't	thrown	 that	party	 on	my
birthday	--	if	 I	 had	stayed	inside	Ravenwood	like	Uncle	 Macon	had	wanted	..."	I
didn't	need	her	to	finish.	He	might	 still	be	alive.
     "You	 can't	 know	that,	 L.	 Sarafine	would	 have	found	 another	way	 to	 get	to
you."
     "They	 hate	me,	and	that's	how	it	 should	be."	Her	 hair	was	beginning	 to	curl,
and	for	a	second	I	thought	there	was	going	to	be	a	downpour.	She	put	her	head	in
her	hands,	 ignoring	 the	 tears	 that	were	 losing	  themselves	in	 her	 crazy	 hair.
"Something	has	to	stay	the	same.	I'm	nothing	like	them."
     "I	 hate	to	break	it	to	you,	but	you	never	were,	and	you	never	will	 be."
     "I	 know,	but	something's	changed.	Everything's	changed."
     I	looked	out	 my	window.	 "Not	everything."
     Boo	Radley	 stared	back	at	me.	He	was	sitting	 on	the	 faded	white	line	 of	 the
parking	space	next	to	ours,	as	if	 he	had	been	waiting	 for	 this	moment.	Boo	 still
followed	 Lena	everywhere,	 like	 a	good	Caster	dog.	 I	thought	 about	how	 many
times	I	 had	considered	giving	 that	dog	a	 ride.	Saving	 him	some	time.	 I	 opened
the	door,	but	Boo	didn't	move.
     "Fine.	 Be	that	 way."	 I	 started	to	 pull	 the	door	 closed,	knowing	 Boo	 would
never	get	in.	 As	I	 did,	 he	leaped	up	 into	my	 lap,	 across	the	gearshift,	and	into
Lena's	arms.
     She	buried	her	face	in	 his	fur,	 breathing	deeply,	as	if	 the	mangy	dog	 created
some	kind	of	air	that	was	different	 from	the	air	outside.
     They	were	one	quivering	 mass	of	black	 hair	and	black	 fur.	For	 a	minute,	the
whole	universe	seemed	fragile,	like	 it	could	fall	 apart	if	 I	so	much	as	blew	in	 the
wrong	direction	or	 pulled	the	wrong	thread.

27
     I	 knew	what	 I	needed	to	do.	 I	couldn't	 explain	 the	feeling,	 but	it	 came	over
me	as	powerfully	  as	the	dreams	had,	 when	I	 saw	Lena	 for	 the	first	 time.	 The
dreams	we	had	always	shared,	so	real	they	left	mud	in	 my	sheets,	or	river	 water
dripping	onto	my	 floor.	This	 feeling	was	no	different.
     I	 needed	to	know	what	 thread	to	pull.	 I	 needed	to	be	the	one	who	 knew	the
right	direction.	 She	couldn't	see	her	way	clear	of	 where	she	was	right	 now,	so	it
had	to	be	me.
     Lost.	That's	what	she	was,	and	it	was	the	one	thing	I	couldn't	let	her	be.
     I	turned	on	the	car	and	shifted	 into	reverse.	We	had	only	made	it	as	far	as	the
parking	lot,	and	I	 knew	without	 a	word	that	it	 was	time	to	drive	Lena	home.	Boo
kept	his	eyes	closed	the	whole	way.




We	 took	 an	old	  blanket	 back	to	 Greenbrier	 and	 curled	 up	 near	Genevieve's
grave,	on	a	tiny	  patch	of	 grass	next	to	the	 hearthstone	and	the	crumbling	 rock
wall.	 The	blackened	 trees	and	meadows	surrounded	 us	on	every	 side,	tufts	 of
green	only	 beginning	 to	push	through	 the	 hard	dirt.	 Even	 now	it	 was	 still	 our
spot,	the	 place	where	 we	had	 first	 talked	 after	 Lena	shattered	the	 window	  in
English	class	with	 a	look	 --	 and	her	Caster	powers.	 Aunt	 Del	couldn't	 stand	to
see	the	burnt	cemetery	and	ruined	gardens	anymore,	but	Lena	 didn't	mind.	 This
was	the	last	place	she	had	seen	Macon,	and	that	made	it	safe.	Somehow,	looking
at	the	wreckage	 from	 the	 fire	 was	familiar,	  even	reassuring.	It	 had	 come	and
taken	everything	 in	 its	path,	 and	then	it	 was	gone.	 You	 didn't	 have	to	wonder
what	else	was	coming	or	when	it	would	get	here.
     The	grass	was	wet	 and	green,	and	I	 wrapped	the	blanket	 around	us.	"Come
closer,	you're	freezing."	She	smiled	without	 looking	at	me.
     "Since	 when	do	I	 need	a	reason	to	 come	closer?"	 She	settled	back	into	 my
shoulder	and	we	sat	in	 silence,	our	 bodies	warming	 each	other	and	 our	fingers
braided	together,	the	shock	moving	up	my	 arm.	It	was	always	that	way	 when	we
touched	--	 a	gentle	 jolt	 of	 electricity	  that	intensified	  with	 our	 every	touch.	 A
reminder	 Casters	and	 Mortals	  couldn't	 be	 together.	 Not	 without	  the	 Mortal
ending	up	dead.
     I	looked	 up	at	the	 twisted	black	 branches	and	the	bleak	sky.	I	 thought	about
the	first	 day	I	followed	  Lena	to	this	 garden,	the	way	I'd	 found	her	crying	 in	 the
tall	 grass.	We	had	 watched	the	 gray	clouds	 disappear	from	 an	otherwise	 blue
sky,	clouds	she	moved	just	by	thinking	 about	them.	The	 blue	sky	--	that's	what	 I
was	to	 her.	 She	 was	Hurricane	  Lena,	 and	I	  was	regular	 old	  Ethan	 Wate.	 I

28
couldn't	imagine	what	my	 life	would	 be	like	without	 her.
     "Look."	  Lena	 climbed	 over	 me	 and	reached	 up	 into	 the	 crumbling	 black
branches.
     A	perfect	 yellow	 lemon,	the	only	 one	in	the	garden,	surrounded	by	ash.	Lena
pulled	it	loose,	and	black	flakes	flew	 into	the	air.	 The	yellow	peel	gleamed	in	her
hand,	and	she	let	herself	 fall	 back	into	 my	arms.	"Look	  at	that.	Not	 everything
burned."
     "It'll	 all	 grow	back,	L."
     "I	 know."	She	didn't	 sound	convinced,	turning	the	lemon	over	and	over	in	her
hands.
     "This	 time	  next	 year,	none	 of	 this	 will	   be	black."	  She	looked	 up	 at	 the
branches	and	the	sky	 above	 our	heads,	and	 I	 kissed	her	 on	her	 forehead,	her
nose,	the	perfect	crescent-shaped	birthmark	 on	her	 cheekbone,	as	she	tilted	 up
toward	me.	"Everything	 will	 be	green.	Even	these	trees	will	 grow	again."	 As	we
pushed	our	feet	against	each	other,	kicking	 off	our	 shoes,	I	could	feel	 a	familiar
prick	 of	electricity	  every	 time	our	 bare	skin	 met.	 We	were	 so	close,	her	 curls
were	falling	into	 my	face.	I	blew,	 and	they	scattered.
     I	 was	caught	in	 her	 drag,	struck	 by	 the	current	 that	bound	 us	together	and
kept	us	apart.	I	 leaned	in	to	 kiss	her	mouth,	 and	she	held	the	lemon	 in	 front	 of
my	nose,	teasing.	"Smell."
     "Smells	like	 you."	 Like	lemons	and	rosemary,	the	scent	that	had	drawn	me	to
Lena	when	we	first	met.
     She	sniffed	it,	making	 a	face.	"Sour,	like	me."
     "You	 don't	taste	sour	to	me."	I	pulled	 her	closer,	until	our	 hair	was	full	 of	ash
and	grass,	and	 the	 bitter	 lemon	 was	 lost	 somewhere	beneath	our	 feet	 at	 the
bottom	of	 the	 blanket.	 The	heat	 was	on	 my	 skin,	like	  fire.	 Even	though	 all	 I
could	feel	was	a	biting	 cold	 whenever	I	held	 her	hand	lately,	when	 we	kissed	--
really	 kissed	--	  there	was	 nothing	 but	 heat.	I	  loved	 her,	atom	 by	 atom,	 one
burning	cell	 at	a	 time.	We	 kissed	until	 my	 heart	began	skipping	 beats,	and	the
edges	of	what	I	could	see	and	feel	and	hear	began	to	fade	into	darkness....
     Lena	pushed	me	away,	for	my	 own	good,	and	we	lay	in	 the	grass	as	I	tried	to
catch	my	breath.
     Are	you	okay?
     I'm	--	 I'm	good.
     I	wasn't,	but	 I	didn't	say	anything.	 I	thought	I	 smelled	something	burning	and
realized	it	 was	 the	blanket.	 It	 was	smoldering	 from	  underneath,	where	it	 was
touching	the	ground.
     Lena	pushed	herself	 up	 and	pulled	 back	the	 blanket.	 The	grass	beneath	us
was	charred	and	trampled.	"Ethan.	Look	at	the	grass."

29
     "What	 about	it?"	I	 was	still	 trying	 to	catch	my	breath,	but	I	 was	trying	 not	to
show	 it.	 Since	 Lena's	 birthday,	 things	  had	only	  gotten	 worse,	 physically.	  I
couldn't	stop	 touching	 her,	though	 sometimes	I	 couldn't	 stand	the	pain	 of	 that
touch.
     "It's	burnt	 now,	too."
     "That's	weird."
     She	looked	at	me	evenly,	her	eyes	strangely	dark	and	bright	at	the	same	time.
She	tossed	the	grass.	"It	was	me."
     "You	 are	pretty	hot."
     "You	 can't	be	joking	right	 now.	It's	getting	 worse."	We	sat	next	to	each	other,
looking	 out	 at	what	 was	 left	 of	 Greenbrier.	 But	 we	 weren't	 really	 looking	 at
Greenbrier.	We	were	looking	 at	the	power	of	the	other	 fire.	"Just	like	 my	mom."
She	sounded	bitter.
     Fire	 was	the	 trademark	of	 a	 Cataclyst,	and	 Sarafine's	fire	 had	 burnt	 every
inch	of	 these	fields	 the	 night	 of	 Lena's	birthday.	 Now	 Lena	 was	starting	 fires
unintentionally.	 My	stomach	tightened.
     "The	grass	will	 grow	back,	too."
     "What	 if	  I	 don't	want	 it	 to?"	 she	said	 softly,	 strangely,	 as	she	 let	another
handful	of	charred	grass	fall	through	her	fingers.
     "What?"
     "Why	 should	it?"
     "Because	life	 goes	on,	 L.	 The	 birds	do	 their	 thing,	 and	the	bees	do	 theirs.
Seeds	get	scattered,	and	everything	grows	back."
     "Then	it	 all	gets	burnt	again.	If	you're	lucky	 enough	to	be	around	me."
     There	was	no	point	 arguing	with	 Lena	when	 she	was	in	one	of	these	moods.
A	lifetime	 with	 Amma	going	dark	had	taught	me	that.	"Sometimes	it	does."
     She	pulled	  her	knees	 up	 and	rested	 her	 chin	 on	 them.	 Her	 shape	cast	a
shadow	much	larger	than	she	actually	was.
     "But	 I'm	still	 lucky."	 I	moved	my	 leg	until	 it	caught	the	light,	throwing	 a	long
line	of	my	shadow	into	 hers.
     We	sat	like	 that,	side	by	 side,	with	 only	our	 shadows	touching,	until	 the	sun
went	down	and	they	stretched	toward	 the	black	trees	and	disappeared	into	dusk.
We	listened	to	 the	cicadas	in	silence	and	tried	 not	to	 think	 until	 the	rain	started
falling	again.

30
5.1	

31
                                                    Falling



In	the	next	few	weeks,	I	successfully	convinced	Lena	to	leave	the	house	with	me
a	total	of	 three	times.	Once	to	the	movies	with	Link	 --	 my	best	friend	 since
second	grade	--	where	even	her	signature	combination	of	popcorn	and	Milk
Duds	didn't	cheer	her	up.	Once	to	my	house	to	eat	Amma's	molasses	cookies	and
watch	a	zombie	marathon,	my	version	of	a	dream	date.	It	wasn't.	And	once	for	a
walk	along	the	Santee,	where	we	ended	up	turning	around	after	ten	minutes	with
sixty	bug	bites	between	us.	Wherever	she	was,	she	didn't	want	to	be.
    Today	was	different.	She	had	finally	found	somewhere	she	was	comfortable,
even	if	it	was	the	last	place	I	expected.
    I	 walked	in	her	room	to	find	her	lying	sprawled	across	the	ceiling,	arms	flung
across	the	plaster,	her	hair	spread	out	like	a	black	fan	around	her	head.
    "Since	when	can	you	do	that?"	I	was	used	to	Lena's	powers	by	now,	but	since
her	sixteenth	birthday	they	seemed	to	be	getting	stronger	and	wilder,	as	if	she
was	awkwardly	growing	into	 herself	as	a	 Caster.	With	every	day,	 Lena	the
Caster	girl	was	more	unpredictable,	stretching	her	powers	to	see	what	she	could
do.	As	it	turned	out,	what	she	could	do	these	days	was	cause	all	kinds	of	trouble.
    Like	 the	time	Link	and	I	were	driving	to	school	in	the	Beater,	and	one	of	his
songs	came	on	the	radio	as	if	the	station	was	playing	it.	Link	was	so	shocked
he'd	swerved	a	good	two	feet	into	Mrs.	Asher's	front	hedge.	"An	accident,"	Lena
said	with	a	crooked	smile.	"One	of	Link's	songs	was	stuck	in	my	head."	Nobody
had	ever	gotten	one	of	Link's	songs	stuck	in	their	head.	But	Link	had	believed
her,	which	made	his	ego	even	more	unbearable.	"What	can	I	say?	I	have	that
effect	on	the	ladies.	This	voice	is	as	smooth	as	butter."
    A	 week	after	that,	Link	and	I	had	been	walking	down	the	hall,	and	Lena	came
up	and	gave	me	a	big	hug,	right	as	the	bell	was	ringing.	I	figured	she	had	finally
decided	to	come	back	to	school.	But	she	wasn't	actually	there	at	all.	It	was	some
kind	of	projection,	or	whatever	the	Caster	word	was	for	making	your	boyfriend
look	like	an	idiot.	Link	thought	I	was	trying	to	hug	him,	so	he	called	me	"Lover
Boy"	for	days.	"I	missed	you.	Is	that	such	a	crime?"	Lena	thought	it	was	funny,
but	I	was	starting	to	wish	Gramma	would	step	in	and	ground	her,	or	whatever	it
was	you	did	to	a	Natural	who	was	up	to	no	good.
    Don't	be	a	baby.	I	said	I	was	sorry,	didn't	I?
    You're	as	big	a	menace	as	Link	in	fifth	grade,	the	year	he	sucked	all	the	juice

32
out	of	my	mom's	tomatoes	with	a	straw.
     It	won't	 happen	again.	I	swear.
     That's	what	Link	 said	back	then.
     But	he	stopped,	right?
     Yeah.	When	we	stopped	growing	tomatoes.
     "Come	down."
     "I	 like	it	 better	up	here."
     I	 grabbed	her	 hand.	 A	 current	 crept	 through	 my	 arm,	but	 I	 didn't	  let	 go,
pulling	her	down	 onto	the	bed	next	to	me.
     "Ouch."	 She	was	laughing.	I	could	 see	her	shoulder	shudder	even	though	her
back	was	to	me.	Or	maybe	she	wasn't	laughing	but	 crying,	which	 was	rare	these
days.	The	crying	had	mostly	stopped	and	had	been	replaced	by	something	worse.
Nothing.
     Nothing	 was	deceptive.	Nothing	was	much	harder	to	describe	or	fix	or	stop.
     Do	you	want	to	talk	 about	it,	L?
     About	what?
     I	pulled	 her	closer,	resting	 my	head	on	hers.	The	shaking	slowed,	 and	I	held
her	as	tight	  as	I	 could.	 Like	  she	was	still	  on	 the	ceiling,	  and	I	 was	 the	one
hanging	on.
     Nothing.




I	shouldn't	 have	 complained	 about	the	 ceiling.	 There	were	 crazier	 places	you
could	hang	out.	Like	where	we	were	now.
     "I	 have	a	bad	feeling	about	this."	I	was	sweating,	but	I	 couldn't	wipe	my	 face.
I	needed	my	hands	to	stay	right	where	they	were.
     "That's	weird."	 Lena	smiled	down	 at	me.	"Because	I	have	a	very	good	feeling
about	it."	 Her	 hair	 was	blowing	 in	 a	breeze,	though	 I	 wasn't	sure	which	 kind.
"Besides,	we're	almost	there."
     "You	 realize	this	is	insane,	right?	If	 a	cop	drives	by,	 we're	gonna	get	arrested
or	sent	to	Blue	Horizons	to	visit	 my	dad."
     "It's	not	 crazy.	It's	romantic.	Couples	come	here	all	the	time."
     "When	 people	go	to	 the	water	tower,	 L,	 they	aren't	 talking	 about	the	top	 of
the	water	tower."	Which	 is	where	we	 would	be	in	 a	minute.	Just	the	two	of	 us,	a
wobbly	 iron	 ladder	about	 a	hundred	 feet	above	 the	ground,	 and	a	 bright	 blue
Carolina	sky.
     I	tried	 not	to	look	down.

33
     Lena	had	talked	me	into	 climbing	 to	the	 top.	There	was	something	about	the
excitement	in	her	voice	 that	made	me	go	along	with	 it,	as	if	something	 so	stupid
might	 be	able	 to	 make	her	 feel	 the	way	 she	did	 the	 last	 time	 we	were	 here.
Smiling,	happy,	in	 a	red	sweater.	I	remembered,	because	there	was	a	piece	of	red
yarn	hanging	from	her	charm	necklace.
     She	must	have	remembered,	too.	So	here	we	were,	stuck	on	a	ladder,	looking
up	so	we	didn't	look	down.
     Once	we	reached	the	top	and	I	looked	out	at	the	view,	I	understood.	Lena	was
right.	It	 was	better	up	here.	Everything	was	so	far	away	that	it	didn't	even	matter.
     I	let	 my	legs	 dangle	over	the	edge.	"My	 mom	 used	to	collect	pictures	 of	old
water	towers."
     "Yeah?"
     "Like	 the	Sisters	collect	 spoons.	Only	 for	my	 mom,	it	 was	water	towers	 and
postcards	from	the	World's	Fair."
     "I	 thought	all	water	towers	looked	like	 this	one.	Like	 a	big	white	spider."
     "Somewhere	in	Illinois,	 there's	one	shaped	like	a	ketchup	bottle."
     She	laughed.
     "And	 there's	one	that	looks	like	a	little	house,	this	high	off	 the	ground."
     "We	 should	live	 there.	I'd	 go	up	once	 and	never	come	back	down."	 She	lay
back	on	the	warm	white	 paint.	"I	 guess	in	Gatlin	 it	 should	be	a	peach,	a	big	old
Gatlin	peach."
     I	 leaned	back	next	to	her.	 "They	already	 have	one,	but	it's	 not	in	 Gatlin.	 It's
over	in	Gaffney.	Guess	they	thought	of	it	 first."
     "What	 about	a	pie?	We	could	paint	this	tank	to	look	 like	 one	of	Amma's	pies.
She'd	like	that."
     "Haven't	 seen	one	of	those.	But	my	 mom	had	a	 picture	of	 one	shaped	like	a
corncob."
     "I'd	 still	 rather	have	the	house."	Lena	stared	up	at	the	sky,	where	there	wasn't
a	cloud	in	sight.
     "I'd	 take	the	corncob	or	the	ketchup,	if	you	were	there."
     She	 reached	 for	   my	  hand	 and	  we	  stayed	 like	  that,	  at	  the	 edge	  of
Summerville's	plain	 white	water	 tower,	looking	 out	at	Gatlin	 County	as	if	 it	was
a	tiny	toy	land	full	 of	 tiny	toy	 people.	As	small	as	the	cardboard	village	my	mom
used	to	keep	under	our	Christmas	tree.
     How	could	 people	that	small	have	any	problems	at	all?
     "Hey,	 I	brought	you	something."	 I	watched	as	she	sat	up,	looking	at	me	like	a
little	kid.
     "What	is	 it?"
     I	 looked	over	 the	edge	of	the	water	 tower.	"Maybe	 we	 should	wait	 until	 we

34
can't	fall	to	our	deaths."
     "We're	not	going	 to	die.	Don't	be	such	a	chicken."
     I	reached	into	 my	back	pocket.	It	 wasn't	anything	 special,	but	I'd	 had	it	for	 a
while	now,	and	I	was	hoping	 it	might	help	her	find	 her	way	back	to	herself.
     I	pulled	 out	a	mini	Sharpie,	with	 a	key	ring	on	it.
     "See?	It	 fits	 on	 your	 necklace,	like	 this."	  Trying	 not	 to	 fall,	 I	 reached	for
Lena's	necklace,	the	one	she	never	took	off.	A	tangle	of	 charms,	each	one	meant
something	to	her	--	the	flattened	penny	 from	the	machine	at	the	Cineplex,	 where
we	had	our	first	date.	A	silver	 moon	Macon	had	given	her	the	night	 of	the	winter
formal.	 The	button	 from	 the	vest	 she	was	wearing	 the	night	 in	 the	 rain.	They
were	Lena's	memories,	and	she	carried	them	with	 her	as	if	 she	might	 lose	them
without	proof	 of	those	few	perfect	moments	of	happiness.
     I	snapped	the	Sharpie	onto	the	chain.	"Now	you	can	write	wherever	you	 are."
     "Even	on	ceilings?"	 She	looked	at	me	and	smiled,	a	little	crooked,	a	little	 sad.
     "Even	on	water	towers."
     "I	 love	it."	 She	spoke	quietly,	pulling	the	cap	off	 the	Sharpie.
     Before	I	 knew	it,	 she	was	drawing	 a	heart.	Black	 ink	on	 white	paint,	 a	heart
hidden	at	the	top	of	the	Summerville	water	tower.
     I	 was	happy	 for	a	 second.	Then	I	 felt	 like	 I	 was	falling	  all	 the	way	 down.
Because	she	wasn't	thinking	about	us.	She	was	thinking	about	her	next	birthday,
the	Seventeenth	Moon.	She	was	already	counting	down.
     In	the	center	of	the	heart,	she	didn't	write	our	names.
     She	wrote	a	number.

35
5.16	

36
                                                  The	   Call



I	didn't	ask	her	about	what	she'd	written	on	the	water	tower,	but	I	didn't	forget	it.
How	could	I,	 when	all	we	had	done	for	the	past	year	was	count	down	to	the
inevitable?	When	I	finally	asked	why	she'd	written	it	or	what	she	was	counting
down	to,	she	wouldn't	say.	And	I	had	the	feeling	she	really	didn't	know.
    Which	was	even	worse	than	knowing.
    It	 had	been	two	weeks	since	then,	and	as	far	as	I	could	tell	Lena	still	hadn't
written	anything	in	 her	notebook.	She	was	wearing	the	little	 Sharpie	on	her
necklace,	but	it	looked	as	new	as	the	day	I	bought	it	at	the	Stop	&	Steal.	It	was
weird	not	to	see	her	writing,	scribbling	on	her	hands	or	her	worn-out	Converse,
which	she	didn't	wear	much	these	days.	She	had	started	wearing	her	thrashed
black	boots	instead.	Her	hair	was	different,	too.	Almost	always	tied	back,	as	if
she	thought	she	could	yank	the	magic	right	out	of	it.
    We	 were	sitting	on	the	top	step	of	my	porch,	the	same	place	we	had	been
sitting	when	Lena	first	told	me	she	was	a	Caster,	a	secret	she	had	never	shared
with	a	Mortal	before.	I	was	pretending	to	read	Jekyll	and	Hyde.	Lena	was	staring
down	at	the	blank	pages	of	her	spiral	notebook,	as	if	the	thin	blue	lines	held	the
answer	to	all	her	problems.
    When	I	 wasn't	watching	Lena,	I	was	staring	down	my	street.	My	dad	was
coming	home	today.	Amma	and	I	had	visited	him	on	Family	Day	every	week
since	my	aunt	checked	him	into	Blue	Horizons.	Even	though	he	wasn't	back	to
his	old	self,	I	had	to	admit	he	was	acting	almost	like	a	regular	person	again.	But	I
was	still	nervous.
    "They're	here."	The	screen	door	slammed	behind	me.	Amma	was	standing	on
the	porch	in	 her	 tool	 apron,	the	kind	 she	preferred	over	 a	traditional	 one,
especially	on	days	like	this.	She	was	holding	the	gold	charm	around	her	neck,
rubbing	it	between	her	fingers.
    I	 looked	down	the	street,	but	the	only	thing	I	saw	was	Billy	Watson	riding	his
bike.	Lena	leaned	forward	to	get	a	better	look.
    I	 don't	see	a	car.
    I	 didn't	either,	but	I	knew	I	would	in	 about	five	seconds.	Amma	was	proud,
particularly	when	it	came	to	her	abilities	as	a	Seer.	She	wouldn't	say	they	were
here	unless	she	knew	they	were	coming.
    It'll	 be	here.

37
     Sure	enough,	 my	 aunt's	white	  Cadillac	 made	the	 right	 onto	 Cotton	 Bend.
Aunt	 Caroline	 had	 the	 window	  rolled	 down,	 what	 she	 liked	 to	 call	  360	air
conditioning,	 and	I	 could	 see	her	waving	 from	  down	the	 block.	 I	 stood	up	 as
Amma	elbowed	her	way	past	me.	"Come	on,	now.	Your	 daddy	deserves	a	proper
homecomin'."	That	was	code	for	Get	your	butt	 down	to	the	curb,	Ethan	Wate.
     I	took	a	deep	breath.
     Are	you	okay?	Lena's	hazel	eyes	caught	the	sun.
     Yeah.	I	lied.	She	must	have	known,	but	she	didn't	say	a	word.	I	took	her	hand.
It	was	cold,	the	way	 she	always	was	now,	and	the	current	of	electricity	 felt	 more
like	the	sting	of	frostbite.
     "Mitchell	  Wate.	 Don't	 tell	  me	you've	 been	eatin'	 anybody's	 pie	 but	 mine.
'Cause	you	look	like	 you	fell	 into	the	cookie	jar	 and	couldn't	find	 your	way	 back
out."	My	 dad	gave	her	a	knowing	 look.	Amma	 had	raised	him,	and	he	knew	 her
teasing	held	as	much	love	as	any	hug.
     I	stood	there	while	 Amma	fussed	over	him	as	if	he	was	ten	years	old.	She	and
my	aunt	were	 chattering	away	like	 the	 three	of	them	 had	just	come	home	from
the	market.	 My	 dad	smiled	 at	 me	weakly.	 It	 was	 the	same	smile	 he	gave	 me
when	we	visited	Blue	Horizons.	 It	said,	I'm	 not	crazy	anymore,	just	ashamed.	He
was	wearing	his	 old	 Duke	T-shirt	  and	jeans,	and	somehow	he	 looked	younger
than	 I	 remembered.	 Except	 for	  the	 crinkling	  lines	  around	 his	 eyes,	 which
deepened	as	he	pulled	me	in	for	an	awkward	hug.	"How	you	doing?"
     My	 voice	caught	in	my	throat	for	 a	second,	and	I	coughed.	"Good."
     He	looked	 over	 at	Lena.	"Nice	  to	see	you	 again,	Lena.	I	 was	sorry	 to	 hear
about	your	uncle."	 Those	were	hard-bred	 Southern	manners	for	you.	 He	had	to
acknowledge	Macon's	passing,	even	in	a	moment	as	awkward	as	this	one.
     Lena	tried	 to	smile,	but	she	only	 managed	to	look	as	uncomfortable	 as	I	felt.
"Thank	you,	sir."
     "Ethan,	come	on	over	here	and	give	your	 favorite	 aunt	a	hug."	Aunt	 Caroline
held	out	her	 hands.	I	wanted	to	 throw	 my	arms	 around	her	and	let	 her	squeeze
the	knot	right	out	of	 my	chest.
     "Let's	 go	on	inside."	 Amma	 waved	 at	my	 dad	from	 the	top	of	 the	porch.	 "I
made	a	Coca-Cola	 cake	and	fried	  chicken.	If	  we	don't	 get	 in	there	 soon,	that
chicken'll	have	a	mind	to	find	 its	way	home."
     Aunt	 Caroline	 looped	her	 arm	through	 my	 dad's	and	led	 him	 up	the	 stairs.
She	had	the	same	brown	hair	 and	small	frame	 as	my	mom,	 and	for	 a	second	it
felt	 like	 my	parents	were	 home	again,	walking	  through	the	 old	 screen	door	of
Wate's	Landing.
     "I	 have	to	get	home."	Lena	was	clutching	 her	notebook	against	her	chest	like
a	shield.

38
     "You	 don't	have	to	go.	Come	in."
     Please.
     I	wasn't	offering	 to	be	polite.	 I	didn't	want	 to	go	in	there	alone.	A	few	 months
ago,	Lena	would	 have	known	 that.	But	I	 guess	today	her	mind	 was	somewhere
else,	because	she	didn't.
     "You	 should	 spend	some	time	with	 your	 family."	  She	stood	up	 on	her	toes
and	kissed	me,	her	lips	 barely	 touching	 my	cheek.	She	was	 halfway	 to	the	 car
before	I	could	argue.
     I	watched	 Larkin's	Fastback	disappear	down	my	 street.	Lena	didn't	 drive	the
hearse	anymore.	As	far	as	I	knew,	she	hadn't	even	looked	at	it	since	Macon	died.
Uncle	 Barclay	 had	parked	 it	 behind	 the	 old	 barn	 and	thrown	  a	tarp	 over	 it.
Instead,	she	was	driving	Larkin's	 car,	all	 black	and	chrome.	Link	  had	foamed	at
the	mouth	the	first	 time	he	saw	it.	 "Do	 you	know	 how	many	 chicks	I	 could	pull
with	that	ride?"
     After	 her	cousin	had	betrayed	her	whole	family,	I	 didn't	understand	why	Lena
would	want	to	 drive	his	car.	When	I	 had	asked	her,	she'd	shrugged	and	said,	"He
won't	be	needing	it	anymore."	Maybe	 Lena	thought	she	was	punishing	Larkin	 by
driving	 it.	 He	 had	 contributed	 to	 Macon's	 death,	something	 she	would	 never
forgive.	I	 watched	the	car	turn	 the	corner,	wishing	 I	 could	disappear	along	with
it.


By	the	time	I	 made	it	to	the	kitchen,	 there	was	already	chicory	coffee	brewing	 --
and	trouble.	 Amma	 was	on	 the	phone,	 pacing	 in	front	  of	 the	sink,	 and	every
minute	 or	 two	  she	would	  cover	 the	 receiver	 with	  her	 hand	 and	 report	 the
conversation	on	the	other	end	to	Aunt	Caroline.
     "They	 haven't	seen	her	 since	yesterday."	Amma	 put	 the	 phone	back	to	 her
ear.	"You	 should	 make	Aunt	 Mercy	 a	 toddy	 and	put	 her	to	 bed	until	 we	 find
her."
     "Find	 who?"	I	looked	at	my	 dad,	and	he	shrugged.
     Aunt	 Caroline	 pulled	 me	over	 to	the	sink	 and	whispered	 the	way	 Southern
ladies	do	 when	 something	 is	 too	 awful	 to	 say	 out	loud.	  "Lucille	  Ball.	 She's
missin'."	Lucille	 Ball	 was	Aunt	Mercy's	 Siamese	cat,	who	spent	most	of	her	time
running	around	my	great-aunts'	front	yard	 on	a	leash	attached	to	a	clothesline,	an
activity	the	Sisters	referred	to	as	exercising.
     "What	do	you	 mean?"
     Amma	 covered	 the	receiver	 with	 her	 hand	 again,	narrowing	 her	 eyes	and
setting	her	jaw.	 The	 Look.	 "Seems	somebody	put	 the	idea	in	 your	 aunt's	head
that	cats	don't	 need	to	be	tied	 up,	 because	they	always	come	 back	home.	You

39
wouldn't	 know	anything	 about	that,	 would	 you?"	It	 wasn't	a	 question.	We	both
knew	I	was	the	one	who	had	been	saying	it	for	years.
     "But	 cats	aren't	supposed	to	 be	on	leashes."	I	 tried	 to	defend	 myself,	but	 it
was	too	late.
     Amma	glared	 at	me	and	turned	to	Aunt	 Caroline.	"Seems	Aunt	Mercy's	 been
waitin',	sittin'	 on	the	 porch,	starin'	at	an	empty	leash	hangin'	 on	the	clothesline."
She	took	her	hand	off	the	receiver.	"You	 need	to	get	her	in	the	house	and	put	her
feet	up.	If	she	gets	lightheaded,	boil	some	dandelion."
     I	 slunk	out	 of	the	kitchen	 before	Amma's	 eyes	got	any	narrower.	 Great.	My
hundred-year-old	aunt's	cat	was	gone,	and	it	 was	my	fault.	 I'd	 have	to	call	 Link
and	see	if	he'd	 drive	around	 town	 with	 me	and	look	 for	 Lucille.	 Maybe	 Link's
demo	tapes	would	scare	her	out	of	hiding.
     "Ethan?"	 My	 dad	was	standing	in	the	 hall,	right	 outside	of	 the	kitchen	 door.
"Can	I	 talk	 to	 you	for	 a	 second?"	I	had	 been	dreading	this,	 the	part	 where	he
apologized	for	everything	 and	tried	to	explain	why	 he	had	ignored	me	for	almost
a	year.
     "Yeah,	 sure."	But	 I	 didn't	know	 if	 I	 wanted	to	 hear	it.	 I	wasn't	 really	 angry
anymore.	When	I	 almost	lost	Lena,	 there	was	a	part	of	me	 that	understood	why
my	dad	had	come	completely	unhinged.	I	couldn't	 imagine	my	life	 without	 Lena,
and	my	dad	had	loved	my	mom	for	more	than	eighteen	years.
     I	felt	 sorry	for	him	 now,	but	it	still	 hurt.
     My	 dad	ran	his	 hand	through	 his	hair	 and	edged	closer	to	me.	 "I	 wanted	to
tell	you	how	sorry	 I	am."	He	paused,	staring	down	at	his	feet.	"I	 don't	know	what
happened.	One	day,	I	was	in	 there	writing,	 and	 the	next	day	all	 I	 could	do	 was
think	about	 your	mom	 --	 sit	in	 her	chair,	 smell	her	 books,	imagine	her	 reading
over	my	shoulder."	 He	studied	his	hands,	as	if	he	was	talking	 to	them	instead	of
me.	Maybe	that	 was	a	trick	 they	taught	 you	at	 Blue	Horizons.	 "It	 was	the	only
place	I	felt	close	to	her.	I	couldn't	 let	her	go."
     He	looked	up	 at	the	old	plaster	ceiling,	 and	a	tear	escaped	from	the	corner	of
his	eye,	running	slowly	 down	the	side	of	his	face.	My	dad	had	lost	the	love	of	 his
life,	 and	he	had	 come	unraveled	like	 an	 old	 sweater.	I'd	 watched,	but	 I	hadn't
done	anything	 about	it.	 Maybe	he	 wasn't	the	only	 one	 to	blame.	I	 knew	 I	 was
supposed	to	smile	now,	but	I	didn't	feel	like	 it.
     "I	 get	it,	Dad.	I	wish	 you'd	said	something.	I	missed	her,	too.	You	know?"
     His	voice	was	quiet	when	he	finally	 spoke.	"I	 didn't	know	 what	to	say."
     "It's	 okay."	I	 didn't	know	 if	I	 meant	it	yet,	but	 I	could	see	relief	spread	across
his	face.	He	reached	around	and	hugged	me,	squeezing	my	back	with	his	fists	for
a	second.
     "I'm	 here	now.	Do	you	want	to	talk	 about	it?"

40
     "About	 what?"
     "Things	you	 need	to	know	when	you	have	a	girlfriend."
     There	was	nothing	I	wanted	to	talk	 about	less.	"Dad,	we	don't	have	to	--"
     "I	 have	a	lot	of	experience,	you	know.	 Your	 mother	taught	me	a	thing	or	 two
about	women	over	the	years."
     I	started	planning	my	escape	route.
     "If	 you	ever	want	to	talk	 about,	you	know	..."
     I	could	hurl	 myself	through	 the	study	window	and	squeeze	between	the	hedge
and	the	house.
     "Feelings."
     I	almost	laughed	in	his	face.	"What?"
     "Amma	 says	Lena's	having	 a	 hard	time	 with	 her	uncle's	 passing.	She's	not
acting	like	herself."
     Lying	  on	 the	 ceiling.	 Refusing	  to	 go	 to	 school.	 Not	 opening	 up	 to	 me.
Climbing	 water	towers.	"No,	she's	all	right."
     "Well,	 women	are	a	different	species."
     I	 nodded	and	tried	not	 to	look	 him	 in	the	 eye.	He	had	no	 idea	how	right	 he
was.
     "As	 much	as	I	loved	your	 mother,	half	the	time	 I	couldn't	 have	told	you	what
was	going	on	in	her	head.	Relationships	are	complicated.	You	 know	you	can	ask
me	anything."
     What	 could	 I	 ask?	What	 do	you	 do	 when	your	 heart	 almost	stops	 beating
every	time	 you	kiss?	Are	 there	times	when	 you	should	 and	shouldn't	read	each
other's	minds?	 What	are	 the	early	 warning	 signs	 that	your	 girlfriend	  is	 being
Claimed	for	all	 time	by	good	or	evil?
     He	squeezed	my	 shoulder	one	last	 time.	I	 was	 still	 trying	 to	 put	together	a
sentence	when	he	let	go.	 He	was	 staring	down	 the	hall,	 in	 the	direction	 of	 the
study.
     The	framed	portrait	 of	 Ethan	Carter	Wate	was	hanging	 in	the	hallway.	 I	 still
wasn't	used	to	seeing	it,	even	though	I	was	the	one	who	had	hung	it	there	the	day
after	Macon's	 funeral.	 It	 had	been	hidden	 under	a	sheet	my	 whole	 life,	 which
seemed	wrong.	Ethan	Carter	Wate	had	walked	away	from	a	war	he	didn't	believe
in	and	died	trying	to	protect	the	Caster	girl	 he	loved.
     So	I	 had	found	 a	nail	 and	hung	the	painting.	 It	 felt	 right.	 After	 that,	 I	went
into	my	dad's	study	and	picked	up	the	sheets	of	paper	strewn	all	over	the	room.	I
looked	at	the	scribbles	and	 circles	one	last	time,	 the	evidence	of	how	 deep	love
can	run	and	how	long	loss	can	last.	Then	I	cleaned	up	and	threw	the	pages	away.
That	felt	right,	 too.
     My	 dad	walked	over	to	 the	painting,	studying	 it	as	if	 he	was	seeing	it	for	 the

41
first	time.	"I	 haven't	seen	this	guy	in	a	long	time."
     I	 was	 so	 relieved	 we	 had	 moved	 on	 to	 a	 new	 subject,	 the	 words	 came
tumbling	 out.	"I	 hung	it	 up.	I	 hope	it's	okay.	 But	 it	seemed	like	 it	belonged	out
here,	instead	of	under	some	old	sheet."
     For	a	minute,	 my	 dad	stared	up	at	the	portrait	 of	the	 boy	in	 the	Confederate
uniform,	who	 didn't	look	 much	older	than	me.	"This	 painting	 always	had	a	sheet
over	it	 when	I	 was	a	 kid.	 My	 grandparents	never	said	much	 about	it,	 but	 they
weren't	about	to	hang	a	deserter	on	the	wall.	After	 I	 inherited	this	 place,	I	found
it	covered	up	in	the	attic	and	brought	it	down	 to	the	study."
     "Why	 didn't	 you	hang	it	up?"	 I	never	imagined	 that	my	dad	had	stared	at	the
same	hidden	outline	when	he	was	a	kid.
     "I	 don't	know.	 Your	 mother	wanted	me	to.	She	loved	 his	story	--	 the	way	he
walked	away	from	 the	war,	even	though	it	ended	up	costing	him	his	 life.	I	 meant
to	hang	it.	 I	was	just	 so	used	to	seeing	it	 covered	up.	Before	 I	got	 around	to	it,
your	mom	 died."	 He	ran	his	 hand	along	 the	bottom	 of	the	 carved	frame.	"You
know,	you	were	named	after	him."
     "I	 know."
     My	 dad	looked	at	me	 as	if	he	was	looking	 at	me	for	 the	first	 time,	 too.	"She
was	crazy	about	that	painting.	I'm	glad	you	hung	it	 up.	It's	where	he	belongs."




I	didn't	 escape	the	fried	 chicken	 or	Amma's	 guilt	 trip.	 So	after	 dinner,	 I	drove
around	the	Sisters'	neighborhood	with	 Link	 looking	 for	 Lucille.	  Link	 called	her
name	between	bites	of	a	chicken	leg	wrapped	in	an	oily	 paper	towel.	 Every	time
he	ran	 his	hand	 over	 his	spiky	  blond	 hair,	the	 shine	 got	shinier	 from	  all	 the
grease.
     "You	 shoulda	brought	 more	fried	 chicken	along.	 Cats	dig	chicken.	 They	eat
birds	in	the	wild."	 Link	 was	driving	 slower	than	usual	so	I	 could	keep	an	eye	out
for	Lucille	 while	 he	beat	time	to	"Love	 Biscuit,"	 his	band's	terrible	new	song,	on
the	steering	wheel.
     "Then	what?	You'd	 drive	around	while	 I	hung	out	the	window	 with	 a	chicken
leg	in	 my	 hand?"	 Link	  was	so	 transparent.	"You	  just	want	 more	 of	 Amma's
chicken."
     "You	 know	 it.	 And	 Coca-Cola	 cake."	 He	hung	 his	drumstick	 bone	 out	the
window.	"Here,	 kitty	 kitty	..."
     I	scanned	the	sidewalk,	looking	 for	 a	Siamese	cat,	but	something	else	caught
my	eye	 --	a	 crescent	moon.	It	 was	on	 a	license	plate	 stuck	between	 a	bumper

42
sticker	of	 the	Stars	and	Bars,	 the	Confederate	flag,	 and	one	for	 Bubba's	 Truck
and	Trailer.	The	same	old	South	Carolina	plates	with	 the	state	symbol	I	had	seen
a	thousand	times,	only	 I'd	never	thought	 about	it	 before.	A	 blue	palmetto	 and	a
crescent	moon,	maybe	a	Caster	moon.	The	 Casters	really	had	been	here	a	 long
time.
     "Cat's	 stupider	  than	 I	 thought,	  if	  he	 doesn't	know	  about	 Amma's	  fried
chicken."
     "She.	Lucille	 Ball's	a	girl."
     "It's	 a	cat."	Link	  swerved,	and	we	turned	the	 corner	onto	Main.	 Boo	 Radley
was	sitting	on	the	curb,	watching	 the	Beater	roll	by.	His	 tail	thumped,	one	lonely
thump	of	 recognition,	 as	 we	disappeared	down	 the	road.	 The	loneliest	 dog	 in
town.
     At	 the	sight	of	 Boo,	 Link	 cleared	his	throat.	 "Speakin'	a	girls,	 how're	 things
with	 Lena?"	 He	 hadn't	 seen	much	 of	 her,	 though	he'd	 seen	more	 than	 most
people	had.	Lena	spent	most	of	her	time	 at	Ravenwood	under	the	watchful	 eyes
of	Gramma	and	Aunt	 Del,	 or	hiding	 from	their	 watchful	 eyes,	depending	on	the
day.
     "She's	dealing."	It	wasn't	a	lie,	 exactly.
     "Is	 she?	I	mean,	she	seems	kinda	different.	Even	for	 Lena."	Link	 was	one	of
the	few	people	in	town	who	knew	 Lena's	secret.
     "Her	 uncle	died.	That	kind	 of	thing	 changes	you."	Link	 should've	known	that
better	than	anyone.	He'd	 watched	me	 try	 to	make	sense	of	 my	mother's	 death,
and	then	a	world	without	her	in	 it.	He	knew	it	 was	impossible.
     "Yeah,	 but	 she	hardly	 talks,	and	 she's	wearin'	 his	clothes.	 Don't	 you	 think
that's	sorta	weird?"
     "She's	fine."
     "If	 you	say	so,	man."
     "Just	drive.	 We	have	to	 find	 Lucille."	 I	 looked	out	 the	window	 at	the	empty
street.	"Stupid	cat."
     Link	  shrugged	and	 cranked	 up	 the	 volume.	 His	  band,	the	 Holy	  Rollers,
shuddered	through	the	speakers.	"The	Girl's	 Gone	Away."	 Getting	 dumped	was
the	theme	of	 every	 song	Link	  wrote.	 It	 was	 his	way	 of	 dealing.	 I	 still	 hadn't
figured	out	mine.




We	never	found	Lucille,	  and	I	never	got	the	conversation	 with	Link,	 or	 my	dad,
out	of	my	 mind.	My	 house	was	quiet,	which	isn't	 what	you	want	a	house	to	be	if

43
you're	trying	  to	run	 away	 from	 your	 thoughts.	 The	window	  in	 my	 room	 was
open,	but	the	air	was	as	hot	and	stagnant	as	everything	else	today.
     Link	 was	right.	 Lena	was	acting	strange.	But	it	 had	only	 been	a	few	months.
She'd	snap	out	of	it,	and	things	would	be	the	way	they	were	before.
     I	 dug	 through	 the	 piles	 of	 books	 and	papers	 on	 my	 desk,	looking	  for	 A
Hitchhiker's	 Guide	to	the	Galaxy,	 my	go-to	 book	for	taking	 my	mind	 off	 things.
Under	a	stack	of	old	Sandman	comics,	I	found	 something	else.	It	was	a	package,
wrapped	in	 Marian's	 signature	brown	 paper	 and	tied	 with	 string.	 But	 it	 didn't
have	GATLIN	COUNTY	LIBRARY	stamped	on	it.
     Marian	 was	my	mother's	oldest	friend	and	the	Gatlin	 County	Head	Librarian.
She	was	also	 a	 Keeper	in	 the	 Caster	world	  --	 a	 Mortal	 who	 guarded	 Caster
secrets	and	history,	and,	in	Marian's	case,	the	Lunae	Libri,	a	Caster	Library	filled
with	 secrets	of	its	own.	 She	had	given	 me	the	package	after	 Macon	died,	 but	I
had	forgotten	all	about	it.	It	 was	his	journal,	and	she	thought	Lena	would	 want	to
have	it.	Marian	 was	wrong.	 Lena	didn't	 want	to	 see	it	or	 touch	it.	 She	wouldn't
even	let	it	 into	 Ravenwood.	"You	  keep	it,"	 she	had	said.	"I	 don't	 think	 I	could
bear	to	see	his	handwriting."	It	had	been	collecting	dust	on	my	desk	ever	since.
     I	turned	 it	over	 in	my	 hands.	It	was	heavy,	 almost	too	heavy	to	 be	a	book.	I
wondered	what	 it	 looked	like.	 It	 was	 probably	old,	 made	of	 cracked	 leather.	I
untied	the	string	 and	unwrapped	it.	 I	wasn't	going	 to	read	it,	 just	 look	at	it.	 But
when	I	pulled	 the	paper	away,	I	realized	it	 wasn't	a	book.	It	was	a	black	 wooden
box,	intricately	 carved	with	strange	Caster	symbols.
     I	 ran	 my	 hand	 over	 the	 top,	 wondering	 what	 he	 wrote	 about.	 I	 couldn't
imagine	him	writing	  poetry	like	Lena.	 It	was	probably	full	 of	 horticultural	 notes.
I	opened	the	lid	 carefully.	 I	 wanted	to	see	something	Macon	had	touched	 every
day,	something	that	 was	important	 to	him.	 The	 lining	 was	black	 satin,	and	 the
pages	inside	 were	unbound	 and	 yellowed,	 written	  in	 Macon's	 fading	 spidery
script.	I	 touched	a	page,	with	 a	single	 finger.	 The	sky	 began	to	spin,	and	 I	felt
myself	pitching	 forward.	The	floor	 rushed	up	to	meet	me,	but	as	I	hit	the	ground,
I	fell	 through	it	and	found	myself	 in	a	cloud	of	smoke	--

    Fires	 burned	along	the	river,	 the	only	 traces	of	the	plantations	that	 had	stood
    there	 just	hours	ago.	Greenbrier	 was	already	 engulfed	in	flames.	Ravenwood
    would	 be	next.	The	Union	soldiers	must	have	been	taking	a	break,	drunk	from
    their	 victory	  and	the	liquor	  they	had	 pillaged	 from	 the	wealthiest	 homes	in
    Gatlin.
        Abraham	 didn't	 have	 much	time.	 The	soldiers	 were	 coming,	and	 he	was
    going	  to	have	 to	 kill	  them.	It	 was	 the	 only	 way	 to	 save	Ravenwood.	The
    Mortals	  didn't	 stand	a	chance	against	 him,	 even	if	they	 were	soldiers.	 They

44
were	no	 match	for	 an	 Incubus.	 And	if	 his	 brother,	 Jonah,	 ever	came	back
from	the	Tunnels,	 the	soldiers	would	 have	two	 of	them	to	 contend	with.	 The
guns	were	Abraham's	 only	 concern.	 Even	though	 Mortal	 weapons	 couldn't
kill	 his	kind,	the	bullets	 would	weaken	him,	which	 might	give	the	soldiers	 the
time	they	needed	to	set	fire	to	Ravenwood.
   Abraham	 needed	to	feed,	and	even	through	 the	smoke,	he	could	 smell	the
desperation	and	 fear	 of	a	 Mortal	  nearby.	Fear	 would	 make	 him	strong.	 It
provided	more	power	and	sustenance	than	memories	or	dreams.
   Abraham	  Traveled	 toward	  the	scent.	 But	 when	 he	 materialized	  in	 the
woods	beyond	Greenbrier,	 he	knew	he	was	 too	late.	 The	scent	was	faint.	 In
the	distance,	he	could	see	Genevieve	Duchannes	hunched	over	a	body	in	 the
mud.	 Ivy,	 Greenbrier's	  cook,	  was	 standing	 behind	  Genevieve,	clutching
something	against	her	chest.
   The	 old	 woman	saw	Abraham	 and	rushed	 toward	 him.	"Mr.	  Ravenwood,
thank	 the	 Lord."	  She	lowered	  her	 voice.	 "You	 have	 to	 take	 this.	 Put	  it
somewhere	safe	till	 I	can	 come	for	it."	 Pulling	  a	heavy	black	 book	from	 the
folds	of	her	apron,	 she	thrust	it	into	 Abraham's	hands.	As	soon	as	he	touched
it,	Abraham	could	feel	its	power.
   The	book	was	alive,	pulsating	 against	his	palms	as	if	it	 had	a	heartbeat.	He
could	almost	hear	it	 whispering	 to	him,	beckoning	 him	to	take	it	 --	to	 open	it
and	release	whatever	was	 hiding	 inside.	There	 were	no	words	 on	its	 cover,
only	a	single	crescent	moon.	Abraham	ran	his	fingers	over	the	edges.
   Ivy	 was	still	  talking,	 mistaking	 Abraham's	silence	for	 hesitation.	 "Please,
Mr.	Ravenwood.	I	 got	no	one	else	to	give	it	 to.	And	I	 can't	leave	it	 with	 Miss
Genevieve.	Not	now."	 Genevieve	raised	her	 head	as	if	 she	could	 hear	them
through	the	rain	and	the	roar	 of	the	flames.
   The	 moment	 Genevieve	turned	  toward	 them,	 Abraham	 understood.	 He
could	see	her	yellow	eyes	glowing	in	the	darkness.	The	eyes	of	a	Dark	Caster.
In	that	moment,	he	also	understood	what	he	was	holding.
   The	Book	 of	Moons.
   He	  had	 seen	the	  Book	 before,	 in	  the	 dreams	 of	 Genevieve's	mother,
Marguerite.	 It	 was	a	 book	of	 infinite	 power,	 a	book	Marguerite	  feared	and
revered	in	equal	measure.	One	she	hid	from	 her	husband	and	her	 daughters,
and	would	never	have	allowed	into	the	hands	of	a	Dark	 Caster	or	an	Incubus.
A	book	that	could	save	Ravenwood.
   Ivy	  scooped	something	from	  inside	the	 folds	 of	 her	 skirt	 and	 rubbed	 it
across	the	face	of	 the	Book.	The	 white	crystals	 rolled	 down	over	 the	edges.
Salt.	The	 weapon	 of	 superstitious	 island	  women,	who	 brought	  their	 own
brand	of	power	with	 them	from	the	Sugar	Islands,	where	their	 ancestors	were

45
    born.	 They	believed	 it	warded	 off	Demons,	a	 belief	that	 had	always	 amused
    Abraham.	 "I'll	 come	for	it,	 soon	as	I	can.	I	swear."
        "I	 will	 keep	it	 safe.	You	have	my	word."	Abraham	brushed	some	of	the	salt
    from	 the	 Book's	cover	 so	he	could	 feel	 its	heat	 against	his	 skin.	He	 turned
    back	 toward	  the	woods.	 He	 would	 walk	 a	 few	 yards,	 for	 Ivy's	 benefit.	 It
    always	 scared	the	Gullah	 women	to	 see	him	Travel,	 to	be	reminded	of	 what
    he	was.
        "Put	 it	 away,	 Mr.	 Ravenwood.	Whatever	you	do,	don't	 open	it.	 That	book
    brings	 nothin'	but	 misery	to	anyone	who	messes	with	it.	Don't	listen	to	it	when
    it	 calls	you.	I'll	 come	for	it."	 But	Ivy's	warning	 had	come	too	late.
        Abraham	 was	already	listening.




When	I	 came	to,	I	 was	lying	 on	my	 back	on	 the	floor,	 staring	 at	my	ceiling.	 It
was	painted	sky	blue,	like	all	 the	ceilings	in	 our	house,	to	fool	the	carpenter	bees
that	nested	there.
     I	sat	up,	dizzy.	The	box	was	beside	me,	the	lid	shut.	I	opened	it,	and	the	pages
were	inside.	This	time	I	didn't	 touch	them.
     None	of	this	 made	sense.	Why	was	I	having	visions	again?	Why	was	I	seeing
Abraham	 Ravenwood,	a	 man	 who	 folks	 in	  town	 had	been	 suspicious	of	  for
generations	because	Ravenwood	was	 the	only	 plantation	 to	 survive	 the	 Great
Burning?	Not	that	I	 believed	much	of	anything	the	folks	 in	town	had	to	say.
     But	 when	Genevieve's	locket	 triggered	the	visions,	 there	had	been	a	reason.
Something	Lena	and	I	needed	to	figure	out.	What	did	Abraham	Ravenwood	have
to	do	with	 us?	The	common	thread	was	The	Book	of	Moons.	It	 was	in	the	locket
visions	and	in	this	one.	But	 the	Book	was	gone.	The	last	time	anyone	had	seen	it
was	the	night	 of	 Lena's	birthday,	 when	 it	 was	lying	  on	the	 table	in	 the	 crypt,
surrounded	by	fire.	Like	 so	many	things,	it	was	nothing	but	ashes	now.

46
5.17	

47
                                         All	  That	    Remains



When	 I	went	to	school	the	next	day,	I	sat	alone	with	Link	and	his	four	sloppy
joes	at	the	lunch	table.	While	I	ate	my	pizza,	all	I	could	think	about	was	what
Link	said	about	Lena.	He	was	right.	She	had	changed,	a	little	bit	at	a	time,	until	I
almost	couldn't	remember	how	things	used	to	be.	If	I	had	anyone	to	talk	to	about
it,	I	knew	they	would	say	to	give	her	time.	I	also	knew	that	was	just	something
people	said	when	there	was	nothing	left	to	say	and	nothing	you	could	do.
    Lena	wasn't	coming	out	of	it.	She	wasn't	coming	back	to	herself	or	to	me.	If
anything,	she	was	drifting	farther	away	from	me	than	anyone	else.	More	and
more,	I	couldn't	reach	her,	not	on	the	inside,	not	with	Kelting	or	kissing	or	any	of
the	other	complicated	or	uncomplicated	ways	we	used	to	touch.	Now	when	I
took	her	hand,	all	I	could	feel	was	the	chill.
    And	when	Emily	Asher	looked	at	me	from	across	the	lunchroom,	there	wasn't
anything	left	but	pity	in	her	eyes.	Once	again,	I	was	someone	to	feel	sorry	for.	I
wasn't	Ethan	Wate	Whose	Mamma	Died	Just	Last	Year.	Now	I	was	Ethan	Wate
Whose	Girlfriend	Went	Psycho	When	Her	Uncle	Died.	People	knew	there	were
complications,	and	they	knew	they	hadn't	seen	Lena	in	school	with	me.
    Even	if	  they	didn't	like	 Lena,	the	miserable	love	to	watch	someone	else's
misery.	I	had	just	about	cornered	the	market	on	miserable.	I	was	worse	than
miserable,	lower	than	a	flattened	sloppy	joe	left	behind	on	a	lunchroom	tray.	I
was	alone.




One	morning	about	a	week	later,	I	kept	hearing	a	strange	sound,	like	a	grating	or
a	record	scratching	or	a	page	tearing,	in	the	back	of	my	mind.	I	was	in	history
class,	and	we	were	talking	about	the	Reconstruction,	which	was	the	even	more
boring	time	after	the	Civil	 War	when	the	United	States	had	to	put	itself	back
together.	In	a	Gatlin	classroom,	this	chapter	was	even	more	embarrassing	than	it
was	depressing	--	a	reminder	South	Carolina	had	been	a	slave	state	and	that	we
had	been	on	the	wrong	side	of	right.	We	all	knew	it,	but	our	ancestors	had	left	us
with	a	permanent	F	on	the	nation's	moral	report	card.	Cuts	that	run	that	deep
leave	scars,	no	matter	what	you	try	to	do	to	heal	them.	Mr.	Lee	was	still	droning
on,	punctuating	each	sentence	with	a	dramatic	sigh.

48
    I	 was	 trying	not	 to	listen,	 when	I	 smelled	something	burning,	maybe	an
overheating	engine	or	a	lighter.	I	looked	around	the	room.	It	wasn't	coming	from
Mr.	Lee,	the	most	frequent	source	of	any	horrible	smell	in	my	history	class.	No
one	else	seemed	to	notice	it.
    The	noise	grew	louder,	into	a	confusing	blur	of	crashing	--	ripping,	talking,
yelling.	Lena.
    L?
    No	answer.	Above	the	noise,	I	heard	Lena	mumbling	lines	of	poetry,	and	not
the	kind	you	send	someone	for	Valentine's	Day.
    Not	waving	but	drowning	...
    I	 recognized	the	poem,	and	it	wasn't	good.	Lena	reading	Stevie	Smith	was
only	one	step	up	from	the	darkest	Sylvia	Plath	and	The	Bell	Jar	kind	of	day.	It
was	Lena's	red	 flag,	 like	 Link	 listening	 to	 the	 Dead	Kennedys	or	 Amma
chopping	vegetables	for	spring	rolls	with	her	cleaver.
    Hang	on,	L.	I'm	coming.
    Something	had	changed,	and	before	it	could	 change	back,	I	grabbed	my
books	and	took	off	running.	I	was	out	of	the	room	before	Mr.	Lee's	next	sigh.




Reece	wouldn't	look	at	me	when	I	walked	through	the	door.	She	pointed	to	the
stairs.	Ryan,	Lena's	youngest	cousin,	was	sitting	on	the	bottom	step	with	Boo,
looking	sad.	When	I	tousled	her	hair,	she	held	her	finger	to	 her	lips.	"Lena's
having	a	nerve	breakup.	We're	supposed	to	be	quiet	until	Gramma	and	Mamma
get	home."
    That	was	an	understatement.
    The	door	was	open	a	crack,	and	when	I	pushed	on	it,	the	hinges	creaked,	like
I	was	walking	into	a	crime	scene.	It	looked	like	the	room	had	been	tossed.	The
furniture	was	upside	down	or	busted	up	or	missing	altogether.	The	entire	room
was	covered	with	pages	of	books,	pages	torn	and	ripped	and	plastered	all	along
the	walls	and	ceiling	and	floor.	Not	a	book	was	left	on	the	shelf.	It	looked	like	a
library	had	exploded.	Some	of	the	charred	pages	piled	on	the	floor	were	still
smoking.	The	only	thing	I	didn't	see	was	Lena.
    L?	Where	are	you?
    I	 scanned	the	room.	The	wall	over	her	bed	wasn't	covered	with	the	remnants
of	the	books	Lena	loved.	It	was	covered	in	something	else.


         Nobody	the	dead	man	&	Nobody	the	living

49
          Nobody	is	giving	in	 &	Nobody	is	giving
          Nobody	hears	me	but	just	Nobody	cares
          Nobody	fears	me	but	Nobody	just	stares
          Nobody	belongs	to	me	&	Nobody	remains
          No	Nobody	knows	Nothing
          All	 that	remains	are	remains


     Nobody	and	Nobody.	One	of	them	was	Macon,	right?	The	dead	man.
     Who	was	the	other?	Me?
     Was	that	who	I	was	now,	Nobody?
     Did	 all	guys	have	to	work	 this	hard	to	figure	 out	their	girlfriends?	 Untwisting
the	twisted	poems	written	all	over	their	 walls	in	Sharpie	or	cracked	plaster?
     All	 that	remains	are	remains.
     I	touched	the	wall,	 smearing	away	the	word	remains.
     Because	all	that	remained	was	not	remains.	There	had	to	be	more	than	that	--
more	to	Lena	 and	me,	more	to	 everything.	 It	wasn't	 just	Macon.	 My	 mom	 was
gone,	but	as	the	last	few	months	had	shown,	some	part	of	her	was	with	me.	I	had
been	thinking	about	her	more	and	more.
     Claim	 yourself.	It	 had	been	my	 mom's	message	to	Lena,	written	 in	the	page
numbers	of	 books,	 scattered	across	 the	floor	  of	 her	 favorite	 room	 at	 Wate's
Landing.	Her	message	to	me	didn't	have	to	be	written	 anywhere,	not	in	 numbers
or	letters	or	even	dreams.
     Lena's	floor	 looked	a	little	  like	the	study	 that	day,	books	lying	 open	all	 over
the	place.	Except	 these	books	were	missing	 their	 pages,	which	sent	a	 different
message	altogether.
     Pain	and	guilt.	It	 was	the	second	chapter	of	every	book	my	Aunt	Caroline	had
given	me	about	the	five	 stages	of	grief,	 or	however	many	 stages	of	grief	people
say	there	are.	Lena	had	 covered	shock	and	denial,	 the	first	 two,	 so	I	 should've
seen	this	one	coming.	For	 her,	I	 guess	it	meant	giving	 up	one	of	 the	things	 she
loved	the	most.	Books.
     At	 least,	I	hoped	 that's	what	it	 meant.	I	 stepped	carefully	around	 the	empty,
burnt	book	jackets.	I	heard	the	muffled	sobs	before	I	saw	her.
     I	opened	the	closet	door.	She	was	huddled	in	the	darkness,	hugging	her	knees
to	her	chest.
     It's	okay,	L.
     She	looked	up	at	me,	but	I	wasn't	sure	what	she	was	seeing.
     My	books	all	sounded	like	him.	I	 couldn't	make	them	stop.
     It	doesn't	matter.	Everything's	 okay	now.

50
     I	knew	things	 wouldn't	stay	that	way	for	 long.	Nothing	 was	okay.	Somewhere
along	the	way	between	angry	and	scared	and	miserable,	she	had	turned	a	corner.
I	knew	from	 experience	there	was	no	turning	back.




Gramma	had	finally	 intervened.	Lena	would	 be	going	back	to	school	next	 week,
like	 it	 or	not.	 Her	 choice	was	 school	or	 the	thing	 nobody	 said	out	 loud.	 Blue
Horizons,	or	whatever	 the	Caster	equivalent	was.	Until	 then,	I	was	only	 allowed
to	see	her	when	 I	 dropped	off	 her	 homework.	 I	trudged	 all	 the	way	 up	 to	her
house	with	 a	 Stop	&	  Steal	bag's	worth	 of	 meaningless	 worksheets	and	 essay
questions.
     Why	me?	What	did	I	do?
     I	guess	I'm	not	supposed	to	be	around	anyone	who	gets	me	worked	up.	That's
what	Reece	said.
     I'm	what	gets	you	worked	up?
     I	could	feel	 something	like	a	smile	tugging	 at	the	back	of	my	mind.
     Of	course	you	are.	Just	not	the	way	they	think.
     When	her	 bedroom	door	finally	  swung	open,	 I	dropped	the	 sack	and	pulled
her	into	my	 arms.	It	had	only	 been	a	few	days	since	I'd	seen	her	in	person,	but	I
missed	the	 smell	 of	 her	 hair,	 the	lemons	 and	 rosemary.	The	 familiar	  things.
Today	I	couldn't	smell	 it,	though.	I	buried	 my	face	in	her	neck.
     I	missed	you,	too.
     Lena	looked	 up	at	me.	She	was	wearing	a	black	 T-shirt	 and	black	tights,	 cut
into	all	 kinds	of	 crazy	slits	up	 and	down	her	legs.	Her	 hair	was	squirming	 loose
from	the	clasp	at	the	 back	of	her	neck.	Her	 necklace	hung	down,	twisting	 on	 its
chain.	Her	 eyes	were	ringed	 with	 darkness	that	wasn't	makeup.	 I	was	 worried.
But	when	I	looked	past	her	to	her	bedroom,	I	was	even	more	worried.
     Gramma	had	gotten	her	way.	 There	was	not	a	burnt	 book,	not	 a	thing	out	 of
place	in	the	room.	That	was	the	problem.	There	wasn't	one	streak	of	Sharpie,	not
a	poem,	not	a	page	anywhere	in	the	 room.	Instead,	the	walls	 were	covered	with
images,	taped	carefully	in	 a	row	 along	the	perimeter,	as	if	 they	were	some	kind
of	fence	trapping	her	inside.
     Sacred.	Sleeping.	Beloved.	Daughter.
     They	 were	photographs	of	 headstones,	taken	so	close	that	all	 I	 could	 make
out	was	the	rough	stubble	of	 the	rock	 behind	the	chiseled	words,	 and	the	words
themselves.
     Father.	Joy.	Despair.	 Eternal	Rest.

51
    "I	 didn't	 know	you	were	into	 photography."	I	wondered	what	else	I	didn't
know.
    "I'm	 not,	really."	She	looked	embarrassed.
    "They're	great."
    "It's	 supposed	to	be	good	for	me.	I	have	to	prove	to	everyone	that	I	know	he's
really	gone."
    "Yeah.	My	 dad's	supposed	to	keep	a	feelings	journal	now."	As	soon	as	I	said
it,	I	wished	I	could	take	it	back.	Comparing	Lena	to	my	dad	couldn't	be	mistaken
for	a	compliment,	but	she	didn't	seem	to	notice.	I	wondered	how	long	she	had
been	climbing	around	His	Garden	of	Perpetual	Peace	with	her	camera,	and	how	I
had	missed	it.
    Soldier.	Sleeping.	Through	a	glass,	darkly.
    I	 came	to	the	last	picture,	the	only	one	that	didn't	seem	to	belong	with	the
rest.	It	 was	a	motorcycle,	a	 Harley	leaning	against	a	gravestone.	The	shiny
chrome	of	the	bike	looked	out	of	place	next	to	the	worn	old	stones.	My	heart
started	to	pound	as	I	looked	at	it.	"What's	this	one?"
    Lena	dismissed	it	with	a	wave.	"Some	guy	visiting	a	grave,	I	guess.	He	was
just	kind	of	...	there.	I	keep	meaning	to	take	it	down,	the	lighting's	terrible."	She
reached	up	past	me,	pulling	the	tacks	out	of	the	wall.	When	she	reached	the	last
one,	the	photo	vanished,	leaving	nothing	but	four	tiny	holes	in	her	black	wall.
    Aside	from	the	images,	the	room	was	nearly	empty,	as	if	she'd	packed	up	and
gone	to	college	somewhere.	The	bed	was	gone.	The	bookshelf	and	all	the	books
were	gone.	The	old	chandelier	we'd	made	swing	so	many	times	I	had	thought	it
would	fall	 from	the	ceiling	 was	gone.	There	was	a	futon	on	the	floor,	in	 the
center	of	the	room.	Next	to	it	was	the	tiny	silver	sparrow.	Seeing	it	flooded	my
brain	with	memories	from	the	funeral	--	magnolias	ripping	out	of	the	lawn,	the
same	silver	sparrow	in	her	muddy	palm.
    "Everything	looks	so	different."	I	tried	not	to	think	about	the	sparrow	or	the
reason	it	would	be	next	 to	her	bed.	The	reason	that	had	nothing	to	 do	with
Macon.
    "Well,	 you	know.	Spring	cleaning.	I	had	kind	of	trashed	the	place."
    A	 few	tattered	books	lay	on	the	futon.	Without	thinking,	I	flipped	one	open	--
until	 I	 realized	I'd	committed	the	 worst	of	 crimes.	Though	the	 outside	was
covered	with	an	old,	taped-up	cover	from	a	copy	of	Dr.	Jekyll	and	Mr.	Hyde,	the
inside	wasn't	a	book	at	all.	 It	was	one	of	 Lena's	spiral	notebooks,	and	I	had
opened	it	up	right	in	front	of	her.	Like	it	was	nothing,	or	it	was	mine	to	read.
    I	 realized	something	else.	Most	of	the	pages	were	blank.
    The	 shock	was	almost	 as	terrible	as	 discovering	the	pages	of	my	 dad's
gibberish	when	I	had	thought	he	was	writing	a	novel.	Lena	carried	a	notebook

52
around	with	 her	 wherever	 she	went.	If	  she	had	stopped	 scribbling	 every	 fifth
word	into	it,	 things	were	worse	than	I	thought.
     She	was	worse	than	I	thought.
     "Ethan!	What	 are	you	doing?"
     I	pulled	 my	hand	away,	and	Lena	grabbed	the	book.
     "I'm	 sorry,	L."
     She	was	furious.
     "I	 thought	it	 was	just	a	book.	 I	mean,	it	 looks	like	 a	book.	 I	didn't	 think	 you
would	leave	your	notebook	lying	 around	where	anyone	could	read	it."
     She	wouldn't	look	 at	me,	clutching	the	book	to	her	chest.
     "Why	 aren't	you	writing	 anymore?	I	thought	you	loved	to	 write."
     She	rolled	her	eyes	and	opened	the	notebook	to	show	me.	"I	do."
     She	fluttered	the	blank	pages,	and	now	they	were	covered	with	 line	upon	line
of	tiny	 scribbled	 words,	crossed	out	again	and	 again,	revised	and	rewritten	 and
revisited	a	thousand	times.
     "You	 Charmed	it?"
     "I	 Shifted	 the	words	out	 of	Mortal	  reality.	Unless	 I	choose	to	 show	them	to
someone,	only	a	Caster	can	read	them."
     "That's	brilliant.	  Since	Reece,	the	person	most	likely	to	read	it,	happens	to	be
one."	Reece	was	as	nosy	as	she	was	bossy.
     "She	doesn't	need	to.	She	can	read	everything	 in	my	 face."	It	 was	true.	As	 a
Sybil,	Reece	could	see	your	thoughts	and	secrets,	even	things	you	were	planning
to	do,	just	by	looking	 you	in	the	eye.	Which	was	why	 I	generally	avoided	her.
     "So,	 what's	with	 all	 the	secrecy?"	 I	flopped	 down	 on	 Lena's	futon.	 She	sat
next	to	 me,	 balancing	on	 her	 crisscrossed	legs.	Things	 were	 less	comfortable
than	I	was	pretending	they	were.
     "I	 don't	know.	 I	still	 feel	 like	 writing	 all	 the	time.	Maybe	 I	just	 feel	less	like
being	understood,	or	less	like	I	can	be."
     My	 jaw	tightened.	"By	 me."
     "That's	not	what	I	 meant."
     "What	other	Mortals	 would	 be	reading	your	notebook?"
     "You	 don't	understand."
     "I	 think	I	do."
     "Some	of	it,	 maybe."
     "I	 would	understand	all	of	it	 if	you'd	 let	me."
     "There's	no	letting,	Ethan.	I	 can't	explain	it."
     "Let	 me	see	it."	I	held	out	my	hand	for	her	notebook.
     She	raised	an	eyebrow,	handing	it	to	me.	"You	won't	 be	able	to	read	it."
     I	 opened	it	and	looked	 at	it.	 I	didn't	 know	 if	 it	was	 Lena,	or	the	book	 itself,

53
but	the	words	appeared	on	the	page	in	front	of	me	slowly,	one	at	a	time.	It	 wasn't
one	of	Lena's	poems,	and	it	 wasn't	song	lyrics.	 There	 weren't	many	words,	 just
strange	drawings,	shapes	and	swirls	 snaking	 up	and	 down	 the	page	like	 some
collection	of	 tribal	designs.
     At	the	bottom	 of	the	page,	there	was	a	list.


          what	i	remember
          mother
          ethan
          macon
          hunting
          the	fire
          the	wind
          the	rain
          the	crypt
          the	me	who	is	not	me
          the	me	who	would	kill
          two	bodies
          the	rain
          the	book
          the	ring
          amma's	charm
          the	moon


     Lena	grabbed	the	book	 out	of	my	 hand.	There	were	a	few	 more	lines	 on	the
page,	but	I	never	got	to	read	them.	"Stop	it!"
     I	looked	at	her.	"What	 was	that?"
     "Nothing,	 it's	private.	You	 shouldn't	have	been	able	to	see	that."
     "Then	why	 could	I?"
     "I	 must	have	done	the	Verbum	Celatum	Cast	wrong.	The	Hidden	 Word."	 She
looked	at	 me	anxiously,	 her	 eyes	softening.	"It	  doesn't	matter.	I	 was	 trying	 to
remember	that	night.	The	night	Macon	...	disappeared."
     "Died,	 L.	The	night	Macon	 died."
     "I	 know	he	died.	Of	course	he	died.	I	just	don't	feel	like	 talking	 about	it."
     "I	 know	you're	probably	depressed.	It's	normal."
     "What?"
     "It's	the	next	stage."

54
     Lena's	eyes	flashed.	"I	 know	your	 mom	died,	 and	my	uncle	died.	 But	I	 have
my	own	stages	of	grief.	 This	isn't	 my	feelings	journal.	 I'm	 not	your	dad,	and	I'm
not	you,	Ethan.	We	aren't	as	much	alike	as	you	think."
     We	 looked	 at	each	other	 in	 a	way	 we	 hadn't	 in	 a	long	 time,	 maybe	ever.
There	was	a	nameless	moment.	 I	realized	 we'd	been	speaking	out	 loud	 since	I
got	there,	without	 Kelting	 a	word.	For	the	first	 time,	 I	didn't	 know	what	she	was
thinking,	and	it	 was	pretty	clear	she	didn't	know	how	I	 felt	either.
     But	then	 she	did.	She	held	out	her	arms	and	drew	 me	into	them	 because,	for
the	first	time,	I	 was	the	one	who	was	crying.




When	I	 got	home,	all	 the	lights	 were	out,	but	 I	still	 didn't	 go	inside.	 I	sat	down
on	the	porch	and	watched	 the	fireflies	 blinking	  in	the	dark.	 I	didn't	 want	 to	see
anyone.	I	wanted	to	think,	and	I	had	a	feeling	 Lena	wouldn't	be	listening.	 There's
something	about	sitting	 alone	 in	 the	dark	 that	reminds	 you	how	 big	 the	world
really	is,	 and	how	far	 apart	we	all	 are.	The	stars	look	 like	 they're	so	close,	 you
could	 reach	out	 and	touch	 them.	 But	 you	 can't.	Sometimes	 things	 look	 a	 lot
closer	than	they	are.
     I	stared	into	the	darkness	for	so	long	 that	I	thought	I	 saw	something	move	by
the	old	oak	in	 our	front	 yard.	For	a	second,	my	pulse	quickened.	Most	 people	in
Gatlin	didn't	 even	lock	 their	 doors,	but	 I	knew	 there	were	plenty	 of	 things	that
could	get	past	a	deadbolt.	I	 saw	the	air	 shift	 again,	almost	imperceptibly,	 like	 a
heat	wave.	I	 realized	it	 wasn't	something	trying	 to	 break	into	 my	 house.	It	was
something	that	had	broken	out	from	another	one.
     Lucille,	 the	 Sisters'	cat.	I	could	 see	her	blue	eyes	shining	 in	the	 darkness	as
she	stalked	onto	the	porch.
     "I	 told	everyone	 you'd	find	 your	way	 back	to	 the	house	sooner	or	later.	You
just	found	the	wrong	house."	Lucille	 cocked	her	head	to	the	side.	"You	 know	the
Sisters	are	never	gonna	let	you	off	that	clothesline	again	after	this."
     Lucille	 stared	back	at	me	as	if	she	understood	perfectly.	As	if	 she	had	known
the	consequences	when	she	took	off	but,	for	whatever	reason,	she	left	anyway.	A
firefly	 blinked	in	 front	of	 me,	and	Lucille	leaped	off	the	step.
     It	flew	 higher,	but	that	dumb	cat	kept	reaching	for	 it.	She	didn't	seem	to	know
how	far	away	it	really	 was.	Like	the	stars.	Like	a	lot	 of	things.

55
6.12	

56
                                   The	  Girl	   of	  My	  Dreams



Darkness.
    I	 couldn't	see	a	thing,	but	I	 could	feel	the	air	 draining	out	of	 my	lungs.	I
couldn't	breathe.	The	air	was	filled	with	smoke,	and	I	was	coughing,	choking.
    Ethan!
    I	 could	hear	her	voice,	but	it	was	distant	and	faraway.
    The	air	around	me	was	hot.	It	smelled	like	ash	and	death.
    Ethan,	no!
    I	 saw	the	glint	 of	a	knife,	over	my	 head,	and	I	heard	the	sinister	laughter.
Sarafine.	Only	I	couldn't	see	her	face.
    As	the	knife	plunged	into	my	stomach,	I	knew	where	I	was.
    I	 was	at	Greenbrier,	on	top	of	the	crypt,	and	I	was	about	to	die.
    I	 tried	to	scream,	but	I	couldn't	make	a	sound.	Sarafine	threw	back	her	head
and	laughed,	her	hands	on	the	knife	in	my	stomach.	I	was	dying,	and	she	was
laughing.	The	blood	 was	running	all	 around	me,	rushing	into	 my	 ears,	my
nostrils,	my	mouth.	It	had	a	distinct	taste,	like	copper	or	salt.
    My	 lungs	felt	like	 two	heaving	sacks	of	cement.	When	the	rush	of	blood	in
my	ears	drowned	out	her	voice,	I	was	overwhelmed	with	the	familiar	feeling	of
loss.	Green	and	gold.	Lemons	and	rosemary.	I	could	smell	it	through	the	blood,
the	smoke,	and	the	ashes.	Lena.
    I	 always	thought	I	couldn't	live	without	her.	Now	I	wasn't	going	to	have	to.




"Ethan	Wate!	Why	don't	I	hear	that	shower	runnin'	yet?"	I	bolted	upright	in	bed,
drenched	in	sweat.	I	ran	my	hand	under	my	T-shirt,	over	my	skin.	There	was	no
blood,	but	I	could	feel	the	raised	impression	where	the	knife	had	cut	me	in	the
dream.	I	pulled	up	my	shirt	and	stared	at	the	jagged	pink	line.	A	scar	cut	across
my	lower	abdomen,	like	a	stab	wound.	It	had	appeared	out	of	nowhere,	an	injury
from	a	dream.
    Only	 it	 was	real,	and	it	hurt.	 I	hadn't	had	one	of	 the	dreams	since	Lena's
birthday,	and	I	didn't	know	why	 they	were	coming	back	now,	like	this.	I	 was
used	to	waking	up	with	mud	in	my	bed	or	smoke	in	my	lungs,	but	this	was	the
first	time	I	 had	ever	woken	up	in	pain.	I	tried	to	shake	it	off,	 telling	myself	it

57
didn't	 really	 happen.	But	 my	 stomach	throbbed.	I	 stared	 at	my	 open	window,
wishing	 Macon	 was	 around	to	 steal	 the	end	 of	 this	 dream.	I	 wished	 he	 was
around	for	a	lot	of	reasons.
     I	 closed	my	 eyes	and	 tried	to	 concentrate,	to	 see	if	 Lena	 was	there.	 But	 I
already	knew	she	wouldn't	be.	I	could	feel	when	 she	had	pulled	away,	which	was
most	of	the	time,	lately.
     Amma	 called	 up	 the	stairs	 again.	"If	  you're	 fixin'	  to	 be	late	 for	 your	 last
examination,	you'll	  be	sittin'	 on	your	 sweet	corncakes	in	 that	room	 a	yours	 all
summer.	That's	a	promise."
     Lucille	 Ball	 was	staring	at	me	from	the	foot	 of	my	 bed,	the	way	she	did	most
mornings	now.	 After	 Lucille	 showed	up	 on	our	porch,	 I	took	 her	back	home	 to
Aunt	 Mercy,	 but	 the	next	 day	she	 was	sitting	 on	 our	porch	 again.	 After	 that,
Aunt	Prue	convinced	her	sisters	that	Lucille	 was	a	deserter,	and	the	cat	moved	in
with	 us.	I	 was	 pretty	 surprised	when	 Amma	 opened	 the	door	 and	let	 Lucille
wander	in,	 but	 she	had	 her	 reasons.	"Nothin'	 wrong	  with	 havin'	 a	 cat	in	 the
house.	They	can	 see	what	most	 people	can't,	 like	 the	folks	  in	 the	Otherworld
when	they	 cross	back	 over	--	 the	 good	ones	 and	the	bad.	 And	 they	 get	rid	 a
mice."	 I	 guess	 you	 could	 say	 Lucille	  was	 the	 animal	 kingdom's	 version	 of
Amma.
     By	 the	time	 I	made	it	 into	 the	shower,	the	 hot	water	rolled	 off	 me,	 pushing
everything	 away.	Everything	 except	 the	scar.	 I	turned	 it	 up	 even	hotter,	 but	I
couldn't	keep	my	mind	 in	the	shower.	It	 was	tangled	up	in	the	dreams,	the	knife,
the	laughter	--
     My	 English	final.
     Crap.
     I'd	fallen	 asleep	before	I	finished	studying.	 If	I	 failed	the	test,	I	would	 fail	 the
class,	Good-Eye	Side	or	 not.	 My	 grades	were	not	 stellar	this	 semester,	and	by
that	I	 mean	I	 was	running	 neck	 and	neck	 with	 Link.	 I	 wasn't	 my	usual	 don't-
study-and-get-by	self.	I	was	already	close	to	failing	 history,	 since	Lena	and	I	had
ditched	the	mandatory	Reenactment	of	the	Battle	 of	Honey	Hill	  on	her	birthday.
If	 I	failed	 English,	 I'd	be	 spending	all	summer	 in	a	school	 so	old	 it	didn't	 even
have	air	conditioning,	 or	I'd	 be	looking	 at	sophomore	year	all	over	 again.	It	was
the	particularly	 penetrating	problem	a	person	with	 a	pulse	should	be	prepared	to
ponder	today.	Assonance,	right?	Or	was	it	consonance?	I	was	screwed.


This	was	day	five	of	 supersized	breakfasts.	We'd	had	finals	all	week,	and	Amma
believed	there	was	a	direct	 correlation	between	how	 much	I	 ate	and	how	well	 I
would	do.	 I	had	eaten	my	 weight	in	 bacon	and	eggs	since	Monday.	 No	wonder

58
my	stomach	was	killing	 me	and	I	was	having	 nightmares.	Or	at	least,	that's	what
I	tried	to	tell	 myself.
     I	poked	at	the	fried	eggs	with	 my	fork.	"More	 eggs?"
     Amma	 squinted	at	me	suspiciously.	"I	 don't	 know	what	 you're	up	to,	 but	I'm
in	no	 mood	for	 it."	 She	slid	 another	egg	onto	my	 plate.	"Don't	 try	 my	 patience
today,	Ethan	Wate."
     I	wasn't	about	to	argue	with	her.	I	 had	enough	problems	of	my	own.
     My	 dad	wandered	into	the	kitchen	and	opened	the	cupboard,	searching	for	his
Shredded	Wheat.	"Don't	tease	Amma.	You	 know	 she	doesn't	like	it."	 He	looked
up	at	her,	shaking	his	spoon.	"That	boy	of	mine	is	downright	 S.	C.	A.	B.	 R.	O.	U.
S.	As	in	..."
     Amma	glared	 at	him,	slamming	 the	cupboard	doors	shut.	"Mitchell	 Wate,	 I'll
give	you	 a	scab	or	two	all	 your	 own	if	 you	 don't	stop	messin'	with	 my	 pantry."
He	laughed,	 and	 a	second	 later	 I	 could	 have	 sworn	 she	was	 smiling,	  and	I
watched	as	my	own	 crazy	father	 started	turning	Amma	 back	into	 Amma	 again.
The	moment	 vanished,	popping	 like	 a	soap	bubble,	 but	 I	knew	 what	 I'd	 seen.
Things	were	changing.
     I	 still	 wasn't	 used	to	 the	 sight	of	 my	 dad	 walking	 around	 during	 the	 day,
pouring	cereal	and	 making	small	 talk.	 It	seemed	unbelievable	 that	four	 months
ago	my	aunt	had	checked	him	into	 Blue	Horizons.	 Although	 he	wasn't	exactly	 a
new	man,	as	Aunt	 Caroline	 professed,	I	 had	to	admit	 I	 barely	recognized	 him.
He	wasn't	making	me	chicken	salad	sandwiches,	but	these	days	he	was	out	of	the
study	more	and	more,	and	 sometimes	even	out	of	the	 house.	Marian	scored	my
dad	a	position	at	 the	University	 of	 Charleston	as	a	guest	lecturer	in	 the	English
department.	Even	though	 the	bus	ride	 turned	a	forty-minute	  commute	into	 two
hours,	there	was	no	letting	my	dad	operate	heavy	machinery,	not	yet.	He	seemed
almost	happy.	I	 mean,	relatively	 speaking,	for	 a	guy	who	 was	previously	 holed
up	in	his	study	for	months	scribbling	 like	 a	madman.	The	bar	was	pretty	low.
     If	 things	could	 change	that	much	for	 my	 dad,	if	 Amma	 was	smiling,	 maybe
they	could	change	for	Lena,	too.
     Couldn't	they?
     But	the	 moment	was	over.	Amma	 was	back	on	the	warpath.	 I	could	 see	it	in
her	face.	My	 dad	sat	down	 next	to	 me	and	poured	milk	 over	 his	cereal.	Amma
wiped	her	hands	on	her	tool	 apron.	"Mitchell,	  you	best	have	some	a	those	eggs.
Cereal	isn't	any	kind	a	breakfast."
     "Good	 morning	to	 you,	too,	 Amma."	 He	smiled	 at	her,	the	way	 I	 bet	he	did
when	he	was	a	kid.
     She	squinted	at	him	and	slammed	a	glass	of	chocolate	milk	 next	to	 my	plate,
even	though	I	barely	drank	it	anymore.

59
     "Doesn't	 look	 so	 good	to	 me."	 She	sniffed	 and	 started	pushing	 a	 massive
amount	of	 bacon	onto	 my	 plate.	To	 Amma,	 I	 would	 always	 be	six	 years	old.
"You	 look	like	 the	livin'	  dead.	What	you	need	is	some	brain	food,	 to	pass	those
examinations	a	yours."
     "Yes,	 ma'am."	I	 chugged	the	glass	of	 water	Amma	 had	poured	 for	 my	dad.
She	held	up	her	infamous	 wooden	spoon	with	 the	 hole	in	 the	middle,	 the	One-
Eyed	Menace	--	that's	what	 I	called	 it.	 When	I	 was	a	kid,	she	used	to	chase	me
around	the	house	with	 it	 if	 I	sassed	her,	even	though	she	never	actually	 hit	 me
with	it.	 I	ducked,	to	play	along.
     "And	 you	better	 pass	every	single	one.	I	won't	 have	you	 hangin'	around	that
school	all	summer	like	 the	Pettys'	kids.	You're	gonna	get	a	job,	like	 you	said	you
would."	 She	sniffed,	waving	 the	spoon.	"Free	 time	means	free	trouble,	 and	you
got	heaps	of	that	already."
     My	 dad	smiled	 and	stifled	 a	 laugh.	I	 bet	 Amma	had	 said	exactly	 the	same
thing	to	him	when	he	was	my	age.
     "Yes,	ma'am."
     I	heard	a	car	honk,	and	the	sound	of	 way	too	much	 Beater	bass,	and	grabbed
my	backpack.	All	 I	saw	was	the	blur	of	the	spoon	behind	me.
     I	 slid	into	 the	Beater	 and	rolled	 down	the	 window.	 Gramma	had	gotten	 her
way,	and	Lena	 had	come	back	to	 school	a	week	ago,	 for	the	 end	of	the	 year.	I
had	driven	all	 the	way	 out	to	 Ravenwood	to	take	 her	to	school	 on	her	first	 day
back,	even	stopping	 at	the	 Stop	&	 Steal	 to	get	 her	one	of	 their	 famous	 sticky
buns,	but	by	the	time	I	got	there	Lena	was	already	gone.	Ever	since	then,	she	had
been	driving	herself	to	school,	so	Link	 and	I	were	back	in	the	Beater.
     Link	  turned	down	 the	 music,	 which	 was	blasting	 through	 the	 car,	out	 the
windows,	and	down	the	block.
     "Don't	 you	embarrass	me	over	 at	that	school	a	 yours,	Ethan	Wate.	And	 you
turn	down	that	music,	 Wesley	Jefferson	Lincoln!	  You're	goin'	 to	knock	over	 my
whole	 row	 a	 rutabagas	with	  that	 ruckus."	 Link	  honked	 back	 at	 her.	 Amma
knocked	her	spoon	against	the	post,	put	her	hands	on	her	hips,	and	then	softened.
"You	do	well	 on	those	tests	a	yours,	and	maybe	I'll	bake	you	a	pie."
     "That	wouldn't	 be	Gatlin	peach,	would	it,	 ma'am?"
     Amma	sniffed	 and	nodded	her	head.	"Just	might	be."
     She	would	 never	admit	 it,	 but	 Amma	 had	finally	  developed	a	soft	 spot	for
Link,	 after	all	 these	years.	Link	thought	 it	 was	because	Amma	felt	sorry	 for	 his
mom	after	her	invasion-of-the-	 body-snatchers	experience	with	Sarafine,	but	that
wasn't	it.	She	felt	 bad	for	 Link.	 "Can't	 believe	that	 boy	has	to	live	 in	 the	house
with	 that	woman.	 He'd	 be	better	off	  if	 he	was	 bein'	raised	by	 wolves."	 That's
what	she'd	said	last	week	before	she	packed	up	a	pecan	pie	for	him.

60
     Link	 looked	at	me	and	grinned.	 "Best	thing	 that	ever	happened	to	me,	Lena's
mom	gettin'	 mixed	up	 with	 my	mom.	 Never	 had	so	much	a	Amma's	 pie	in	 my
life."	 It	was	about	as	much	as	he	ever	said	about	Lena's	nightmare	of	 a	birthday
anymore.	He	floored	 it,	 and	the	Beater	went	 skidding	 down	 the	road.	It	 almost
wasn't	worth	mentioning	that	we	were	late,	as	usual.
     "Did	 you	 study	for	 English?"	It	 wasn't	really	 a	question.	I	 knew	 Link	 hadn't
cracked	a	book	since	seventh	grade.
     "Nah.	I'm	 gonna	copy	offa	someone."
     "Who?"
     "What	do	you	 care?	Somebody	smarter	than	you."
     "Yeah?	Last	time	you	 copied	off	Jenny	Masterson,	and	you	both	got	D's."
     "I	 didn't	 have	time	 to	 study.	 I	was	 writin'	  a	song.	We	 might	 play	 it	 at	the
county	fair.	 Check	it	 out."	Link	 sang	along	with	 the	song,	which	 sounded	weird
because	he	was	singing	along	 to	a	 recording	of	 his	 own	voice.	 "Lollipop	  Girl,
took	off	without	 a	word,	was	callin'	 out	your	name,	but	you	never	heard."
     Great.	Another	 song	about	Ridley.	Which	 shouldn't	 have	surprised	me,	since
he	hadn't	written	 a	song	about	anything	 but	Ridley	 for	 four	 months	now.	 I	was
beginning	 to	think	  he	would	  always	 be	hung	 up	 on	Lena's	 cousin,	 who	 was
nothing	like	 her.	Ridley	 was	 a	Siren,	who	 used	her	Power	of	 Persuasion	to	get
what	she	wanted	with	one	lick	 of	a	lollipop.	  Which,	for	 a	while,	 was	Link.	 Even
though	she	had	used	him	and	disappeared,	he	hadn't	forgotten	her.	But	I	couldn't
blame	him.	It	was	probably	 tough	being	in	love	 with	a	Dark	 Caster.	It	was	pretty
tough	sometimes	with	a	Light	one,	too.
     I	 was	still	 thinking	 about	 Lena,	despite	the	deafening	 roar	in	 my	ears,	until
Link's	 voice	 was	drowned	 out	altogether,	 and	I	 heard	Seventeen	Moons.	Only
now	the	words	had	changed.


          Seventeen	moons,	seventeen	turns,
          Eyes	so	dark	and	bright	it	 burns,
          Time	is	high	but	one	is	higher,
          Draws	the	moon	into	the	fire	 ...


Time	 is	  high?	  What	  did	 that	  even	 mean?	 It	  wasn't	  going	  to	 be	  Lena's
Seventeenth	Moon	for	 eight	more	 months.	Why	 was	time	 high	 now?	And	 who
was	the	one,	and	what	was	the	fire?
     I	 felt	 Link	 smack	 the	side	 of	 my	 head,	and	the	 song	disappeared.	He	was
shouting	over	 his	demo	 tape.	"If	 I	 can	get	 the	backbeat	down,	 it'll	  be	a	pretty

61
rockin'	tune."	I	 stared	at	him,	and	he	knocked	me	in	the	head	again.	"Shake	it	off,
man.	It's	just	an	exam.	You	look	as	crazy	as	Miss	Luney,	the	hot-lunch	lady."
     Thing	is,	he	wasn't	that	far	off.




When	the	Beater	pulled	into	 the	Jackson	High	parking	 lot,	 it	still	 didn't	 feel	like
the	last	day	 of	 school.	For	 the	seniors,	 it	 wasn't.	They	 would	 have	graduation
tomorrow,	 and	a	party	 that	 lasted	all	 night	 and	usually	 gave	 more	than	 a	few
people	a	brush	with	 alcohol	 poisoning.	 But	 for	us	 sophomores	and	juniors,	 we
had	one	more	exam	until	we	were	free.
     Savannah	and	Emily	walked	past	Link	 and	me,	ignoring	 us.	Their	short	skirts
were	even	shorter	than	usual,	and	we	 could	see	bikini	 strings	 hanging	out	from
under	their	tank	tops.	Tie-dye	and	pink	gingham.
     "Check	it	 out.	Bikini	 season."	Link	grinned.
     I	had	almost	forgotten.	 We	were	only	 an	exam	away	from	an	afternoon	at	the
lake.	Everyone	 who	was	 anyone	was	wearing	 bathing	suits	 under	their	 clothes
today,	since	summer	didn't	officially	  start	until	you	 had	taken	your	first	swim	 off
the	shores	of	Lake	Moultrie.	Kids	 from	 Jackson	had	a	place	we	hung	out,	up	past
Monck's	 Corner,	where	 the	lake	 opened	deep	and	 wide	 into	 what	felt	  like	 an
ocean	when	you	were	swimming	 in	 it.	 Except	for	 all	the	catfish	 and	the	swamp
weeds,	you	could	be	out	to	sea.	This	time	last	year,	I	 rode	to	the	lake	in	the	back
of	Emory's	 brother's	truck	 with	 Emily,	 Savannah,	Link,	 and	half	 the	 basketball
team.	But	that	was	last	year.
     "You	 goin'?"
     "Nah."
     "I've	 got	 an	extra	 suit	in	 the	 Beater,	but	 it's	not	 as	cool	 as	these	puppies."
Link	 pulled	up	his	 shirt	so	I	 could	see	his	bathing	suit,	which	 was	bright	 orange
and	yellow	plaid.	About	 as	low-key	as	Link	 was.
     "I'll	 pass."	He	knew	why	 I	wasn't	going,	but	 I	wouldn't	 say	it.	I	had	to	act	like
things	were	okay.
     Like	 Lena	and	I	were	okay.
     Link	 wasn't	giving	 up	 today.	"I'm	 sure	Emily's	 savin'	you	 half	 her	towel."	 It
was	a	joke,	because	we	both	knew	 she	wasn't.	Even	the	pity	 parade	had	moved
on,	along	with	 the	hate	campaign.	I	guess	we	were	such	easy	targets	these	days,
the	sport	was	gone,	like	shooting	fish	in	a	barrel.
     "Give	 it	a	rest."
     Link	 stopped	walking	and	put	his	hand	up	to	stop	me.	I	shoved	his	hand	away

62
before	he	could	 start	talking.	 I	 knew	what	 he	was	going	 to	say,	and	as	far	 as	I
was	concerned,	the	conversation	was	over	before	it	started.
     "Come	 on.	 I	 know	 her	uncle	 died.	 Quit	 actin'	 like	 you're	 both	 still	  at	the
funeral.	I	 know	 you	love	 her,	but	 ..."	He	 didn't	 want	to	 say	it,	 even	though	we
were	both	thinking	it.	 He	never	brought	it	 up	anymore,	because	he	was	Link,	and
he	sat	at	the	lunch	table	with	me	when	nobody	else	would.
     "Everything's	 fine."	 It	was	going	 to	work	 out.	It	 had	to.	I	didn't	 know	how	 to
be	without	her.
     "It's	hard	to	watch,	 dude.	She's	treatin'	you	like	--"
     "Like	 what?"	 It	was	a	challenge.	I	 could	feel	 my	fingers	 curling	 into	a	fist.	 I
was	waiting	 for	 a	reason,	any	 reason.	I	felt	 like	 I	 was	going	 to	 explode,	that's
how	badly	I	wanted	to	hit	 something.
     "The	 way	girls	 usually	 treat	me."	 I	 think	 he	was	waiting	 for	 me	to	 hit	him.
Maybe	he	even	wanted	me	to,	if	it	would've	 helped.	He	shrugged.
     I	 uncurled	my	 fingers.	Link	  was	Link,	 whether	or	 not	I	 felt	 like	 kicking	 his
butt	sometimes.	"Sorry,	man."
     Link	 laughed	a	little,	  taking	off	 down	 the	hall	 a	little	 faster	 than	usual.	"No
problem,	Psycho."
     As	 I	walked	 up	 the	steps	toward	 inevitable	 doom,	I	 felt	 a	 familiar	 pang	of
loneliness.	Maybe	Link	  was	right.	I	 didn't	 know	 how	much	 longer	things	could
go	on	like	 this	with	 Lena.	Nothing	 was	the	 same.	If	Link	 could	 see	it,	maybe	it
was	time	to	face	facts.
     My	 stomach	started	to	ache,	and	I	grabbed	my	side,	as	if	I	 could	squeeze	out
the	pain	with	my	hands.
     Where	are	you,	L?




I	slid	into	 my	desk	just	as	the	bell	rang.	Lena	was	sitting	in	 the	seat	next	to	mine,
on	the	Good-Eye	Side,	like	she	always	had.	But	she	didn't	look	like	 herself.
     She	was	wearing	one	of	those	white	V-neck	 undershirts	that	was	too	big,	and
a	black	skirt,	a	few	inches	shorter	than	she	would've	ever	worn	three	months	ago.
You	 could	 barely	 see	it	 under	 the	shirt,	  which	 was	Macon's.	 I	 almost	 didn't
notice	anymore.	She	also	 wore	his	 ring,	 the	one	he	used	to	 twist	 on	his	 finger
when	he	was	thinking,	on	a	chain	around	her	neck.	It	 hung	on	a	new	chain,	right
next	to	my	mother's	ring.	The	old	 chain	had	broken	the	night	of	her	birthday,	 lost
somewhere	in	 the	ash.	 I	 had	given	 her	 my	 mom's	ring	 out	 of	 love,	 though	 I
wasn't	sure	it	felt	like	 that	to	her	now.	 Whatever	the	reason,	Lena	loyally	 carried

63
our	ghosts	 with	 her,	 hers	and	 mine,	 refusing	 to	 take	off	  either	 one.	My	  lost
mother	and	 her	 lost	 uncle,	 caught	in	 circles	 of	 gold	  and	platinum	 and	 other
precious	metals,	 hanging	 above	her	 charm	 necklace	 and	hidden	 in	  layers	of
cotton	that	didn't	belong	to	her.
     Mrs.	 English	 was	already	passing	out	 the	tests,	and	she	didn't	 look	 amused
that	half	 the	class	was	wearing	a	 bathing	suit	 or	carrying	 a	beach	towel.	 Emily
was	doing	both.
     "Five	 short	answers,	ten	points	each,	multiple-choice,	twenty-five	 points,	 and
the	essay,	twenty-five.	Sorry,	no	Boo	Radley	this	 time.	We're	covering	Dr.	 Jekyll
and	Mr.	  Hyde.	It's	 not	 summer	yet,	 people."	 We	 had	been	reading	 To	 Kill	  a
Mockingbird	 in	 the	 fall.	 I	 remembered	 the	first	  time	 Lena	had	 shown	up	 for
class,	carrying	her	own	broken-in	copy.
     "Boo	 Radley's	 dead,	Mrs.	 English.	 Stake	through	 the	 heart."	 I	 don't	know
who	said	it,	 one	of	the	girls	 sitting	 in	the	 back	with	 Emily,	 but	we	all	 knew	 she
was	talking	about	Macon.	The	 comment	was	meant	for	Lena,	just	like	 old	times.
I	tensed	up	as	the	ripple	of	laughter	died	down.	I	 was	waiting	for	 the	windows	 to
shatter	or	something,	but	there	wasn't	even	a	crack.	Lena	didn't	react.	Maybe	she
wasn't	listening,	or	she	didn't	care	what	they	said	anymore.
     "I	 bet	Old	 Man	 Ravenwood	 isn't	even	 in	the	 town	 graveyard.	That	 coffin's
probably	empty.	If	 there	is	one."	The	voice	 was	loud	enough	for	Mrs.	 English	to
direct	her	eye	toward	the	back	of	the	room.
     "Shut	up,	Emily,"	 I	 hissed.
     This	time,	 Lena	turned	around	and	looked	 right	at	Emily.	 That's	all	 it	 took	--
one	look.	Emily	 opened	her	test,	like	she	had	any	idea	what	Jekyll	and	Hyde	was
about.	No	one	wanted	to	take	on	Lena.	They	 just	wanted	to	talk	 about	her.	Lena
was	the	new	Boo	Radley.	I	 wondered	what	Macon	 would	 have	had	to	say	about
that.
     I	was	still	 wondering,	when	I	 heard	a	scream	from	the	back	of	the	room.
     "Fire!	 Someone	help!"	 Emily	 was	holding	 her	test,	and	it	 was	burning	 up	in
her	hand.	She	dropped	the	test	 on	the	linoleum	 floor	 and	 kept	screaming.	Mrs.
English	picked	 up	her	 sweater	off	the	 back	of	 her	chair,	 walked	to	 the	back	of
the	room,	and	swiveled	so	she	could	use	her	good	eye.	Three	good	slaps	and	the
fire	was	out,	leaving	 a	charred	and	smoking	test	in	the	charred	and	smoking	spot
on	the	floor.
     "I	 swear,	it	 was	 some	kinda	spot-aneous	combustion.	 It	 just	 started	burnin'
while	I	was	writin'."
     Mrs.	English	 picked	up	a	shiny	 black	lighter	 from	the	center	of	 Emily's	desk.
"Really?	pack	up	your	things.	You	 can	explain	it	all	 to	Principal	Harper."
     Emily	 stormed	out	 the	door	 while	 Mrs.	 English	marched	 to	the	front	 of	 the

64
classroom.	As	she	passed	me,	I	noticed	the	lighter	was	emblazoned	with	a	silver
crescent	moon.
     Lena	turned	 back	to	 her	own	 test	and	started	writing.	  I	 stared	at	the	baggy
white	undershirt,	her	necklace	jingling	 beneath	it.	Her	hair	 was	up,	twisted	into	a
weird	knot,	 another	new	 preference	she	never	bothered	to	 explain.	I	 poked	her
with	 my	 pencil.	She	 stopped	writing	 and	 looked	up	 at	me,	 curving	 her	mouth
into	a	crooked	half-smile,	which	 was	about	the	best	she	could	do	these	days.
     I	 smiled	back	at	her,	 but	she	looked	down	 at	her	test,	as	if	 she	would	 rather
consider	assonance	and	consonance	than	look	at	me.	Like	it	actually	hurt	to	look
at	me	--	or,	worse,	she	just	didn't	want	to.


When	the	bell	rang,	 Jackson	High	turned	into	 Mardi	 Gras.	Girls	peeled	off	 their
tank	tops	and	went	running	 through	the	 parking	lot	 in	their	 bikini	 tops.	Lockers
were	emptied,	 notebooks	dumped	into	 the	 trash.	Talking	 turned	 into	 shouting,
then	screaming,	 as	 sophomores	turned	 into	 juniors	  and	 juniors	 into	  seniors.
Everyone	finally	  had	what	 they'd	 been	waiting	  for	 all	 year	--	 freedom,	 and	a
fresh	start.
     Everyone	but	me.
     Lena	and	I	 walked	to	 the	parking	lot.	 Her	bag	swung	 as	she	walked,	and	we
brushed	against	each	other.	I	felt	the	electricity	 from	 months	ago,	but	it	 was	still
cold.	She	stepped	to	the	side,	avoiding	me.
     "So,	how'd	 you	 do?"	I	 was	trying	 to	make	 conversation,	as	if	 we	were	 total
strangers.
     "What?"
     "The	English	 final."
     "I	 probably	 failed	 it.	 I	 didn't	 really	 do	 any	of	 the	 reading."	 It	 was	hard	 to
imagine	 Lena	not	 doing	 the	 reading	 for	 class,	considering	 she	had	 answered
every	question	for	months	when	we	read	To	Kill	 a	Mockingbird.
     "Yeah?	I	 aced	it.	I	stole	a	copy	of	 the	test	off	 Mrs.	English's	desk	last	week."
It	was	 a	lie.	 I	 would	 have	failed	 before	I	 cheated	in	 the	House	of	 Amma.	 But
Lena	wasn't	listening	 anyway.	 I	 waved	my	 hand	in	 front	 of	 her	eyes.	"L?	 Are
you	listening	 to	me?"	I	 wanted	to	 talk	to	 her	about	the	dream,	but	 first	 I	had	to
get	her	to	notice	I	was	here.
     "Sorry.	I	 have	a	lot	on	my	mind."	 She	looked	away.	It	wasn't	much,	but	it	was
more	than	I'd	gotten	out	of	her	in	weeks.
     "Like	 what?"
     She	hesitated.	"Nothing."
     Nothing	good?	Or	 nothing	you	can	talk	about	here?

65
     She	stopped	walking	  and	turned	 to	 face	me,	 refusing	to	 let	 me	 in.	"We're
leaving	Gatlin.	All	 of	 us."
     "What?"	 I	hadn't	seen	this	coming.	 Which	 must	have	been	what	she	wanted.
She	was	shutting	me	out	so	I	 couldn't	 see	inside,	where	things	were	 happening,
where	she	 hid	 the	feelings	 she	 didn't	 want	 to	 share.	I	 kept	 thinking	 she	 just
needed	time.	I	didn't	realize	it	was	time	away	from	 me.
     "I	 didn't	want	to	tell	 you.	It's	only	 for	a	few	months."
     "Does	 it	 have	 anything	 to	 do	with	  --"	 The	 familiar	  panic	 in	 my	 stomach
dropped	like	a	stone.
     "It	 has	nothing	to	 do	with	 her."	 Lena	looked	 down.	"Gramma	 and	Aunt	 Del
think	 if	 I	 get	 away	from	  Ravenwood,	I	 might	 think	  about	it	 less.	 About	 him
less."
     If	I	 get	away	from	you.	That's	what	I	heard.
     "It	 doesn't	work	like	that,	Lena."
     "What?"
     "You	 aren't	going	to	forget	Macon	by	 running	away."
     She	tensed	at	the	mention	of	 his	name.	"Yeah?	Is	that	 what	your	 books	say?
Where	am	I?	Stage	five?	Six,	tops?"
     "Is	that	what	you	 think?"
     "Here's	a	stage	for	you.	 Leave	it	all	 behind	and	get	away	while	 you	 still	 can.
When	do	I	get	to	that	one?"
     I	stopped	walking	 and	looked	at	her.	"Is	that	what	you	want?"
     She	twisted	her	charm	necklace	on	 the	long	silver	 chain,	touching	 the	littlest
bits	of	 us,	the	things	 we	 had	done	and	seen	together.	She	twisted	 it	 so	tight,	 I
thought	for	a	minute	 it	would	 snap.	"I	don't	know.	 Part	of	me	wants	to	leave	and
never	come	back,	and	part	of	 me	can't	bear	to	go	 because	he	loved	Ravenwood
and	left	it	to	me."
     Is	that	the	only	reason?
     I	waited	for	 her	to	finish	 --	to	say	she	didn't	want	to	leave	me.	But	she	didn't.
     I	changed	the	subject.	"Maybe	that's	why	we're	dreaming	about	that	night."
     "What	are	you	talking	 about?"	I	had	her	attention.
     "The	 dream	we	 had	last	night,	 about	 your	birthday.	 I	 mean,	it	 seemed	like
your	birthday	 except	for	 the	part	 when	Sarafine	 killed	 me.	It	 seemed	so	real.	I
even	woke	up	with	this."	 I	held	up	my	shirt.
     Lena	stared	at	the	raised	pink	scar,	creating	a	jagged	line	across	my	abdomen.
She	looked	like	 she	was	going	 to	 pass	out.	Her	face	 went	pale,	her	 expression
panicked.	It	 was	the	 first	 time	 I	 had	seen	any	 kind	 of	 emotion	in	 her	 eyes	in
weeks.	"I	don't	know	 what	you're	talking	 about.	I	didn't	have	a	dream	last	night."
There	was	something	 about	the	way	 she	said	it,	 and	the	look	 on	 her	face.	She

66
was	serious.
     "That's	weird.	 Usually	we	both	 do."	I	tried	 to	sound	calm,	but	I	could	 feel	my
heart	starting	to	 pound.	We	 had	been	having	the	 same	dreams	since	before	we
met.	They	were	the	reason	for	Macon's	midnight	 visits	 to	my	room	 --	to	take	the
pieces	of	my	dreams	he	didn't	want	 Lena	to	see.	Macon	had	said	our	connection
was	 so	 strong	 that	 Lena	 dreamed	 my	 dreams.	 What	  did	 it	  say	 about	 our
connection	if	she	couldn't	anymore?
     "It	 was	the	night	of	your	 birthday,	and	I	heard	you	calling	 me.	But	when	I	got
to	the	top	of	the	crypt,	Sarafine	was	there	and	she	had	a	knife."
     Lena	looked	 like	 she	was	going	 to	be	sick.	 I	 probably	 should	have	stopped
there,	but	I	couldn't.	 I	 had	to	keep	pushing,	and	I	 didn't	even	know	 why.	 "What
happened	that	 night,	  L?	 You	  never	 really	  told	 me.	 Maybe	  that's	 why	  I'm
dreaming	about	it	now."
     Ethan,	I	can't.	 Don't	make	me.
     I	couldn't	 believe	it.	There	she	was	back	in	my	 mind,	Kelting	 again.	I	 tried	to
crack	open	the	door,	an	inch	further,	and	get	back	into	hers.
     We	can	talk	about	this.	You	have	to	talk	to	me.
     Whatever	 Lena	was	 feeling,	 she	shook	 it	 off.	 I	 felt	  the	door	 between	 our
minds	slam	shut.	"You	 know	 what	happened.	You	 fell,	 trying	 to	climb	 onto	the
crypt,	and	you	were	knocked	out."
     "But	 what	happened	to	Sarafine?"
     She	tugged	on	the	strap	of	her	bag.	"I	don't	know.	There	was	fire	 everywhere,
remember?"
     "And	 she	just	 disappeared?"	"I	 don't	know.	 I	 couldn't	 see	anything,	 and	by
the	time	the	fire	 died	down,	she	was	gone."	Lena	 sounded	defensive,	as	if	I	was
accusing	her	of	 something.	 "Why	 are	you	 making	 such	a	 big	deal	 about	this?
You	had	a	dream,	and	I	 didn't.	So	 what?	It's	not	like	 the	others.	It	 doesn't	mean
anything."	She	started	to	walk	away.
     I	stepped	in	front	 of	her	and	lifted	 my	 shirt	again.	"Then	 how	do	you	explain
this?"
     The	jagged	outline	 of	 the	scar	was	 still	 pink	 and	newly	 healed.	Lena's	eyes
were	wide,	catching	the	sunlight	 of	the	first	 day	of	summer.	In	the	sun,	her	hazel
eyes	seemed	to	glint	with	gold.	She	didn't	say	a	word.
     "And	 the	song	--	it's	changing.	I	 know	you	 hear	it,	too.	Time	 is	high?	Are	we
going	to	talk	 about	that?"	She	started	backing	away	from	me,	which	 I	 guess	was
her	answer.	But	I	didn't	 care	and	it	didn't	 matter,	because	I	couldn't	stop	myself.
"Something's	happening,	isn't	it?"
     She	shook	her	head.
     "What	is	 it?	Lena	--"

67
     Before	I	 could	say	anything	else,	Link	 caught	up	to	 us,	snapping	me	with	his
towel.	"Looks	 like	nobody's	goin'	to	 the	lake	today,	except	maybe	you	two."
     "What	do	you	 mean?"
     "Look	 at	the	tires,	oh	 Whipped	One.	They're	 all	slashed,	every	car	in	the	lot,
even	the	Beater."
     "Every	  car?"	 Fatty,	  Jackson's	 truant	 officer,	   would	  be	 all	  over	 this.	  I
calculated	the	number	of	cars	in	the	lot.	Enough	to	get	the	whole	 mess	kicked	up
to	Summerville,	maybe	even	the	sheriff's	office.	 This	was	out	of	Fatty's	league.
     "Every	 car	except	Lena's."	Link	  pointed	at	the	Fastback	in	 the	parking	 lot.	I
still	 had	trouble	getting	 my	head	around	the	idea	 that	it	 was	Lena's	car.	The	lot
was	in	 total	 chaos.	Savannah	was	on	 her	cell	 phone.	Emily	  was	screaming	 at
Eden	Westerly.	The	basketball	team	was	going	nowhere.
     Link	 bumped	 his	shoulder	 against	Lena's.	"I	 don't	 really	 blame	you	 for	 the
rest	a	them,	but	did	you	have	to	get	the	Beater?	I'm	a	little	 short	on	cash	for	 new
tires."
     I	looked	at	her.	She	was	transfixed.
     Lena,	did	you?
     "It	 wasn't	me."	 Something	was	 wrong.	The	 old	 Lena	would	 have	bitten	 our
heads	off	for	even	asking.
     "You	 think	 it	 was	Ridley	  or	--"	 I	 looked	 over	at	 Link.	 I	 didn't	 want	 to	say
Sarafine's	name.
     Lena	shook	her	head.	"It	wasn't	Ridley."	 She	didn't	sound	like	 herself,	or	sure
of	herself.	"She's	not	the	only	one	who	hates	Mortals,	believe	it	or	 not."
     I	looked	at	her,	but	it	 was	Link	 who	said	the	one	thing	we	were	both	thinking.
"How	do	you	 know?"
     "I	 just	do."
     Over	the	chaos	of	the	parking	lot,	 a	motorcycle	gunned	its	engine.	A	 guy	in	a
black	T-shirt	 swerved	through	the	parked	cars,	blowing	 exhaust	into	the	faces	of
angry	cheerleaders,	and	disappeared	out	onto	the	road.	He	was	wearing	a	helmet,
so	you	couldn't	see	his	face.	Just	his	Harley.
     But	 my	 stomach	balled	 itself	  up,	because	the	 motorcycle	 looked	 familiar.
Where	had	I	 seen	it	 before?	Nobody	 at	Jackson	had	a	motorcycle.	 The	 closest
thing	 was	 Hank	 Porter's	ATV,	   which	 hadn't	 worked	 since	 he	 rolled	 it	 after
Savannah's	last	party.	Or	so	I'd	heard,	now	that	I	no	longer	made	the	guest	list.
     Lena	stared	after	the	motorcycle	 as	if	 she	had	seen	a	ghost.	"Let's	get	out	of
here."	She	headed	for	her	car,	practically	running	down	the	stairs.
     "Where	to?"	I	 tried	to	catch	up	to	her,	Link	 jogging	behind	me.
     "Anywhere	 but	here."

68
6.12	

69
                                                  The	  Lake



If	 it	 wasn't	Ridley,	 why	 weren't	your	 tires	slashed?"	I	pushed	again.	What
happened	in	the	parking	lot	didn't	make	sense,	and	I	couldn't	stop	thinking	about
it.	Or	the	motorcycle.	Why	did	I	recognize	it?
    Lena	 ignored	me,	looking	out	at	 the	water.	"It's	 probably	a	coincidence."
Neither	of	us	believed	in	coincidences.
    "Yeah?"	I	 grabbed	a	handful	of	sand,	brown	and	gritty.	Except	for	Link,	we
had	the	lake	to	ourselves.	Everyone	else	was	probably	lined	up	at	the	BP	trying
to	buy	new	tires	before	Ed	ran	out.
    In	 another	town,	you	might	have	put	your	shoes	back	on	and	called	the	sand
dirt	and	this	part	of	our	lake	a	swamp,	but	the	murky	water	of	Lake	Moultrie	was
the	closest	thing	Gatlin	had	to	 a	swimming	pool.	Everyone	hung	out	 on	the
northern	shore	because	it	was	on	the	edge	of	the	woods	and	a	hike	from	the	cars,
so	you	never	ran	into	anyone	who	wasn't	in	high	school	--	especially	not	your
parents.
    I	 didn't	know	why	we	were	here.	It	was	weird	to	have	the	lake	to	ourselves,
since	the	whole	school	had	planned	to	be	here	today.	I	hadn't	believed	Lena
when	she	told	me	she	wanted	to	come.	But	she	did,	and	we	had,	and	now	Link
was	thrashing	around	in	the	water,	and	we	were	sharing	a	dirty	towel	Link	had
grabbed	out	of	the	back	of	the	Beater	before	we	left.
    Lena	turned	over	next	to	me.	For	 a	minute,	it	seemed	like	everything	was
back	to	normal	and	she	wanted	to	be	there	on	my	towel.	But	that	only	lasted
until	the	silence	set	in.	I	could	see	her	pale	skin	glistening	under	the	thin	white
undershirt,	which	was	sticking	to	her	in	the	suffocating	heat	and	humidity	of	a
June	South	Carolina	day.	The	sound	of	the	cicadas	chirping	almost	drowned	out
the	awkward	silence.	Almost.	Lena's	black	skirt	was	riding	low	on	her	hips.	I
wished	we	had	our	bathing	suits	for	the	hundredth	time.	I'd	never	seen	Lena	in
one.	I	tried	not	to	think	about	it.
    Did	 you	forget	I	can	hear	you?
    I	 raised	an	eyebrow.	There	she	was	again.	Back	in	my	mind,	twice	in	one
day,	as	if	she'd	never	left.	One	minute	she	was	barely	speaking	to	me,	and	the
next	she	acted	like	nothing	had	changed	between	us	at	all.	I	knew	we	should	talk
about	it,	but	I	didn't	want	to	fight	anymore.
    Not	like	there'd	be	anything	forgettable	about	you	in	a	bikini,	L.

70
     She	leaned	closer,	pulling	  my	faded	 shirt	over	 my	 head.	I	 could	feel	 a	few
stray	curls	of	 her	 hair	brushing	 against	my	 shoulders.	She	slid	 her	arm	around
my	neck	and	pulled	 me	closer.	Face	to	face,	I	could	 see	the	sun	glinting	 gold	in
her	eyes.	I	didn't	remember	them	looking	so	gold.
     She	tossed	my	shirt	 in	my	 face	and	took	off	 running	 for	 the	water,	laughing
like	a	little	 kid	as	she	jumped	into	the	lake,	still	wearing	 her	clothes.	I	hadn't	seen
her	laugh	or	joke	 around	in	months.	It	 was	like	 I	had	her	 back	for	an	afternoon,
even	if	I	 didn't	 know	 why.	I	 pushed	it	 out	of	 my	mind	 and	chased	her,	running
into	the	water	and	across	the	shallow	edge	of	the	lake.
     "Stop	 it!"	  Lena	 splashed	me,	 and	 I	 splashed	her	 back.	 Her	 clothes	 were
dripping,	and	my	shorts	were	dripping,	 but	it	felt	 good	to	be	out	in	the	sun.	In	the
distance,	Link	was	swimming	 out	to	the	dock.	We	were	really	alone.
     "L,	 wait	up."	She	smiled	over	her	shoulder	and	dove	under	the	water.
     "You're	 not	getting	 away	that	 easy."	I	grabbed	her	 leg	before	it	 disappeared
and	yanked	her	toward	me.	She	laughed	and	kicked,	twisting	 until	 I	 fell	 into	the
water	next	to	her.
     "I	 think	I	felt	 a	fish,"	she	squealed.
     I	 pulled	 her	 waist	 into	 mine.	 We	were	 face	 to	face,	 nothing	 but	 sun,	and
water,	and	the	two	of	us.	There	was	no	avoiding	each	other	now.
     "I	 don't	 want	you	 to	leave.	 I	want	 things	to	 be	like	 they	 were.	Can't	 we	go
back,	you	know,	to	how	it	 used	to	--"
     Lena	reached	out	and	touched	my	 lips	with	 her	hand.	"Shh."	 Warmth	spread
from	 the	tip	 of	 her	finger	 down	 across	my	shoulders	 and	into	 my	 body.	I	 had
almost	forgotten	 that	feeling,	 the	heat	and	the	electricity.	 She	moved	 her	hands
down	my	 arms	and	clenched	them	behind	my	 back,	laying	 her	head	against	my
chest.	It	felt	like	 steam	was	rising	off	my	 skin,	prickling	 where	she	touched	me.	I
hadn't	been	this	close	to	her	in	weeks.	I	inhaled	deeply.	Lemons	and	rosemary	...
and	something	else.	Something	different.
     I	love	you,	L.
     I	know.
     Lena	 lifted	   her	 face	  to	 mine,	  and	 I	  kissed	  her.	 Within	   seconds,	 she
disappeared	into	my	 arms,	 in	 a	way	 she	hadn't	 in	 months.	The	 kiss	 began	to
move	us	involuntarily,	   as	if	 we	 were	under	 some	kind	 of	 Cast	all	 our	 own.	 I
picked	her	up	and	lifted	her	out	of	 the	water,	her	legs	dangling	over	my	arms,	the
water	pouring	off	 us.	I	 carried	her	back	to	 the	towel,	and	we	 were	rolling	 in	 the
dirty	sand.	Our	 warmth	turned	 into	fire.	 I	 knew	we	were	 out	of	 control,	and	we
had	to	stop.
     L.
     Lena	gasped	under	 the	weight	 of	 my	 body,	 and	we	 rolled	 again.	I	 tried	 to

71
catch	my	 breath.	She	threw	her	 head	back	and	laughed,	 and	a	chill	 ran	 up	my
back.	I	remembered	that	laugh,	straight	out	of	my	dream.	It	 was	Sarafine's	laugh.
Lena	sounded	exactly	like	her.
     Lena.
     Was	I	 imagining	 it?	 Before	I	 could	make	 sense	of	it,	 she	was	on	top	of	 me
and	I	couldn't	think	 about	anything	else.	I	 was	lost	in	seconds,	tangled	up	in	her.
My	chest	tightened,	and	I	 felt	 my	breath	growing	 short.	I	knew	 if	 we	didn't	 stop
soon,	I'd	end	up	in	the	emergency	room,	or	worse.
     Lena!
     I	 felt	 a	searing	 pain	cut	 through	 my	 lip.	 I	 pushed	her	 off	 and	rolled	 over,
stunned.	Lena	slid	 away	from	 me	in	 the	dirt,	 backing	 onto	her	 heels.	Her	eyes
were	glowing,	 gold	and	huge.	Barely	a	trace	of	 green.	She	was	breathing	hard.	I
doubled	over,	trying	 to	 catch	my	breath.	Every	 raw	nerve	in	 my	body	 had	been
lit	on	 fire,	one	match	at	a	time.	 Lena	raised	her	head,	and	I	could	 hardly	see	her
face	through	the	wild	mess	of	dirt	and	hair.	Just	the	strange	golden	glow.
     "Get	away	 from	me."	 She	spoke	slowly,	 as	if	each	word	 was	coming	from	 a
deep,	untouchable	place	within	her.
     Link	  was	out	 of	 the	 water,	rubbing	 a	 towel	 on	 his	 spiky	 hair.	 He	 looked
ridiculous	 in	the	 same	plastic	goggles	his	 mom	made	him	 wear	when	 we	were
little.	"Did	 I	 miss	somethin'?"
     I	touched	my	lip,	 wincing,	 and	looked	at	my	fingers.	Blood.
     Lena	rose	to	her	feet,	backing	away	from	us.
     I	could	have	killed	 you.
     She	turned	and	bolted	into	the	trees.
     "Lena!"	 I	took	off	 after	her.


Running	 through	  the	  South	 Carolina	  woods	  barefoot	 is	  not	  something	 I
recommend.	We'd	 been	in	  a	drought,	 and	 the	shoreline	 around	 the	lake	 was
littered	 with	 dry	 cypress	needles,	which	 bit	 into	 my	 feet	 like	 a	 thousand	tiny
knives.	But	 I	kept	running.	 I	 could	hear	Lena	more	 than	see	her,	as	she	crashed
through	the	trees	in	front	of	me.
     Get	away	from	me!
     A	 heavy	 pine	  branch	 splintered	 and	 cracked	 without	 warning,	  smashing
across	the	trail	 a	few	 feet	 in	front	  of	me.	 I	 could	already	 hear	another	branch
groaning	ahead.
     L,	are	you	crazy?
     Branches	were	falling	 around	me,	missing	me	by	inches.	Far	enough	away	so
they	didn't	hit	me,	but	close	enough	to	make	a	point.

72
     Stop	it!
     Don't	follow	 me,	Ethan!	Leave	me	alone!
     As	 the	 gap	between	 us	widened,	 I	 sped	 up.	Tree	 trunks	 and	 scrub	brush
flashed	past	me.	Lena	was	swerving	around	the	trees,	not	following	  any	distinct
path.	She	was	heading	for	the	highway.
     Another	 tree	fell	 in	 front	 of	 me,	 catching	horizontally	  on	the	 trunks	 of	the
trees	on	either	side	of	me.	I	 was	momentarily	trapped.	There	was	an	osprey	nest
upside	down	in	the	broken	tree.	Something	Lena,	in	 her	right	mind,	 would	 never
have	dreamed	of	hurting.	I	touched	the	twigs,	checking	for	 broken	eggs.
     I	 heard	the	 sound	 of	 a	motorcycle,	 and	 my	 stomach	caved	 in	 on	 itself.	 I
shoved	my	 way	under	 the	branches.	My	 face	 was	scratched	and	bloody,	 but	 I
made	it	out	to	the	highway	in	time	 to	see	Lena	climb	on	the	back	of	a	Harley.
     What	are	you	doing,	L?
     She	 looked	 back	 at	  me	 for	 a	  second.	Then	  she	disappeared	 down	 the
highway,	black	hair	flying	  behind	her.
     Getting	away	from	 here.
     Her	pale	arms	were	 clinging	 to	the	biker	 from	 the	Jackson	High	parking	 lot,
the	tire	slasher.
     The	motorcycle.	I	 finally	 remembered.	It	had	been	in	one	of	Lena's	graveyard
pictures,	the	one	that	vanished	from	her	wall	right	after	 I	asked	about	it.
     She	wouldn't	jump	 on	the	back	of	some	random	guy's	bike.
     Not	unless	she	knew	him.
     Right	then,	I	 didn't	know	which	 was	worse.

73
6.12	

74
                                                Caster	   Boy



Link	 and	I	 didn't	talk	 much	on	the	way	back	from	the	lake.	We	 had	to	take
Lena's	car,	but	I	was	in	no	shape	to	drive.	My	feet	were	cut	up,	and	I	had	messed
up	my	ankle	trying	to	climb	over	that	last	tree.
    Link	 didn't	mind.	He	was	enjoying	his	turn	behind	the	wheel	of	the	Fastback.
"Man,	this	 thing	can	haul.	 Pony	power,	Baby."	 Link's	usual	worship	 of	the
Fastback	was	annoying	today.	My	head	was	spinning	and	I	didn't	want	to	hear
about	Lena's	car	for	the	hundredth	time.
    "Then	speed	it	up,	man.	We	have	to	find	her.	She's	hitchhiking	on	the	back	of
some	guy's	motorcycle."	I	couldn't	tell	him	 the	odds	were	she	knew	the	guy.
When	had	she	taken	that	picture	of	the	Harley	in	the	graveyard?	I	punched	the
door	in	frustration.
    Link	 didn't	state	the	obvious.	Lena	ran	away	from	me.	It	was	pretty	clear	she
didn't	want	to	 be	found.	He	 just	drove,	and	I	 stared	out	the	 window	of	 the
passenger's	seat	as	the	hot	wind	stung	the	hundreds	of	tiny	cuts	on	my	face.
    Something	had	been	wrong	for	a	while	now.	I	just	 didn't	want	to	face	it.	I
wasn't	sure	if	it	was	something	that	had	been	done	to	us,	I	had	done	to	her,	or	she
had	done	to	me.	Maybe	it	was	something	she	was	doing	to	herself.	Her	birthday
was	when	it	all	started,	her	birthday	and	Macon's	death.	I	wondered	if	it	was
Sarafine.
    All	 this	time,	I'd	 been	thinking	this	was	about	those	stupid	stages	of	grief.	I
thought	about	the	gold	in	her	eyes	and	the	laugh	from	the	dream.	What	if	this
was	about	different	 kinds	 of	 stages,	stages	of	 something	else?	Something
supernatural?	Something	Dark?
    What	if	this	was	what	we'd	been	afraid	of	all	along?
    I	 hit	the	door	again.
    "I'm	  sure	Lena's	okay.	She	probably	needs	some	space.	Girls	are	always
talkin'	about	needin'	space."	Link	turned	on	the	radio,	then	turned	it	off	again.
"Killer	stereo."
    "Whatever."
    "Hey,	we	should	go	by	the	Dar-ee	Keen	and	see	if	Charlotte's	workin'.	Maybe
she	can	hook	us	up.	Especially	if	we	show	up	in	this	sweet	ride."	Link	was	trying
to	distract	me,	but	it	wasn't	going	to	happen.
    "Like	  there's	a	person	in	town	who	 doesn't	know	whose	car	this	is?	 We

75
should	drop	it	 off,	anyway.	 Aunt	Del	 will	 be	worried."	 It	 would	 also	give	me	an
excuse	to	see	if	the	Harley	was	at	Lena's	house.
     Link	 persisted.	"You're	 goin'	to	 show	up	with	 Lena's	car	without	 Lena?	Like
that	won't	worry	 Aunt	 Del?	 Let's	stop	and	get	a	freeze	and	figure	 this	out.	 Who
knows,	maybe	Lena's	at	the	Dar-ee	Keen.	It's	right	off	the	highway."
     He	was	right,	but	it	 didn't	make	me	feel	any	better.	It	 made	me	feel	worse.	"If
you	like	 the	Dar-ee	Keen	so	much,	you	should	have	gotten	a	job	 there.	Oh	wait,
you	couldn't,	because	you'll	 be	in	summer	school	dissecting	frogs	 with	the	other
Lifers	 who	 failed	  bio."	 Lifers	  were	 the	 super	seniors,	 the	 ones	who	 always
seemed	to	be	at	school	and	yet	 somehow	never	graduated.	The	guys	who	 wore
their	letterman	jackets	years	later,	when	they	were	working	at	the	Stop	&	 Steal.
     "You	 should	talk.	Could	you	 have	a	lamer	summer	job?	The	library?"
     "I	 could	hook	you	up	with	 a	book,	but	you'd	have	to	learn	to	read."
     Link	 was	baffled	by	my	 summer	plans	to	work	at	the	library	 with	 Marian,	but
I	didn't	 mind.	I	 was	still	 full	 of	 questions	about	Lena,	her	family,	 and	Light	 and
Dark	Casters.	Why	didn't	 Lena	have	to	Claim	 herself	on	 her	sixteenth	birthday?
It	didn't	seem	like	the	kind	 of	thing	 you	could	get	out	of.	Could	 she	really	choose
to	be	Light	 or	Dark?	 Was	it	that	easy?	Since	The	Book	of	Moons	 was	destroyed
in	the	fire,	the	Lunae	Libri	 was	the	only	place	that	might	 have	the	answers.
     Then	there	were	 the	other	questions.	I	 tried	not	 to	think	 about	my	 mother.	I
tried	not	to	think	 about	strangers	on	motorcycles	and	nightmares	and	bloody	lips
and	golden	eyes.	Instead,	I	stared	out	the	window	 and	watched	the	trees	pass	by
in	a	blur.




The	Dar-ee	Keen	 was	packed.	Not	 a	big	 surprise,	since	it	 was	one	of	 the	 only
places	within	walking	 distance	of	Jackson	High.	In	the	summer,	you	could	 pretty
much	follow	  the	 trail	 of	 flies	 and	 you	 would	 eventually	 find	 your	 way	 here.
Formerly	 the	Dairy	  King,	 the	place	 had	gotten	 a	new	 name	after	 the	Gentrys
bought	it	but	didn't	 want	to	fork	 up	the	money	to	pay	to	put	all	 new	letters	on	the
sign.	Today	 everyone	 looked	 even	 sweatier	 and	more	 pissed	 off	 than	 usual.
Walking	 a	mile	in	 the	South	Carolina	 heat	and	missing	the	first	 day	 of	hooking
up	and	drinking	  warm	beer	at	 the	lake	 wasn't	anyone's	idea	of	 a	good	 time.	It
was	like	canceling	a	national	holiday.
     Emily,	 Savannah,	and	Eden	were	hanging	out	at	the	good	 table	in	the	corner
with	the	basketball	team.	They	 were	barefoot,	in	their	 bikini	 tops	and	supershort
jean	skirts	--	 the	kind	with	 one	button	 left	open,	offering	 up	 a	powerful	 flash	of

76
bikini	 bottoms	without	 ever	completely	 falling	  off.	 Nobody	was	in	 a	very	 good
mood.	There	wasn't	a	tire	 left	 in	Gatlin,	 so	half	 the	cars	were	 still	 sitting	in	 the
school	parking	 lot.	  All	 the	 same,	there	 was	plenty	 of	 loud	 giggling	  and	 hair
flipping.	 Emily	  was	spilling	 out	 of	 her	string	 bikini	 top,	 and	Emory,	 her	latest
victim,	was	loving	 it.
     Link	 shook	his	head.	"Man,	 those	two	wanna	be	the	bride	at	 the	weddin'	and
the	corpse	at	the	funeral."
     "Just	so	long	as	I'm	not	invited	 to	either."
     "Dude.	You	 need	some	sugar.	I'm	gonna	get	in	line.	You	want	somethin'?"
     "No,	thanks.	You	 need	some	money?"	Link	never	had	any	money.
     "Naw,	 I'm	gonna	get	Charlotte	to	hook	me	up."
     Link	 could	 talk	 his	way	 into	 and	out	 of	almost	 anything.	 I	pushed	my	 way
through	 the	crowd,	 as	 far	 away	 from	 Emily	  and	Savannah	 as	I	 could	 get.	 I
slumped	down	 at	 the	bad	 corner	table,	 beneath	the	 shelves	of	 soda	cans	and
bottles	from	around	the	country.	 Some	of	the	sodas	had	been	there	since	my	dad
was	little,	 and	you	 could	 see	the	different	 levels	 of	brown	 and	orange	 and	red
syrup,	disappearing	to	the	bottom	of	the	bottles	from	 years	of	evaporation.	It	was
pretty	disgusting,	I	 guess,	that	and	the	fifties	soda	bottle	 wallpaper	and	the	flies.
After	a	while,	 you	didn't	even	notice	it	 anymore.
     I	 sat	down	and	looked	 at	the	disappearing	dark	 syrup,	my	 mood	in	 a	bottle.
What	happened	to	Lena	back	at	the	lake?	One	minute	 we	were	kissing,	the	 next
she	was	running	away	from	me.	All	 that	gold	 in	her	eyes.	I	wasn't	stupid.	I	 knew
what	it	  meant.	Light	  Casters	had	 green	eyes.	 Dark	 Casters	had	gold.	  Lena's
weren't	completely	 gold,	but	 what	I'd	 seen	at	the	lake	 was	enough	to	 make	me
wonder.
     A	fly	 landed	on	the	shiny	red	table,	and	I	stared	at	it.	I	recognized	the	familiar
churning	in	my	 stomach.	Dread	and	panic,	all	turning	 into	 a	dull	anger.	I	 was	so
mad	at	Lena,	I	wanted	to	kick	 out	the	glass	window	next	 to	our	booth.	But	 at	the
same	time,	I	wanted	to	know	what	 was	going	on	and	who	that	guy	on	the	Harley
was.	Then	I'd	have	to	kick	his	ass.
     Link	 slid	into	 the	booth	across	from	me	with	 the	biggest	freeze	I'd	 ever	seen.
The	 ice	 cream	 rose	 about	 four	 inches	 above	 where	 the	 plastic	 cup	  ended.
"Charlotte	has	some	real	potential."	Link	 licked	the	straw.
     Even	the	sugary	smell	of	 the	freeze	was	making	me	sick.	I	 felt	like	 the	sweat
and	the	grease	and	the	flies	and	the	Emorys	and	Emilys	were	closing	in	on	me.
     "Lena's	 not	here.	We	 should	 go."	I	 couldn't	 sit	 around	like	  everything	 was
normal.	Link,	 on	the	other	hand,	could.	Rain	or	shine.
     "Chillax.	 I'll	 suck	it	down	 in	five."
     Eden	walked	by	on	her	way	to	 refill	 her	Diet	Coke.	She	smiled	down	at	us,	as

77
fake	as	ever.	"What	a	cute	couple.	See,	Ethan,	you	didn't	need	to	be	wastin'	time
with	 that	 lil'	 tire	  slasher	window	 basher.	 You	 and	Link,	  y'all	  lovebirds	 were
meant	for	each	other."
     "She	didn't	 slash	your	 tires,	 Eden."	I	 knew	 how	 this	was	 going	to	 look	 for
Lena.	I	had	to	shut	them	down	before	their	mothers	got	involved.
     "Yeah.	 I	did,"	 Link	  said,	his	 mouth	full	  of	ice	 cream.	"Lena's	just	 bummed
she	didn't	think	 of	it	 first."	 He	 could	never	resist	 the	chance	to	harass	the	cheer
squad.	To	them,	 Lena	was	 an	old	 joke	that	 wasn't	funny	 anymore	 but	nobody
could	drop.	 That	 was	the	thing	 about	small	 towns.	 No	 one	ever	changed	their
opinion	of	 you,	even	if	 you	changed.	As	far	 as	they	were	concerned,	even	when
Lena	was	a	great-grandmother,	she	would	 still	 be	the	crazy	girl	 who	 busted	out
the	window	 in	 English	class.	Considering	 most	of	 our	English	 class	would	 still
be	living	in	 Gatlin.
     Not	me.	 Not	if	 things	were	 going	to	stay	 like	this.	 It	was	the	 first	time	 I	had
really	 thought	 about	 leaving	 since	Lena	 came	 to	 Gatlin.	 The	 box	 of	 college
brochures	under	my	 bed	had	stayed	under	my	 bed	until	 now.	 As	long	 as	I	 had
Lena,	I	wasn't	counting	the	days	until	I	 could	get	out	of	Gatlin.
     "Hell-o.	 Who	is	that?"	Eden's	voice	was	a	little	 too	loud.
     I	heard	the	bell	on	 the	door	of	the	Dar-ee	Keen	chime	as	it	closed.	It	 was	like
some	kind	of	 Clint	 Eastwood	movie,	 where	the	 hero	steps	into	the	 saloon	after
he's	just	shot	up	the	whole	 town.	The	 neck	of	every	 girl	 sitting	near	us	snapped
toward	the	door,	greasy	blond	ponytails	flying.
     "I	 don't	know,	 but	I'd	 sure	like	to	find	 out,"	 Emily	 purred,	coming	 up	behind
Eden.
     "I've	 never	seen	him	before.	Have	you?"	I	 could	see	Savannah	filing	 through
the	yearbook	in	her	mind.
     "No	 way.	 I'd	 remember	him."	  Poor	guy.	 Emily	  had	him	 in	 her	 crosshairs,
target	locked	 and	loaded.	He	 didn't	 stand	a	 chance,	whoever	he	 was.	I	 turned
around	to	get	a	look	at	the	guy	Earl	 and	Emory	would	 be	kicking	 the	crap	out	of
when	they	realized	their	girlfriends	 were	drooling	 over	him.
     He	was	standing	 in	the	doorway	 in	 a	faded	black	T-shirt,	 jeans,	and	scuffed
black	army	boots.	I	 couldn't	 see	the	scuffs	from	where	 I	was	sitting,	 but	I	 knew
they	were	there.	Because	he	was	wearing	 exactly	the	same	thing	 the	last	time	 I
saw	him,	when	he	ripped	out	of	Macon's	funeral.
     It	was	the	stranger,	the	Incubus	who	wasn't	an	Incubus.	The	sunlight	Incubus.
I	remembered	the	 silver	 sparrow	in	 Lena's	hand	when	 she	was	sleeping	in	 my
bed.
     What	was	he	doing	here?
     A	 black	tattoo	 wound	around	 his	arm,	sort	 of	tribal-looking,	  like	 something

78
I'd	seen	before.	I	felt	a	knife	in	 my	gut,	and	touched	my	scar.	It	was	throbbing.
     Savannah	and	Emily	 walked	 up	to	 the	counter,	 trying	 to	act	 like	 they	were
going	to	order	something,	as	if	they	touched	anything	here	other	than	Diet	Coke.
     "Who	  is	 that?"	 Link	  wasn't	 one	for	  competition,	 not	 that	 he	 was	 in	 the
running	these	days.
     "I	 don't	know,	but	he	showed	up	at	Macon's	funeral."
     Link	 was	staring	at	him.	"Is	he	one	of	Lena's	weird	relatives?"
     "I	 don't	 know	 what	he	 is,	but	 he	isn't	 related	to	 Lena."	 Then	again,	 he	did
come	to	 the	funeral	 to	 pay	 his	respects	to	 Macon.	 Still,	  there	was	something
wrong	about	him.	I'd	sensed	it	since	the	first	time	I	 saw	him.
     I	heard	the	bell	chime	again	as	the	door	closed.
     "Hey,	Angel	 Face,	wait	up."
     I	 froze.	 I	would	  have	known	 that	 voice	anywhere.	 Link	 was	 staring	at	 the
door,	too.	He	looked	like	 he'd	seen	a	ghost,	or	worse....
     Ridley.
     Lena's	Dark	Caster	of	 a	cousin	was	as	dangerous	and	hot	and	barely	dressed
as	always,	except	now	 it	was	summer,	 so	she	had	on	even	less	than	usual.	She
was	wearing	 a	 skin-tight,	  lacy	 black	 tank	 and	 a	black	 skirt	  so	small	  it	 was
probably	 made	 for	  a	  ten-year-old.	 Ridley's	  legs	  looked	 longer	  than	 ever,
balancing	on	some	kind	 of	high,	 spiky	sandals	that	could	 stake	a	vampire.	Now
the	girls	 weren't	 the	 only	 ones	with	  their	 mouths	hanging	 open.	 Most	 of	 the
school	had	been	at	the	winter	formal,	 when	 Ridley	brought	 down	the	house	and
still	managed	to	look	hotter	than	any	girl	 there	except	one.
     Ridley	 leaned	back	and	stretched	her	 arms	over	her	 head,	as	if	we'd	 woken
her	from	  a	long	 nap.	 She	laced	 her	 fingers	 together,	 stretching	even	 higher,
revealing	even	more	 skin	 and	the	black	 tattoo	 encircling	 her	 navel.	Her	 tattoo
looked	a	lot	like	 the	one	on	her	 friend's	arm.	Ridley	 whispered	something	in	 his
ear.
     "Holy	 crap,	she's	here."	Link	 was	slowly	 absorbing	it.	 He	hadn't	seen	Ridley
since	the	night	of	 Lena's	birthday,	 when	he	had	talked	 Ridley	 out	of	 killing	 my
dad.	But	he	didn't	need	to	see	her	to	think	about	her.	It	was	pretty	clear	he'd	been
thinking	 about	her	a	lot,	 based	on	every	song	he'd	written	 since	she	left.	 "She's
with	 that	 guy?	 Do	 you	 think	 he's,	 you	 know,	 like	 her?"	 A	 Dark	  Caster.	He
couldn't	say	it.
     "Doubt	 it.	 His	eyes	aren't	yellow."	 But	 he	was	something.	I	 just	didn't	 know
what.
     "They're	 comin'	over	 here."	Link	 looked	 down	at	his	 freeze,	and	Ridley	 was
on	us.
     "Well,	 if	 it	isn't	two	 of	my	favorite	 people.	Fancy	meeting	you	here.	John	and

79
I	were	 dying	 for	 a	 drink."	 Ridley	 tossed	her	 blond	 and	pink	 strands	 over	her
shoulder.	She	slid	into	 the	booth	across	from	us	and	motioned	 for	 the	guy	to	sit
down.	He	didn't.
     "John	Breed."	 He	said	it	 like	 it	was	one	name,	looking	 right	 at	me.	His	 eyes
were	as	green	as	Lena's	used	to	 be.	What	 would	 a	Light	 Caster	be	doing	 with
Ridley?
     Ridley	 smiled	 at	him.	 "This	 is	Lena's,	you	 know,	 the	one	I	 was	telling	  you
about."	She	dismissed	me	with	a	wave	of	her	purple-polished	fingers.
     "I'm	 Lena's	boyfriend,	Ethan."
     John	looked	 confused,	but	 only	 for	 a	second.	He	was	 the	kind	 of	 guy	who
looked	relaxed,	 as	if	 he	knew	 everything	 would	 go	 his	way	 eventually.	 "Lena
never	told	me	she	had	a	boyfriend."
     Every	 muscle	in	my	 body	 tightened.	He	knew	 Lena,	but	 I	 didn't	know	 him.
He	had	seen	her	since	the	funeral,	at	least	talked	to	her.	When	had	that	happened,
and	why	hadn't	she	told	me?
     "How	 exactly	 do	 you	know	  my	girlfriend?"	  My	  voice	was	 too	loud,	 and	 I
could	feel	the	eyes	on	us.
     "Relax,	 Short	Straw.	We	were	in	 the	neighborhood."	 Ridley	looked	 across	at
Link.	"How	 ya	been,	Hot	Rod?"
     Link	  cleared	his	 throat	 awkwardly.	  "Good."	  His	 voice	 came	 out	 kind	 of
squeaky.	"I've	been	real	good.	Thought	you	left	town."	 Ridley	 didn't	answer.
     I	 was	 still	 looking	  at	John,	 and	he	 was	 staring	right	  back,	sizing	  me	up.
Probably	figuring	  out	a	 thousand	ways	to	 get	rid	 of	 me.	Because	he	was	after
something	--	or	 someone	--	and	I	was	in	 his	way.	 Ridley	 wouldn't	 just	show	up
here	with	this	guy	now,	not	after	 four	months.
     I	kept	my	 eyes	on	him.	"Ridley,	you	 shouldn't	be	here."
     "Don't	 get	your	 panties	in	 a	twist,	 Boyfriend.	 We're	just	 passin'	through,	 on
our	way	back	from	Ravenwood."	 She	said	it	casually,	like	it	 wasn't	a	big	deal.
     I	laughed.	"Ravenwood?	 They	wouldn't	 let	you	in	 the	door.	Lena	would	 burn
the	house	down	first."	 Ridley	and	Lena	had	grown	 up	together,	like	 sisters,	until
Ridley	went	 Dark.	Ridley	 had	helped	Sarafine	find	 Lena	on	her	birthday,	 which
almost	got	 us	all,	 including	  my	father,	 killed.	  There	was	 no	way	 Lena	would
hang	out	with	her.
     She	smiled.	 "Times	 have	 changed,	Short	Straw.	 I'm	 not	 on	 the	best	terms
with	 the	rest	of	 my	family,	  but	Lena	 and	I	 have	worked	things	 out.	Why	 don't
you	ask	her?"
     "You're	 lying."
     Ridley	 unwrapped	a	cherry	 lollipop,	 which	 looked	 innocent	enough	but	was
the	ultimate	weapon	in	her	hands.	"You	 clearly	have	trust	issues.	I'd	love	 to	help

80
you	with	 that,	but	 we've	gotta	get	going.	 Have	to	 fill	 up	John's	bike	 before	that
hick	gas	station	of	yours	runs	out	of	gas."	I	 was	holding	the	side	of	the	table,	and
my	knuckles	went	white.
     His	bike.
     It	 was	sitting	out	 front	right	 now,	 and	I	bet	it	 was	a	Harley.	 The	same	bike	I
had	seen	in	the	photograph	on	 the	wall	 of	Lena's	room.	 John	Breed	had	picked
up	Lena	 from	 Lake	 Moultrie.	 And	 before	 he	said	 another	word,	 I	 knew	 John
Breed	wasn't	 about	to	 disappear.	He'd	be	 waiting	 on	 the	corner	 the	next	 time
Lena	needed	a	ride.
     I	stood	up.	I	 wasn't	sure	what	I	was	going	 to	do,	but	Link	 was.	He	slid	 out	of
the	booth	and	shoved	me	toward	the	door.	"Let's	get	outta	here,	man."
     Ridley	 called	 after	 us.	"I	 really	 did	 miss	 you,	 Shrinky	 Dink."	  She	tried	 to
make	it	 sound	 sarcastic,	like	 one	 of	 her	 jokes.	 But	 the	sarcasm	stuck	 in	 her
throat,	and	it	came	out	sounding	more	like	 the	truth.	I	 slammed	my	palm	against
the	door,	sending	it	flying	 open.
     But	before	it	 swung	shut,	I	heard	John's	voice.	"Nice	 to	meet	you,	Ethan.	Say
hi	to	Lena	for	 me."	My	 hands	were	shaking,	and	I	heard	Ridley	laugh.	She	didn't
have	to	lie	to	hurt	me	today.	She	had	the	truth.




We	didn't	 talk	on	 the	way	 to	Ravenwood.	Neither	 one	of	 us	knew	 what	to	say.
Girls	can	do	that	to	 you,	especially	Caster	girls.	When	 we	reached	the	top	of	the
long	drive	 leading	 to	Ravenwood	 Manor,	 the	gates	were	closed,	 something	I'd
never	seen	before.	The	ivy	had	grown	over	the	twisting	 metal,	as	if	it	 had	always
been	there.	I	got	out	of	the	 car	and	shook	the	gate	to	see	if	it	would	 swing	open,
knowing	it	 wouldn't.	 I	looked	up	at	the	house	behind	it.	The	windows	 were	dark,
and	the	sky	over	the	house	looked	even	darker.
     What	 had	 happened?	I	 could've	 handled	Lena's	 freak-out	 at	 the	 lake	 and
feeling	 like	 she	had	to	 take	 off.	 But	 why	 him?	 Why	 the	 Caster	boy	 with	 the
Harley?	How	 long	had	she	been	hanging	out	 with	 him	without	 telling	 me?	And
what	did	Ridley	 have	to	do	with	it?
     I	 had	never	been	this	mad	 at	her	before.	 It	was	 one	thing	 to	be	attacked	by
someone	you	hated,	but	this	was	something	 else.	This	was	the	kind	 of	 hurt	that
could	only	 be	inflicted	  by	 someone	you	loved,	 who	 you	thought	 loved	 you.	It
was	sort	of	like	being	stabbed	from	the	inside	out.
     "You	 okay,	man?"	Link	 slammed	the	driver's	side	door.
     "No."	 I	looked	down	 the	long	driveway	ahead	of	us.

81
     "Me	 neither."	 Link	 tossed	the	key	through	 the	Fastback's	open	window,	 and
we	headed	down	the	hill.
     We	hitched	back	to	town,	 Link	turning	 every	few	minutes	to	check	the	stretch
of	road	 behind	 us	for	 a	Harley.	 But	 I	 didn't	 think	  we'd	see	it.	 That	 particular
Harley	wouldn't	  be	headed	into	 town.	 For	all	 I	 knew,	 it	 could	 be	inside	 those
gates	already.




I	 didn't	 come	down	 for	 dinner,	 which	  was	my	 first	 mistake.	 My	  second	was
opening	the	 black	 Converse	 shoe	box.	 I	 shook	 it	 open,	 the	contents	 spilling
across	my	bed.	A	note	 Lena	had	written	 me	on	the	back	of	 a	wrinkled	 Snickers
wrapper,	a	ticket	 stub	from	 the	movie	 we	saw	on	 our	first	 date,	a	faded	receipt
from	 the	Dar-ee	 Keen,	and	 a	highlighted	  page	ripped	 out	 of	 a	book	 that	had
reminded	me	 of	 her.	It	 was	 the	box	 where	 I	 stashed	all	 our	 memories	--	 my
version	of	Lena's	necklace.	It	 didn't	seem	like	the	kind	 of	thing	 a	guy	should	do,
so	I	didn't	let	on	that	I	did	 it,	not	even	to	her.
     I	 picked	 up	the	 crumpled	 photo	 from	 the	 winter	 formal,	 taken	 the	second
before	we	 were	doused	with	 liquid	  snow	by	 my	 so-called	friends.	 The	picture
was	blurry,	but	 we	were	captured	in	a	kiss,	so	happy	it	 was	hard	to	look	 at	now.
Remembering	that	night,	 even	though	I	knew	 the	next	moment	 was	going	to	 be
awful,	it	 felt	like	 part	of	me	was	still	back	there	kissing	her.
     "Ethan	Wate,	is	that	you?"
     I	tried	 to	shove	everything	 back	into	the	box	 when	I	heard	my	 door	opening,
and	the	box	fell,	scattering	everything	onto	the	floor.
     "You	 feelin'	 all	right?"	 Amma	 came	into	 my	room	 and	sat	at	the	foot	 of	my
bed.	She	hadn't	done	that	since	I'd	 had	stomach	flu	 in	sixth	 grade.	Not	 that	she
didn't	love	me.	We	just	 had	things	worked	out	in	 a	way	that	didn't	include	 sitting
on	beds.
     "I'm	 tired,	that's	all."
     She	looked	 at	the	mess	on	 the	floor.	 "You	  look	 lower	 than	a	catfish	 at	the
bottom	a	the	river.	 And	a	perfectly	 good	pork	chop's	lookin'	 as	sorry	as	you	are,
down	in	my	 kitchen.	That's	 two	kinds	 a	sorry."	She	leaned	forward	 and	brushed
my	brown	hair	out	of	 my	eyes.	She	was	always	after	me	to	cut	my	hair.
     "I	 know,	I	know.	 The	eyes	are	the	window	to	the	soul,	and	I	need	a	haircut."
     "You	 need	a	good	sight	more	than	a	haircut."	She	looked	sad	and	grabbed	my
chin	as	if	  she	could	lift	  me	up	 by	 it.	 Given	 the	right	 circumstances,	I	 bet	 she
could.	"You're	not	 right."

82
     "I'm	 not?"
     "You're	 not,	and	you're	my	boy,	and	it's	my	fault."
     "What	 do	you	mean?"	I	didn't	understand	and	she	didn't	elaborate,	which	was
generally	how	our	conversations	went.
     "She's	 not	 right	 either,	 you	 know."	  Amma	 spoke	 softly,	  looking	 out	  my
window.	 "Not	 bein'	 right	  isn't	always	 somebody's	fault.	  Sometimes	it's	 just	 a
fact,	like	 the	 cards	you	pull."	  With	 Amma,	 everything	 came	down	 to	fate,	 the
cards	in	her	tarot	deck,	the	bones	in	the	graveyard,	the	universe	she	could	read.
     "Yes,	ma'am."
     She	looked	 into	 my	 eyes,	and	I	 could	 see	hers	shining.	"Sometimes	 things
aren't	what	they	 seem,	and	even	a	 Seer	can't	tell	 what's	comin'."	  She	took	 my
hand	and	dropped	something	into	it.	 A	red	string	 with	 tiny	beads	knotted	into	 it,
one	of	her	charms.	"Tie	it	'round	your	 wrist."
     "Amma,	 guys	don't	wear	bracelets."
     "Since	when	 do	I	 make	jewelry?	 That's	for	 women	with	 too	 much	time	 and
not	enough	sense."	She	yanked	on	her	apron,	straightening	it.	"A	red	string's	a	tie
to	the	Otherworld,	offers	 the	kinda	protection	I	can't.	Go	on,	put	it	 on."
     I	 knew	better	than	to	 argue	when	Amma	 had	that	look	 on	her	face.	 It	was	a
mixture	of	 fear	and	sadness,	and	she	wore	it	 like	 a	burden	too	heavy	 for	her	 to
carry.	I	 held	 out	 my	 arm	and	let	 her	 tie	 the	string	 around	my	 wrist.	 Before	 I
could	say	anything	 else,	she	was	at	my	window,	 pouring	 a	handful	 of	salt	from
her	apron	pocket	all	along	the	sill.
     "Everything's	 gonna	be	okay,	Amma.	Don't	worry."
     Amma	 stopped	in	the	doorway	and	looked	 back	at	me,	rubbing	the	 shine	out
of	her	eyes.	"Been	choppin'	onions	all	afternoon."
     Something	 wasn't	right,	 like	 Amma	 said.	 But	 I	had	 a	feeling	 it	 wasn't	 me.
"You	know	 anything	about	a	guy	named	John	Breed?"
     She	 stiffened.	 "Ethan	 Wate,	 don't	 you	  make	 me	give	  that	 pork	 chop	 to
Lucille."
     "No,	ma'am."
     Amma	knew	 something,	and	it	wasn't	good,	 and	she	wasn't	talking.	I	knew	 it
as	sure	as	I	knew	her	pork	chop	recipe,	which	didn't	have	a	single	onion	in	it.

83
6.14	

84
                                                Bookworm



If	 it	 was	good	enough	for	Melvil	  Dewey,	it's	good	enough	for	me."	 Marian
winked	at	me	as	she	pulled	a	stack	of	new	books	out	of	a	cardboard	box,	sniffing
deeply.	There	were	books	everywhere,	in	a	circle	around	her	almost	up	to	her
head.
    Lucille	 was	weaving	through	the	towers	of	books,	prowling	for	a	lost	cicada.
Marian	made	an	exception	to	the	Gatlin	County	Library's	no-pets	rule	since	the
place	was	full	of	 books	but	empty	of	 people.	Only	an	idiot	 would	be	 in	the
library	 on	the	 first	 day	of	 summer,	or	 someone	who	needed	a	distraction.
Someone	who	wasn't	speaking	to	his	girlfriend,	or	wasn't	being	spoken	to	by	his
girlfriend,	or	didn't	know	if	 he	even	still	had	one	--	all	in	the	space	of	the	two
longest	days	of	his	life.
    I	 still	hadn't	talked	to	Lena.	I	told	myself	it	was	because	I	was	too	angry,	but
that	was	one	of	those	lies	you	tell	when	you're	trying	to	convince	yourself	that
you're	doing	the	right	thing.	The	truth	was,	I	didn't	know	what	to	say.	I	didn't
want	to	ask	the	questions,	and	I	was	scared	to	hear	the	answers.	Besides,	I	wasn't
the	one	who	ran	off	with	some	guy	on	a	motorcycle.
    "It's	 chaos.	Dewey	decimal	is	mocking	you.	I	can't	even	find	one	almanac	on
the	history	of	the	moon's	orbital	pattern."	The	voice	from	the	stacks	startled	me.
    "Now,	 Olivia	 ..."	Marian	smiled	to	herself	as	she	examined	the	bindings	of
the	books	in	her	hands.	It	was	hard	to	believe	she	was	old	enough	to	be	my
mother.	With	not	a	streak	of	 gray	in	her	short	hair,	and	not	a	 wrinkle	in	 her
golden-brown	skin,	she	didn't	look	more	than	thirty.
    "Professor	Ashcroft,	this	isn't	1876.	Times	do	change."	It	was	a	girl's	voice.
She	had	an	accent	--	British,	I	think.	I'd	only	heard	people	talk	that	way	in	James
Bond	movies.
    "So	has	the	Dewey	decimal	system.	Twenty-two	times,	to	be	exact."	Marian
shelved	a	stray	book.
    "What	about	the	Library	of	Congress?"	The	voice	sounded	exasperated.
    "Give	me	a	hundred	more	years."
    "The	Universal	Decimal	Classification?"	Now	irritated.
    "This	is	South	Carolina,	not	Belgium."
    "Perhaps	the	Harvard-Yenching	system?"
    "Nobody	in	this	county	speaks	Chinese,	Olivia."

85
     A	 blond,	 lanky	 girl	 poked	 her	head	out	 from	 behind	 the	stacks.	"Not	 true,
Professor	Ashcroft.	At	least,	not	for	 the	summer	holidays."
     "You	 speak	Chinese?"	I	 couldn't	 help	myself.	 When	Marian	 had	 mentioned
her	summer	research	assistant,	she	hadn't	told	 me	 the	girl	 would	 be	 a	teenage
version	of	herself.	 Except	for	 the	streaky,	honey-colored	hair,	 the	pale	skin,	and
the	accent,	they	could	have	 been	mother	and	daughter.	Even	at	first	 glance,	the
girl	 had	a	vague	degree	of	 Marian-ness	that	was	 hard	to	 describe	and	that	you
wouldn't	find	 in	anyone	else	in	town.
     The	girl	 looked	 at	me.	 "You	 don't?"	She	poked	 me	in	 the	ribs.	"That	 was	a
joke.	In	 my	 opinion,	 people	in	 this	 country	 barely	speak	English."	 She	 smiled
and	held	out	her	hand.	She	was	tall,	but	I	 was	taller,	and	she	looked	up	 at	me	as
if	she	was	already	 confident	we	 were	great	friends.	 "Olivia	 Durand.	 Liv,	 to	my
friends.	You	 must	 be	Ethan	 Wate,	which	 I	 find	 hard	 to	 believe,	actually.	 The
way	  Professor	  Ashcroft	  talks	   about	  you,	  I	  was	  expecting	   more	  of	  a
swashbuckler,	with	a	bayonet."
     Marian	laughed,	and	I	turned	red.	"What	 has	she	been	telling	you?"
     "Only	 that	you're	 incredibly	 brilliant	  and	brave	and	virtuous,	 quite	the	save-
the-day	sort.	Every	bit	the	son	you	would	 expect	of	the	beloved	Lila	 Evers	Wate.
And	that	you'll	 be	my	lowly	 assistant	this	summer,	so	I	can	boss	you	around	all	I
like."	She	smiled	at	me,	and	I	blanked.
     She	was	nothing	like	 Lena,	but	 nothing	like	 the	girls	 in	Gatlin	 either.	Which
was	in	itself	 more	than	confusing.	 Everything	 she	was	wearing	had	a	weathered
look,	from	 her	 faded	jeans	and	the	random	 bits	of	 string	 and	beads	around	her
wrists,	to	 her	holey	silver	 high-tops,	 held	together	with	 duct	 tape,	and	her	ratty
Pink	Floyd	 T-shirt.	 She	had	a	big,	 black	plastic	 watch	with	 crazy-looking	  dials
on	the	 face,	caught	 between	the	 bits	 of	 string.	 I	 was	too	 embarrassed	to	 say
anything.
     Marian	 swooped	in	 to	rescue	me.	"Don't	 mind	 Liv.	  She's	teasing.	'Even	the
gods	love	jokes,'	Ethan."
     "Plato.	And	 stop	showing	off."	 Liv	 laughed.
     "I	 will."	 Marian	 smiled,	impressed.
     "He's	not	 laughing."	 Liv	 pointed	 at	me,	suddenly	 serious.	"'Hollow	  laughter
in	marble	halls.'	"
     "Shakespeare?"	I	looked	at	her.
     Liv	 winked	and	yanked	on	her	T-shirt.	 "Pink	 Floyd.	I	 can	see	you've	got	a	lot
to	learn."	A	 teenage	Marian,	and	not	at	all	what	 I	expected	when	I	 signed	on	for
a	summer	job	in	the	library.
     "Now,	 children."	  Marian	 held	 out	 her	hand,	 and	I	 pulled	 her	 up	 from	 the
floor.	 Even	on	a	 hot	day	like	 today,	 she	still	 managed	to	look	 cool.	 Not	 a	hair

86
was	out	of	place.	Her	patterned	blouse	rustled	as	she	walked	in	 front	of	 me.	"I'll
leave	the	stacks	to	you,	Olivia.	I	have	a	special	project	for	Ethan	in	the	archive."
     "Right,	 of	  course.	The	 highly	 trained	 history	 student	 sorts	out	 the	 stacks,
while	the	 unschooled	slacker	is	promoted	 to	the	archive.	 How	 very	American."
She	rolled	her	eyes	and	picked	up	a	box	of	books.
     The	 archive	hadn't	 changed	since	 last	month,	 when	 I	 came	to	 ask	Marian
about	a	summer	job	but	 stayed	to	talk	 about	Lena	and	my	 dad	and	Macon.	She
had	been	sympathetic,	the	 way	 she	always	was.	 There	were	 piles	of	 old	 Civil
War	registries	on	the	shelf	above	my	mother's	desk,	and	her	collection	of	antique
glass	paperweights.	A	 glistening,	 black	 sphere	sat	 next	to	 the	 misshapen	clay
apple	I	 made	for	 her	 in	 first	 grade.	My	 mom's	 and	Marian's	 books	 and	notes
were	still	  stacked	 across	the	 desk,	 over	 yellowed	  maps	of	  Ravenwood	 and
Greenbrier	spread	open	on	the	tables.	Every	scribbled	scrap	of	paper	I	saw	made
it	feel	 like	she	was	here.	Even	though	everything	 in	 my	life	 seemed	to	be	going
wrong,	I	always	 felt	better	in	 this	place.	It	was	like	 I	was	with	 my	mom,	 and	she
was	the	one	 person	who	 always	knew	 how	 to	 fix	 things,	 or	at	 least	make	me
believe	there	was	a	way	to	fix	them.
     But	something	else	was	on	my	mind.	"That's	your	 summer	intern?"
     "Of	 course."
     "You	 didn't	tell	 me	she'd	be	like	that."
     "Like	 what,	Ethan?"
     "Like	 you."
     "Is	that	what's	bothering	 you?	The	brains,	or	is	it	perhaps	the	long	blond	hair?
Is	there	a	certain	way	 a	librarian	 should	look?	Big	 glasses	and	hair	in	a	graying
bun?	I	  would	 have	 thought	  between	your	  mother	 and	 me,	 we	 would	  have
disabused	you	of	at	least	that	 notion."	 She	was	right.	My	 mom	 and	Marian	 had
always	been	two	of	the	most	beautiful	 women	in	 Gatlin.	"Liv	  won't	be	here	very
long,	and	she's	not	much	older	 than	you	 are.	I	was	thinking	 the	 least	you	could
do	would	be	to	show	her	around	town,	introduce	her	to	some	people	your	age."
     "Like	 who?	Link?	 To	 improve	 his	vocabulary	and	kill	  off	 a	few	thousand	of
her	brain	cells?"	I	 didn't	 mention	that	Link	  would	spend	most	of	 his	time	 trying
to	hook	up	with	her,	which	 I	didn't	 see	happening.
     "I	 was	thinking	 of	Lena."	 The	silence	in	the	room	 was	embarrassing,	even	to
me.	Of	course	she	had	been	thinking	 of	 Lena.	The	 question	was,	why	 hadn't	I?
Marian	looked	 at	me	evenly.	"Why	 don't	you	 tell	me	what's	really	 on	your	 mind
today?"
     "What	is	 it	you	need	me	to	do	in	here,	Aunt	Marian?"	 I	didn't	 feel	like	 talking
about	it.
     She	sighed	and	turned	back	to	the	 archive.	"I	 thought	maybe	you	 could	help

87
me	sort	 through	 some	of	 this.	 Obviously	 a	 great	deal	 of	 the	material	 in	 here
relates	to	the	locket	and	Ethan	and	Genevieve.	Now	that	we	know	the	end	of	that
story,	we	might	want	to	make	some	room	for	 the	next	one."
     "What's	 the	next	one?"	I	 picked	 up	the	old	 photo	of	 Genevieve	wearing	 the
locket.	I	 remembered	the	 first	 time	 I	 looked	 at	it	 with	 Lena.	 It	 felt	 like	 years
since	then,	instead	of	months.
     "It	 would	 seem	to	me	that	 it's	yours	 and	Lena's.	The	events	on	her	 birthday
raised	a	number	of	questions,	most	 of	which	 I	 can't	answer.	I've	never	 heard	of
an	incident	 when	a	Caster	didn't	 have	to	 choose	Light	 or	Dark	 on	 the	night	 of
their	Claiming	 --	 except	in	 the	case	of	 Lena's	family,	 when	the	 choice	is	 made
for	them.	 Now	 that	we	 don't	have	Macon	 to	 help	us,	I'm	 afraid	 we're	going	 to
have	to	search	out	the	answers	ourselves."	Lucille	 jumped	 up	onto	my	 mother's
chair,	her	ears	perking	up.
     "I	 wouldn't	know	 where	to	start."
     "'He	who	 chooses	the	beginning	of	the	road	chooses	the	place	it	leads	to.'	"
     "Thoreau?"
     "Harry	  Emerson	 Fosdick.	 A	  bit	 older	  and	 more	 obscure,	 but	 still	  quite
relevant,	I	think."	 She	smiled	and	put	her	hand	on	the	edge	of	the	door.
     "Aren't	 you	going	to	help	me?"
     "I	 can't	 leave	Olivia	 alone	 for	 long,	 or	she'll	 reshelve	the	 entire	collection,
and	then	we'll	 all	 have	to	 learn	Chinese."	 She	paused	for	a	 moment,	watching
me,	looking	 so	much	 like	 my	 mom.	 "I	 think	 you	 can	handle	this	 one	on	 your
own.	At	least	the	beginning."
     "I	 don't	have	a	choice,	do	I?	You	 can't	really	help	me	since	you're	a	Keeper."
I	was	still	  bitter	 about	Marian's	 revelation	that	 she	had	known	 my	mother	 was
involved	with	 the	Caster	world,	 but	she	would	never	explain	 why	or	 how.	There
were	so	many	things	about	my	 mother	and	her	death	that	Marian	 had	never	told
me.	It	always	 came	back	to	the	endless	rules	that	Bound	 Marian	 to	her	job	 as	a
Keeper.
     "I	 can	only	help	you	 help	yourself.	I	 can't	determine	the	course	of	events,	the
unraveling	of	Darkness	and	Light,	the	Order	of	 Things."
     "That's	such	a	load	of	crap."
     "What?"
     "It's	like	 the	prime	directive	 on	Star	Trek.	You	have	to	let	 the	planet	evolve	at
its	own	pace.	You	can't	introduce	hyperspace	or	warp	speed	until	they	discover	it
for	themselves.	But	 Captain	Kirk	 and	the	crew	 of	the	 Enterprise	always	 end	up
breaking	the	rule."
     "Unlike	 Captain	Kirk,	  there	is	no	choice	in	 my	case.	A	Keeper	is	 powerfully
Bound	to	 act	neither	for	 the	 Dark	nor	 the	Light.	 I	 couldn't	 change	my	 destiny,

88
even	if	I	wanted	to.	I	have	my	own	place	in	the	natural	order	of	the	Caster	world,
in	the	Order	of	Things."
    "Whatever."
    "It's	 not	a	choice.	I	don't	have	the	authority	to	change	the	way	things	work.	If
I	so	much	as	tried,	I	might	destroy	not	only	myself	but	the	very	people	I	was
trying	to	help."
    "But	 my	mom	still	ended	up	dead."	I	don't	know	why	I	said	it,	but	I	couldn't
understand	the	logic.	Marian	had	to	remain	uninvolved	to	protect	the	people	she
cared	about,	but	the	person	she	cared	about	most	died	anyway.
    "Are	 you	asking	me	if	I	could've	prevented	your	mother's	death?"	She	knew	I
was.	I	looked	down	at	my	sneakers.	I	wasn't	sure	I	was	ready	to	hear	the	answer.
    Marian	put	her	hand	under	my	chin	and	pulled	my	face	up	to	meet	hers.	"I
didn't	know	your	mother	was	in	 danger,	Ethan.	But	she	knew	the	risks."	Her
voice	was	uneven,	and	I	knew	I	had	gone	too	far,	but	I	couldn't	help	it.	I'd	been
trying	to	get	up	the	courage	to	have	this	conversation	for	months	now.	"I	would
have	gladly	taken	her	place	in	 that	car.	Don't	 you	think	 I	 have	wondered	a
thousand	times	if	there	was	something	I	knew	or	could	have	done	that	might
have	saved	Lila	..."	Her	voice	trailed	off.
    I	 feel	the	same	way.	You're	just	holding	on	to	a	different	edge	of	the	same
jagged	hole.	We're	both	lost.	That's	what	I	wanted	to	say.	Instead,	I	let	her	put
her	arm	around	my	shoulder	and	pull	me	into	a	rough	hug.	I	barely	felt	it	when
the	arm	slipped	away	and	the	door	closed	behind	her.
    I	 stared	at	the	stacks	of	paper.	Lucille	jumped	down	from	the	chair	and	onto
the	table.	"Be	careful.	These	are	a	lot	older	than	you."	She	tilted	her	head	and
looked	at	me	with	her	blue	eyes.	Then	she	froze.
    She	was	staring	at	my	mother's	chair,	eyes	wide,	fixated.	There	was	nothing
there,	but	I	remembered	what	Amma	told	me.	"Cats	can	see	the	dead.	That's	why
they	stare	at	things	the	way	they	do	for	so	long,	like	they're	just	lookin'	into	thin
air.	But	they're	not.	They're	lookin'	through	it."
    I	 stepped	closer	to	the	chair.	"Mom?"	She	didn't	answer,	or	maybe	she	did,
because	there	was	a	book	lying	on	the	chair	that	wasn't	there	a	minute	ago.
Darkness	and	Light:	The	Origins	of	Magic.	It	was	one	of	Macon's	books.	I	had
seen	it	in	his	library	at	Ravenwood.	I	lifted	it	up,	and	a	gum	wrapper	fell	out	--
one	of	my	mother's	bookmarks,	no	doubt.	I	bent	down	to	pick	up	the	wrapper,
and	the	room	began	to	sway,	the	lights	and	colors	swirling	around	me.	I	tried	to
focus	on	something,	anything,	to	keep	from	falling,	but	I	 was	too	dizzy.	The
wood	floor	rushed	up	to	meet	me,	and	as	I	hit	the	ground	the	smoke	burned	my
eyes	--

89
By	the	time	 Abraham	returned	 to	Ravenwood,	the	ash	 had	already	 made	its
way	inside	the	house.	The	charred	 remnants	of	 Gatlin's	 great	houses	wafted
down	from	the	open	windows	on	the	second	floor	like	black	 snowflakes.	As	he
ascended	the	staircase,	Abraham's	footsteps	left	impressions	in	the	thin	black
layer	 already	 coating	 the	floor.	  He	secured	 the	upstairs	 windows,	 without
putting	The	 Book	 of	Moons	 down	 for	a	 second.	But	he	couldn't	 have	put	 it
down	even	if	he	had	wanted	to.	Ivy,	 the	old	cook	from	 Greenbrier,	was	right;
the	Book	was	calling	him,	a	whisper	only	 he	could	hear.
   When	 he	 reached	the	 study,	 Abraham	 rested	 the	Book	 on	 the	 polished
mahogany	desk.	He	knew	exactly	 which	page	 to	turn	 to,	as	 if	the	 Book	was
flipping	 the	pages	itself.	 As	if	 it	 knew	what	 he	wanted.	Even	though	 he	had
never	seen	the	Book	before,	Abraham	knew	the	answer	was	in	those	pages,	an
answer	that	would	guarantee	Ravenwood's	survival.
   The	 Book	was	offering	 him	 the	one	thing	 he	wanted	above	all	 else.	But	it
wanted	something	in	return.
   Abraham	 stared	down	at	 the	Latin	 script.	He	 recognized	it	immediately.	 It
was	a	Cast	he	had	read	about	in	 other	books.	One	he	had	always	considered
more	of	a	myth.	But	he	had	been	wrong,	because	it	was	staring	back	at	him.
   Abraham	 heard	 Jonah's	voice	 before	he	saw	 him.	"Abraham,	 we	 have	to
get	out	 of	the	 house.	The	Federals	 are	coming.	 They've	burned	 everything,
and	they	aren't	 planning	 to	stop	 until	 they	reach	 Savannah.	We	have	to	get
into	the	Tunnels."
   Abraham's	 voice	was	 resolute,	and	it	 sounded	different	 somehow,	even	to
him.	"I'm	not	 going	anywhere,	Jonah."
   "What	 are	you	talking	 about?	 We	have	to	save	what	we	can	and	get	out	of
here."	 Jonah	 grabbed	 his	 brother's	 arm,	 noticing	  the	 open	page	 beneath
them.	He	stared	at	the	script,	unsure	he	could	trust	what	he	was	seeing.
   "The	 Daemonis	 Pactum?	The	 Demon's	Trade?"	 Jonah	 stepped	back.	"Is
this	what	I	think	it	 is?	The	Book	of	 Moons?"
   "I'm	 surprised	 you	recognize	it.	 You	never	paid	much	attention	 during	 our
studies."
   Jonah	 was	used	 to	Abraham's	 insults,	 but	 there	was	 something	different
about	his	tone	tonight.	"Abraham,	 you	can't."
   "Don't	  tell	 me	what	 I	 can't	 do.	 You	would	 watch	 this	house	burn	 to	 the
ground	before	you	thought	to	act.	You	have	never	been	capable	of	doing	what
was	required.	You	are	weak,	like	Mother."
   Jonah	flinched,	 as	if	someone	had	struck	him.	"Where	did	you	get	it?"
   "You	 don't	need	to	worry	about	that."
   "Abraham,	  be	sensible.	The	Demon's	Trade	 is	 too	powerful.	 It	 cannot	 be

90
controlled.	You	are	making	 a	bargain,	without	 knowing	what	 you	will	 have	to
sacrifice.	We	have	other	houses."
   Abraham	 pushed	his	brother	 aside.	Though	Abraham	 barely	 touched	him,
Jonah	flew	 across	the	 room.	"Other	  houses?	Ravenwood	is	the	seat	 of	our
family's	 power	in	 the	 Mortal	 world,	  and	you	 think	 I	 intend	to	 allow	 a	 few
soldiers	to	burn	it	 to	the	ground?	I	can	use	this	to	save	Ravenwood."
   Abraham's	  voice	 rose.	 "Exscinde,	  neca,	 odium	  incende;	 mors	 portam
patefacit.	Destroy,	kill,	 hate;	death	opens	the	gate."
   "Abraham,	 stop!"
   But	 it	 was	too	 late.	 The	words	 rolled	 off	 Abraham's	tongue	 as	if	 he	had
known	them	his	 entire	 life.	 Jonah	looked	 around,	panicked,	 waiting	 for	 the
Cast	to	take	 effect.	But	 he	had	no	 idea	what	 his	brother	 had	 asked	for.	 He
only	knew	that	whatever	 it	was,	it	 would	 be	done.	That	was	the	power	of	 the
Cast,	but	there	was	also	a	price.	It	 was	never	the	same.	Jonah	rushed	toward
his	brother,	and	a	 small,	perfectly	round	 orb,	the	size	of	an	egg,	slipped	from
his	pocket	and	rolled	across	the	floor.
   Abraham	 picked	 up	the	sphere,	glowing	 at	 his	feet,	and	 rolled	 it	 between
his	 fingers.	 "What	  are	  you	 doing	  with	 an	  Arclight,	  Jonah?	 Is	  there	 a
particular	 Incubus	you're	planning	 to	imprison	in	 this	archaic	device?"
   Jonah	 backed	away	as	Abraham	advanced,	matching	him	step	for	step,	but
Abraham	was	 too	fast.	 In	the	 blink	 of	 an	eye,	he	pinned	 Jonah	against	 the
wall,	his	iron	 grip	closing	 around	his	brother's	 throat.
   "No.	 Of	course	not.	I	--"
   Abraham	 tightened	 his	hold.	 "What	 would	 an	 Incubus	be	 doing	with	 the
only	vessel	capable	of	imprisoning	his	kind?	Do	 you	think	I'm	that	stupid?""
   I	 am	only	trying	 to	protect	you	from	yourself."
   In	 one	 fluid	 motion,	Abraham	 lunged	 forward	 and	plunged	 his	teeth	 into
his	brother's	shoulder.	Then	he	did	the	unthinkable.
   He	 drank.
   The	bargain	 was	made.	He	would	 no	longer	 be	sustained	by	the	memories
and	dreams	of	Mortals.	From	 this	day	forward,	 he	would	crave	blood.
   When	he	had	his	 fill,	 Abraham	dropped	 his	brother's	limp	 body	and	licked
the	ash	from	 his	hand,	 the	taste	of	 flesh	still	 lingering	  in	the	 black	residue.
"You	should	have	been	more	concerned	about	protecting	yourself."
   Abraham	 turned	away	from	his	brother's	 body.	"Ethan."

91
"Ethan!"
     I	 opened	 my	 eyes.	I	  was	lying	  on	 the	 floor	 of	  the	 archive.	 Marian	 was
hovering	over	me	in	an	un-Marian	state	of	panic.	"What	 happened?"
     "I	  don't	 know."	  I	 sat	 up,	 rubbing	 my	  head,	wincing.	  There	 was	 a	 knot
growing	underneath	my	hair.	"I	 must	have	hit	the	table	on	my	way	down."
     Macon's	book	 was	lying	 on	the	floor,	 open	next	to	me.	 Marian	looked	 at	me
with	her	 uncanny	ESP	--	or	 not	so	uncanny,	if	 you	 stopped	to	consider	that	she
had	followed	me	into	 visions	herself	only	months	ago.	Within	 seconds,	she	had	a
cold	pack	 in	 her	hand	and	 was	holding	 it	 against	my	 throbbing	 head.	"You're
having	visions	again,	aren't	you?"
     I	nodded.	My	 mind	 was	swimming	 with	 images,	but	 I	couldn't	 focus	on	any
one	of	them.	"It's	 the	second	time.	I	had	one	the	other	night	 when	I	 was	holding
Macon's	journal."
     "What	did	 you	see?"
     "It	 was	the	 night	 of	 the	fires,	 like	 in	 the	locket	 visions.	 Ethan	Carter	Wate
was	already	 dead.	Ivy	 had	 The	Book	 of	 Moons,	 and	she	gave	 it	 to	 Abraham
Ravenwood.	He	was	in	 both	of	 the	visions."	 His	name	sounded	thick	 and	fuzzy
on	my	  tongue.	Abraham	  Ravenwood	 was	the	 original	  boogeyman	 of	 Gatlin
County.
     I	gripped	 the	edge	of	the	table,	steadying	myself.	 Who	 wanted	me	to	see	the
visions?	More	important,	why?
     Marian	paused,	still	holding	 the	book.	"Oh?"	 She	looked	at	me	carefully.
     "And	 someone	else.	His	 name	began	with	  a	J.	Judas?	Joseph?	Jonah.	That
was	it.	I	think	 they	were	brothers.	They	were	Incubuses."
     "Not	 just	Incubuses."	 Marian	snapped	the	book	 shut.	"Abraham	 Ravenwood
was	a	 powerful	 Blood	  Incubus,	 the	father	 of	 the	 Ravenwood	 Blood	 Incubus
line."
     "What	 do	you	mean?"	So,	the	story	folks	had	been	telling	 for	years	was	true?
I	had	cleared	another	layer	of	fog	from	the	supernatural	map	of	Gatlin.
     "Although	 all	 Incubuses	are	Dark	by	nature,	not	all	of	them	choose	to	feed	on
blood.	But	once	one	does,	the	instinct	appears	to	be	inherited."
     I	 leaned	against	the	table	as	the	vision	 sharpened	in	my	 mind.	 "Abraham	 --
he's	the	reason	Ravenwood	Manor	 never	 burned,	right?	 He	didn't	 make	a	 deal
with	the	Devil.	 He	made	it	with	 The	Book	of	Moons."
     "Abraham	 was	 dangerous,	maybe	more	 dangerous	than	any	 Caster.	I	 can't
imagine	why	 you're	seeing	him	now.	 Fortunately,	 he	died	young,	before	Macon
was	born."
     I	tried	 to	do	the	math.	"That's	young?	How	long	do	Incubuses	usually	live?"
     "A	 hundred	 and	fifty	  to	two	 hundred	years."	 She	replaced	the	book	 on	 her

92
worktable.	"I	 don't	know	 what	any	of	this	has	to	do	with	 you	or	Macon's	 journal,
but	I	never	 should	have	given	it	 to	you.	 I	interfered.	 We	should	 leave	this	book
locked	up	here."
     "Aunt	 Marian	--"
     "Ethan!	Don't	 pursue	this,	and	don't	tell	anyone	else	about	it,	not	even	Amma.
I	can't	imagine	 how	she	would	 react	if	you	 said	the	name	Abraham	Ravenwood
in	her	presence."	She	put	her	arm	around	me	and	gave	me	a	halfhearted	squeeze.
"Now,	 let's	go	finish	 up	in	 the	stacks	before	Olivia	 calls	the	police."	 She	turned
to	the	door	and	stuck	her	key	in	the	lock.
     There	was	one	more	 thing.	I	 had	to	 say	it.	 "He	could	 see	me,	Aunt	 Marian.
Abraham	looked	 right	 at	 me	and	said	 my	name.	 That's	never	happened	in	 the
visions	before."
     Marian	stopped,	staring	at	the	door	 as	if	she	could	see	right	through	it.	 It	was
more	than	a	 few	seconds	before	she	turned	 the	key	 in	 the	lock	 and	swung	 the
door	open.	"Olivia?	  Do	 you	think	 Melvil	  Dewey	 could	 spare	you	for	 a	cup	 of
tea?"
     Our	conversation	 was	over.	Marian	 was	a	Keeper	and	the	Head	Librarian	 of
the	Caster	Library,	  the	Lunae	 Libri.	  She	could	 only	 tell	 me	 so	much	 without
violating	 her	obligations.	 She	couldn't	take	sides	or	change	the	course	of	 events
once	they	were	set	in	motion.	 She	couldn't	be	Macon	for	 me,	and	she	wasn't	my
mom.	I	was	on	my	own.

93
6.14	

94
                                        Beneath	     the	 Paper



All	 of	those?"	There	were	three	stacks	of	brown	paper	packages	on	the	checkout
desk.	Marian	marked	the	last	one	with	 the	 familiar	GATLIN	COUNTY	LIBRARY
stamp,	always	twice	and	always	tied	with	the	same	white	string.
    "No,	 take	that	pile,	too."	She	pointed	to	a	second	pile,	on	the	nearest	trolley.
    "I	 thought	nobody	in	this	town	reads."
    "Oh,	 they	read.	They	just	don't	own	up	to	what	they	read,	which	is	why	we
make	not	only	 library-to-library	 deliveries	but	library-to-home	ones	as	well.
Circulating	books	 only.	 Allowing	 two	 to	 three	 days	for	 the	 processing	of
requests,	of	course."
    Great.	I	was	afraid	to	ask	what	was	in	these	brown	paper	packages,	and	I	was
pretty	sure	I	didn't	want	to	 know.	I	 picked	up	a	stack	of	books	and	groaned.
"What	are	these,	encyclopedias?"
    Liv	  pulled	 the	receipt	 from	 the	top	 bundle.	"Yes.	 The	Encyclopedia	of
Ammunition,	actually."
    Marian	 waved	us	out	the	door.	"Go	 with	 Ethan,	Liv.	You	 haven't	had	an
opportunity	to	see	our	beautiful	little	town	yet."
    "I	 can	handle	it."
    Liv	 sighed	and	pushed	the	trolley	toward	the	door.	"Come	on,	Hercules.	I'll
help	you	 load	up.	Can't	 keep	the	ladies	of	 Gatlin	 waiting	on	 their	 ..."	She
consulted	another	receipt.	"...	Carolin-er	Cake	Doctor	Cookbook,	now	can	we?"
    "Carolina,"	I	said,	automatically.
    "That's	what	I	said.	Carolin-er."




Two	hours	later,	we	had	delivered	most	of	the	books	and	driven	by	both	Jackson
High	and	the	Stop	&	Steal.	As	we	circled	the	General's	Green,	I	realized	why
Marian	had	been	so	eager	to	hire	me	at	a	library	that	was	always	empty	and
didn't	need	summer	employees.	She	had	planned	for	me	to	be	Liv's	teenage	tour
guide	all	along.	It	was	my	job	to	show	her	the	lake	and	the	Dar-ee	Keen	and	fill
in	the	gaps	between	what	folks	around	here	said	and	what	they	meant.	My	job
was	to	be	her	friend.
    I	 wondered	how	Lena	was	going	to	feel	about	that.	If	she	noticed.

95
     "I	 still	don't	 understand	why	there's	a	statue	of	a	general	from	a	war	the	South
didn't	win,	 and	 one	which	 was	generally	 embarrassing	for	your	 country,	 in	the
middle	of	town."	 Of	course	she	didn't.
     "Folks	 honor	 the	fallen	 around	here.	There's	 a	whole	 museum	dedicated	to
them."	 I	 didn't	 mention	  the	Fallen	 Soldiers	 was	 also	 the	 scene	of	 my	 dad's
Ridley-induced	suicide	attempt	a	few	months	ago.
     I	looked	over	 at	Liv	from	 behind	the	wheel	of	the	Volvo.	 I	 couldn't	remember
the	last	time	there	had	been	any	girl	except	Lena	in	the	passenger's	seat.
     "You're	 a	terrible	tour	guide."
     "This	 is	 Gatlin.	 There	isn't	 all	 that	much	 to	see."	I	 glanced	in	 the	rearview
mirror.	"Or	 just	not	that	much	I	want	 you	to	see."
     "What	do	you	 mean	by	that?"
     "A	 good	tour	guide	knows	what	to	show	and	what	to	hide."
     "I	 stand	 corrected.	 You're	 a	 terribly	 misguided	 tour	 guide."	  She	pulled	 a
rubber	band	out	of	her	pocket.
     "So	I'm	more	of	 a	mis-guide?"	It	was	a	stupid	joke,	my	 trademark.
     "And	 I	take	 issue	with	both	 your	punning	 and	your	tour-guiding	 philosophy,
generally	speaking."	She	was	working	 her	blond	hair	into	 two	braids,	her	cheeks
pink	from	 the	heat.	She	wasn't	used	to	the	South	Carolina	humidity.
     "What	do	 you	want	to	see?	You	want	me	to	take	you	to	shoot	cans	behind	the
old	cotton	mill	  off	Route	 9?	Flatten	pennies	on	the	train	tracks?	Follow	 the	trail
of	flies	into	 the	eat-at-your-own-risk	grease	pit	we	call	the	Dar-ee	Keen?"
     "Yes.	All	 of	 the	above,	particularly	the	last	bit.	I'm	 starving."




Liv	 dropped	the	last	library	 receipt	 into	one	of	 two	 piles.	"...	 seven,	eight,	nine.
Which	means	I	win,	you	 lose,	and	get	your	hands	off	those	chips.	They	belong	to
me	now."	She	pulled	my	chili	 fries	over	to	 her	side	of	the	red	plastic	table.
     "You	 mean	fries."
     "I	 mean	 business."	Her	 side	 of	 the	 table	was	 already	 covered	with	  onion
rings,	a	 cheeseburger,	ketchup,	mayonnaise,	and	my	 sweet	tea.	 I	 knew	whose
side	was	whose	because	she	had	made	a	line	between	us,	laying	french	fries	end
to	end,	like	the	Great	Wall	of	 China.
     "'Good	fences	make	good	neighbors.'	"
     I	remembered	the	poem	from	English	class.	"Walt	 Whitman."
     She	shook	 her	 head.	"Robert	  Frost.	 Now	 keep	 your	 hands	off	  my	 onion
rings."

96
    I	 should've	known	that	one.	How	many	times	had	Lena	quoted	Frost's	poems
or	twisted	them	into	one	of	her	own?
    We	had	stopped	for	lunch	at	the	Dar-ee	Keen,	which	was	down	the	road	from
the	last	two	deliveries	we'd	made	--	Mrs.	Ipswich	(Guide	to	Colon	Cleanliness)
and	Mr.	Harlow	(Classic	Pinups	of	World	War	II),	 which	we	had	given	to	his
wife	because	he	wasn't	home.	For	the	first	time,	I	understood	the	reason	for	the
brown	paper.
    "I	 can't	believe	it."	I	wadded	up	my	napkin.	"Who	would	have	figured	Gatlin
was	so	romantic?"	I	had	bet	on	church	books.	Liv	had	bet	on	romance	novels.	I
lost,	eight	to	nine.
    "Not	   only	  romantic,	 but	  romantic	  and	 righteous.	 It's	  a	  wonderful
combination,	so	--"
    "Hypocritical?"
    "Not	 at	all.	 I	 was	going	to	say	American.	Did	 you	notice	we	delivered	It
Takes	a	Bible	and	Divinely	Delicious	Delilah	to	the	very	same	house?"
    "I	 thought	that	was	a	cookbook."
    "Not	 unless	Delilah's	cooking	up	something	quite	a	bit	hotter	than	these	chili
chips."	She	waved	a	fry	in	the	air.
    "Fries."
    "Exactly."
    I	 turned	bright	red,	thinking	 about	how	flustered	Mrs.	Lincoln	had	looked
when	we	dropped	those	books	off	at	her	door.	I	 didn't	 point	out	to	 Liv	 that
Delilah's	devotee	was	the	mother	of	my	 best	friend,	and	the	most	ruthlessly
righteous	woman	in	town.
    "So,	you	like	the	Dar-ee	Keen?"	I	changed	the	subject.
    "I'm	 mad	about	it."	Liv	 took	 a	bite	of	her	cheeseburger,	big	enough	to	put
Link	to	 shame.	I'd	already	seen	her	wolf	down	more	than	the	average	varsity
basketball	player	at	lunch.	She	didn't	seem	to	care	what	I	thought	about	her	one
way	or	another,	which	was	a	relief.	 Especially	since	everything	I	did	around
Lena	lately	was	wrong.
    "So	 what	 would	 we	find	 in	 your	 brown	 paper	package?	Church	books,
romance	novels,	or	both?"
    "I	 don't	know."	I	had	more	secrets	than	I	knew	what	to	do	with,	but	I	wasn't
about	to	share	any	of	them.
    "Come	on.	Everyone	has	secrets."
    "Not	 everyone,"	I	lied.
    "There's	nothing	at	all	beneath	your	paper?"
    "Nope.	Just	more	paper,	I	guess."	In	a	way,	I	wished	it	was	true.
    "So	you're	rather	like	an	onion?"

97
     "More	 like	a	regular	old	potato."
     She	picked	up	 a	fry	 and	examined	it.	 "Ethan	 Wate	is	 no	regular	 old	potato.
You,	sir,	are	a	french	fry."	 She	popped	it	into	her	mouth,	smiling.
     I	laughed	and	conceded.	"Fine.	I'm	 a	french	fry.	But	 no	brown	paper,	nothing
to	tell."
     Liv	 stirred	her	sweet	tea	with	 her	straw.	"That	confirms	 it.	 You	are	definitely
on	the	waiting	list	 for	Divinely	 Delicious	 Delilah."
     "You	 caught	me."
     "I	 can't	promise	anything,	but	 I	will	  tell	you	 that	I	know	 the	librarian.	 Rather
well,	it	 turns	out."
     "So	you'll	 hook	me	up?"
     "I	 will	 hook	you	up,	dude."	 Liv	 started	laughing,	and	I	did,	too.	She	was	easy
to	be	around,	like	I'd	known	 her	forever.	I	was	having	fun,	 which,	by	the	time	we
stopped	laughing,	turned	into	feeling	guilty.	 Explain	 that	to	me.
     She	returned	to	her	fries.	"I	find	 all	 the	secrecy	sort	of	romantic,	don't	you?"	I
didn't	know	 how	 to	answer	that,	considering	 how	 deep	the	secrets	went	around
here.
     "In	  my	  town,	  the	 pub	  is	 on	  the	 same	 street	 as	 the	  church,	 and	 the
congregation	moves	 directly	  from	 one	 to	 the	 other.	 Sometimes	we	 even	 eat
Sunday	dinner	there."
     I	smiled.	"Is	 it	divinely	 delicious?"
     "Nearly.	 Maybe	 not	quite	 so	hot.	But	 the	drinks	 are	not	 quite	so	cold."	 She
pointed	at	her	sweet	tea	with	a	fry.	 "Ice,	my	 friend,	is	something	 you	find	 on	the
ground	more	often	than	in	your	glass."
     "You	 have	a	problem	with	Gatlin	 County's	famous	sweet	tea?"
     "Tea	is	meant	to	be	hot,	sir.	From	a	kettle."
     I	 stole	a	fry	  and	pointed	it	 back	 at	her	 sweet	tea.	"Well,	  ma'am,	to	a	 strict
Southern	Baptist,	that	is	the	Devil's	drink."
     "You	 mean	because	it's	cold?"
     "I	 mean	because	it's	tea.	No	caffeine	allowed."
     Liv	 looked	shocked.	"No	tea?	I'll	 never	understand	this	country."
     I	 stole	another	fry.	  "You	 want	 to	talk	 about	blasphemy?	 You	 weren't	there
when	 Millie's	  Breakfast	 'n'	  Biscuits	 over	  on	 Main	  started	serving	  premade
freezer	biscuits.	My	 great-aunts,	the	Sisters,	pitched	 a	fit	 that	nearly	took	 down
the	place.	I	mean,	chairs	were	flying."
     "Are	 they	nuns?"	Liv	stuck	an	onion	ring	 inside	her	cheeseburger.
     "Who?"
     "The	Sisters."	Another	 onion	ring.
     "No.	They're	 actual	sisters."

98
    "I	 see."	She	slapped	the	bun	back	down.
    "You	 don't,	not	really."
    She	picked	 up	the	burger	and	took	 a	bite.	 "Not	 at	all."	 We	 both	started
laughing	again.	I	didn't	hear	Mr.	Gentry	walk	up	behind	us.
    "Y'all	 get	enough	to	eat?"	he	asked,	wiping	his	hands	with	a	rag.
    I	 nodded.	"Yes,	sir."
    "How's	that	girlfriend	a	yours?"	He	asked	as	if	he	was	hoping	I	had	come	to
my	senses	and	dumped	Lena	by	now.
    "Um,	 fine,	sir."
    He	nodded,	disappointed,	and	walked	back	toward	the	counter.	"Say	hello	to
Miss	Amma	for	me."
    "I	 take	it	 he	doesn't	like	your	girlfriend?"	She	said	it	like	a	 question,	but	I
didn't	know	what	to	say.	Was	a	girl	still	technically	your	girlfriend	if	she	drove
off	with	another	guy?	"I	think	Professor	Ashcroft	may	have	mentioned	her."
    "Lena.	My	 --	her	name	is	Lena."	I	hoped	I	didn't	look	as	uncomfortable	as	I
felt.	Liv	didn't	seem	to	notice.
    She	took	another	sip	of	her	tea.	"I'll	probably	meet	her	at	the	library."
    "I	  don't	know	if	 she'll	be	coming	 by	the	library.	 Things	have	been	weird
lately."	I	don't	know	why	I	 said	it.	I	barely	knew	Liv.	But	 it	felt	good	to	say	it
out	loud,	and	my	insides	untwisted	a	little.
    "I'm	 sure	you'll	work	it	 out.	Back	home,	I	fought	with	my	boyfriend	all	the
time."	Her	voice	was	light.	She	was	trying	to	make	me	feel	better.
    "How	 long	have	you	guys	been	together?"
    Liv	 waved	her	hand	in	the	air,	the	weird	watch	sliding	down	her	wrist.	"Oh,
we	broke	up.	He	was	a	bit	of	a	prat.	I	don't	think	he	liked	having	a	girlfriend	who
was	smarter	than	he	was."
    I	 wanted	to	get	off	the	subject	of	girlfriends,	and	ex-girlfriends.	"So	what's
that	thing,	anyway?"	I	nodded	at	the	watch,	or	whatever	it	was.
    "This?"	 She	held	her	wrist	over	the	 table	so	I	could	see	the	clunky	black
watch.	It	had	three	dials	and	a	little	silver	needle	that	rested	on	a	rectangle	with
zigzags	all	over	it,	sort	of	like	one	of	those	machines	that	track	the	strength	of
earthquakes.	"It's	a	selenometer."
    I	 looked	at	her	blankly.
    "Selene,	the	Greek	goddess	of	the	moon.	Metron,	or	'measure'	in	Greek."	She
smiled.	"A	little	rusty	on	your	Greek	etymology?"
    "A	 little."
    "It	  measures	the	moon's	gravitational	pull."	She	turned	one	of	 the	dials,
thoughtfully.	Numbers	appeared	under	the	pointer.
    "Why	 do	you	care	about	the	moon's	gravitational	pull?"

99
     "I'm	  an	amateur	 astronomer.	I'm	 interested	 in	 the	 moon,	 mostly.	 It	 has	a
tremendous	impact	on	the	Earth.	You	know,	the	tides	and	everything.	That's	why
I	made	this."
     I	almost	spit	out	my	 Coke.	"You	 made	it?	Seriously?"
     "Don't	 be	so	impressed.	It	wasn't	that	difficult."	  Liv's	 cheeks	flushed	again.	I
was	embarrassing	 her.	 She	reached	 for	 another	 fry.	 "These	 chips	 really	  are
brilliant."
     I	 tried	 to	 imagine	 Liv	  sitting	 in	 the	 English	 version	 of	 the	 Dar-ee	 Keen,
measuring	the	gravitational	  pull	 of	 the	moon	 over	a	 mountain	 of	 fries.	It	 was
better	than	 picturing	 Lena	 on	the	 back	of	 John	 Breed's	Harley.	 "So	 let's	 hear
about	your	 Gatlin.	 The	 one	where	 they	 call	 fries	 by	 the	wrong	 name."	 I	 had
never	been	any	farther	than	Savannah.	I	couldn't	imagine	what	life	 would	be	like
in	another	country.
     "My	 Gatlin?"	 The	pink	spots	on	her	cheeks	faded.
     "Where	you're	from."
     "I'm	 from	a	town	north	 of	London,	called	Kings	 Langley."
     "What?"
     "In	 Hertfordshire."
     "Doesn't	ring	 a	bell."
     She	took	 another	bite	 of	 her	burger.	"Maybe	  this	will	  help.	It's	 where	 they
invented	Ovaltine.	You	 know,	the	drink?"	 She	sighed.	"You	 stir	it	in	 milk,	 and	it
makes	the	milk	into	a	chocolate	malted?"
     My	 eyes	widened.	"You	mean	chocolate	milk?	Kind	 of	like	 Nesquik?"
     "Exactly.	 It's	amazing	stuff,	really.	 You	should	try	 it	sometime."
     I	 laughed	into	 my	 Coke,	which	 spilled	 on	my	 faded	Atari	  T-shirt.	 Ovaltine
girl	meets	Quik	boy.	I	 wanted	to	tell	Link,	 but	he	would	 get	the	wrong	idea.
     Even	though	it	had	only	 been	a	few	hours,	I	had	the	feeling	she	was	a	friend.
     "What	 do	 you	do	 when	you're	 not	 drinking	 Ovaltine	 and	making	 scientific
devices,	Olivia	Durand	of	 Kings	Langley?"
     She	crumpled	 the	 paper	from	  her	cheeseburger.	"Let's	  see.	Mostly	 I	 read
books	and	go	to	school.	I	study	at	a	place	called	Harrow.	Not	the	boys'	school."
     "Is	it?"
     "What?"	 She	scrunched	up	her	nose.
     "Harrowing?"	  H.	 A.	 R.	R.	 O.	 W.	 I.	N.	 G.	 Nine	 across,	as	in,	 gettin'	 on	in
years	and	can't	take	much	more	a	these	harrowin'	times,	Ethan	Wate.
     "You	 can't	resist	a	terrible	pun,	can	you?"	Liv	 smiled.
     "And	 you	didn't	answer	the	question."
     "No.	Not	 especially	harrowing.	 Not	for	me."
     "Why	 not?"

100
     "Well,	 for	 starters,	I'm	a	genius."	She	was	matter-of-fact,	 as	if	 she'd	just	said
she	was	blond,	or	British.
     "So	why	did	 you	come	to	Gatlin?	We're	not	exactly	 a	genius	magnet."
     "Well,	 I'm	 part	 of	the	 AGE,	 Academically	 Gifted	 Exchange,	between	Duke
University	 and	my	school.	Will	 you	pass	the	mayo-nnaise?"
     "Mann-aise."	 I	tried	to	say	it	slowly.
     "That's	what	I	 said."
     "Why	 would	 Duke	bother	to	send	you	to	Gatlin?	 So	you	could	take	classes	at
Summerville	Community	 College?"
     "No,	 silly.	 So	I	could	study	 with	my	 thesis	adviser,	the	renowned	Dr.	Marian
Ashcroft,	truly	 the	only	one	of	her	kind."
     "What	is	 your	thesis	about?"
     "Folklore	  and	 mythology,	  as	 it	  relates	 to	 community	  building	  after	 the
American	Civil	 War."
     "Around	 here	most	people	still	call	it	 the	War	Between	the	States,"	I	said.
     She	laughed,	delighted.	I	 was	glad	someone	thought	 it	was	funny.	 To	 me,	it
was	just	embarrassing.	"Is	it	 true	people	in	 the	South	sometimes	dress	up	in	old
Civil	 War	costumes	and	fight	all	the	battles	over	again,	for	fun?"
     I	stood	up.	 It	was	one	thing	 for	me	to	 say	it,	but	I	 didn't	 want	to	hear	it	 from
Liv,	too.	 "I	think	 it's	time	to	get	going.	We've	 got	more	books	to	deliver."
     Liv	 nodded,	grabbing	 her	fries.	"We	 can't	leave	these.	We	should	 save	them
for	Lucille."
     I	didn't	 mention	that	Lucille	 was	used	to	Amma	feeding	her	fried	 chicken	and
plates	of	leftover	casserole	on	her	own	china	plate,	as	the	Sisters	had	instructed.	I
couldn't	see	Lucille	  eating	greasy	 fries.	Lucille	  was	partic-u-lar,	  as	the	Sisters
would	say.	She	liked	Lena,	though.
     As	 we	headed	for	 the	door,	 a	car	caught	my	 eye	through	 the	grease-coated
windows.	The	 Fastback	was	making	 a	three-point	 turn	at	 the	end	of	 the	gravel
parking	lot.	Lena	made	a	point	of	not	driving	 past	us.
     Great.
     I	stood	and	watched	the	car	skid	onto	Dove	Street.




That	night,	 I	 lay	in	 my	 bed	and	stared	up	at	 the	blue	ceiling,	 my	 hands	folded
behind	my	head.	A	few	months	ago,	this	would've	 been	when	Lena	and	I	went	to
bed	in	 our	 separate	rooms	 together	--	  reading,	laughing,	 talking	  through	 our
days.	I	had	nearly	forgotten	how	to	fall	 asleep	without	her.

101
    I	 rolled	over	and	checked	my	old,	cracked	cell.	It	hadn't	really	been	working
since	Lena's	birthday,	but	 still,	 it	 would	 ring	 when	someone	called	me.	If
someone	had.
    Not	like	she'd	use	the	phone.
    Right	 then,	I	was	back	to	being	the	same	seven-year-old	who	had	dumped
every	puzzle	in	my	room	into	one	giant,	miserable	mess.	When	I	was	a	kid,	my
mom	sat	on	the	floor	and	helped	me	turn	the	mess	into	a	picture.	But	I	wasn't	a
kid	anymore,	and	my	mom	was	gone.	I	turned	the	pieces	over	and	over	in	my
mind,	but	I	couldn't	seem	to	get	them	sorted	out.	The	girl	I	was	madly	in	love
with	was	still	the	girl	I	was	madly	in	love	with.	That	hadn't	changed.	Only	now
the	girl	 I	 was	madly	in	 love	 with	 was	keeping	secrets	from	me	and	barely
speaking	to	me.
    Then	there	were	the	visions.
    Abraham	Ravenwood,	a	Blood	 Incubus	who	had	 killed	 his	own	 brother,
knew	my	name	and	could	see	me.	I	had	to	figure	out	how	the	pieces	fit	together
until	I	could	see	something	--	some	kind	of	pattern.	I	couldn't	get	the	puzzle	back
into	the	box.	It	was	too	late	for	that.	I	wished	someone	could	tell	me	where	to
put	even	one	piece.	Without	thinking,	I	got	up	and	pushed	open	my	bedroom
window.
    I	 leaned	out	and	breathed	in	the	darkness,	when	I	heard	Lucille's	distinctive
meow.	Amma	must	have	forgotten	to	let	her	back	inside.	I	was	about	to	call	out
to	tell	her	I	was	coming,	when	I	noticed	them.	Under	my	window,	at	the	edge	of
the	porch,	Lucille	Ball	and	Boo	Radley	sat	side	by	side	in	the	moonlight.
    Boo	thumped	his	tail,	and	Lucille	meowed	in	response.	They	sat	like	that	at
the	top	of	the	porch	steps,	thumping	and	meowing,	as	if	they	were	carrying	on	as
civilized	a	conversation	as	any	two	townsfolk	on	a	summer	night.	I	don't	know
what	they	were	gossiping	about,	but	it	must	have	been	big	news.	As	I	lay	in	bed
listening	to	the	quiet	conversation	of	Macon's	dog	and	the	Sisters'	cat,	I	drifted
off	before	they	did.

102
6.15	

103
                                             Southern	       Crusty



Don't	 you	lay	a	finger	 on	a	single	one	a	my	pies	until	I	ask	you	to,	Ethan	Wate."
     I	backed	away	from	Amma,	 hands	in	the	air.	"Just	trying	to	help."
     She	glared	at	me	while	she	wrapped	a	sweet	potato	pie,	a	two-time	winner,	in
a	clean	dish	towel.	The	sour	cream	and	raisin	pie	sat	on	the	kitchen	 table	next	to
the	buttermilk	 pie,	ready	for	 the	icebox.	 The	fruit	 pies	 were	still	 cooling	 on	the
racks,	and	a	dusting	of	white	flour	coated	every	surface	in	the	kitchen.
     "Only	 two	 days	into	 summer	and	you're	already	under	 my	feet?	You'll	  wish
you	were	 over	at	 the	high	 school	takin'	 summer	 classes	if	you	 drop	 one	a	my
prizewinnin'	 pies.	You	want	to	help?	Stop	mopin'	and	go	pull	 the	car	around."


Tempers	were	running	about	as	high	as	temperatures,	and	we	didn't	say	much	as
we	bumped	our	way	out	toward	 the	highway	in	 the	Volvo.	 I	wasn't	talking,	 but	I
can't	say	anybody	 noticed.	Today	 was	the	 single	biggest	 day	of	 Amma's	 year.
She	had	won	first	place	in	Baked	and	Fried	Fruit	 Pies	and	second	place	in	Cream
Pies	every	year	at	the	Gatlin	 County	 Fair	for	 as	long	as	I	 could	remember.	The
only	year	she	didn't	get	a	ribbon	was	last	year,	when	we	 didn't	go	because	it	was
only	two	 months	 after	my	 mom's	accident.	Gatlin	 couldn't	 boast	the	biggest	 or
the	oldest	fair	  in	the	 state.	The	 Hampton	County	 Watermelon	 Festival	 had	us
beat	by	 maybe	two	  miles	 and	twenty	 years,	 and	the	 prestige	 of	 winning	 the
Gatlin	Peach	Prince	and	Princess	Promenade	could	hardly	compare	to	the	honor
of	placing	in	Hampton's	Melon	 Miss	and	Master	Pageant.
     But	as	we	pulled	into	 the	dusty	parking	lot,	Amma's	 poker	face	didn't	fool	 my
dad	or	me.	Today	was	all	about	pageants	and	pies,	and	if	you	weren't	balancing	a
pie	wrapped	as	snugly	as	someone's	firstborn,	you	were	pushing	 a	kid	in	 curlers
holding	 a	 baton	  toward	 the	 pavilion.	  Savannah's	 mom	 was	 Gatlin's	  Peach
Pageant	organizer,	and	Savannah	was	the	defending	Peach	Princess.	Mrs.	Snow
would	be	overseeing	pageants	all	day.	There	was	no	such	thing	as	too	young	for
a	crown	 in	 our	 county.	 The	 fair's	 Best	 Babies	event,	 where	rosy	 cheeks	and
diaper	 dispositions	   were	  compared	 like	   competing	  cobblers,	  drew	  more
spectators	than	the	 Demolition	  Derby	 did.	  Last	 year,	the	 Skipetts'	 baby	 was
disqualified	 for	 cheating	when	 her	rosy	 cheeks	came	off	 on	the	 judges'	hands.
The	county	 fair	 had	strict	 guidelines	--	 no	formal	 wear	 until	 two	 years	old,	no

104
makeup	until	six	years	old,	and	then	only	"age-appropriate	makeup"	until	 twelve.
     Back	 when	 my	 mom	 was	around,	 she	was	 always	 ready	to	 take	 on	 Mrs.
Snow,	and	the	Peach	Pageants	were	one	of	her	favorite	targets.	I	could	still	 hear
her	saying,	 "Age-appropriate	 makeup?	Who	 are	you	 people?	What	 makeup	is
age-appropriate	for	  a	seven-year-old?"	  But	 even	 my	 family	  never	 missed	 a
county	fair,	 except	last	year.	Now	here	we	were	again,	carrying	 pies	through	the
crowds	and	into	the	fairgrounds,	same	as	ever.
     "Don't	 jostle	 me,	Mitchell.	  Ethan	Wate,	 keep	up.	 I'm	 not	gonna	 let	Martha
Lincoln	 or	any	 a	those	women	beat	me	out	 a	that	ribbon	 on	account	a	you	 two
boys."	In	Amma's	 shorthand,	those	women	were	always	the	same	women	--	Mrs.
Lincoln,	Mrs.	 Asher,	Mrs.	Snow,	and	the	rest	of	the	DAR.
     By	 the	time	my	 hand	was	stamped,	it	 looked	like	 three	or	 four	counties	had
already	beaten	us	there.	Nobody	missed	the	opening	day	at	the	fair,	which	meant
a	trip	to	the	fairgrounds	halfway	 between	Gatlin	and	Peaksville.	And	 a	trip	to	the
fairgrounds	meant	a	 disastrous	amount	of	 funnel	 cake,	a	day	so	hot	 and	sticky
you	could	pass	out	just	 from	 standing,	and	if	 you	were	lucky,	 some	making	 out
behind	the	Future	 Farmers	of	 America	 poultry	 barns.	My	  shot	at	anything	 but
heat	and	funnel	cake	wasn't	looking	too	good	this	year.
     My	  dad	 and	I	  dutifully	  followed	  Amma	  to	 the	 judging	  tables	under	 an
enormous	Southern	Crusty	banner.	Pies	had	a	different	 sponsor	every	year,	and
when	it	 couldn't	be	 Pillsbury	 or	Sara	Lee,	you	 ended	up	with	 Southern	 Crusty.
Pageants	were	crowd-pleasers,	but	 Pies	was	 the	granddaddy	 of	 them	all.	 The
same	families	 had	 been	making	 the	 same	recipes	 for	 generations,	 and	every
ribbon	won	was	the	pride	of	 one	great	Southern	house	and	the	shame	of	another.
Word	had	it	 that	a	few	women	from	 town	 had	their	sights	set	on	keeping	Amma
from	 winning	 first	  place	this	 year.	 Judging	by	 the	 muttering	 I'd	 heard	 in	 the
kitchen	all	week	 long,	that	would	 happen	when	hell	froze	over	 and	those	women
were	skating	on	it.
     By	  the	 time	 we	  had	 unloaded	 her	 precious	 cargo,	 Amma	  was	 already
harassing	the	judges	 about	 table	placement.	 "You	  can't	put	 a	 vinegar	 after	a
cherry,	and	you	can't	 put	a	rhubarb	between	my	 creams.	It'll	 take	the	taste	right
out	a	them,	unless	that's	what	you	boys	are	lookin'	to	do."
     "Here	it	 comes,"	said	my	dad,	under	his	breath.	As	the	words	came	out	of	 his
mouth,	Amma	  gave	the	 judges	the	 Look,	 and	 they	 squirmed	in	 their	  folding
chairs.
     My	 dad	glanced	over	 at	the	exit,	 and	we	 slunk	outside	 before	Amma	 had	a
chance	to	put	us	to	work	terrorizing	 innocent	volunteers	and	intimidating	 judges.
The	moment	we	hit	the	crowds,	we	instinctively	 turned	in	 opposite	directions.
     "You	 going	 to	walk	 around	the	 fair	 with	 that	cat?"	My	 dad	 looked	down	 at

105
Lucille	 sitting	in	the	dirt	 next	to	me.
     "Guess	so."
     He	 laughed.	 I	 still	  wasn't	used	 to	 hearing	 it	 again.	 "Well,	  don't	 get	 into
trouble."
     "Never	do."
     My	 dad	nodded	at	me,	like	he	was	the	dad	and	I	was	the	son.	I	 nodded	back,
trying	not	 to	think	 about	the	last	year,	when	I	 was	the	grown-up	 and	he	was	out
of	his	 mind.	He	 walked	 his	way,	 I	walked	 mine,	 and	we	both	 disappeared	into
the	hot	and	sweaty	masses.


The	fair	 was	 packed,	and	it	 took	 me	a	 while	 to	 track	down	 Link.	  But	 true	to
form,	he	was	hanging	 out	by	 the	games,	trying	to	 flirt	 with	 any	girl	 who	 would
look	at	 him,	 today	being	 a	prime	 opportunity	 to	meet	 a	few	 who	weren't	 from
Gatlin.	 He	 was	standing	 in	 front	 of	 one	 of	 those	scales	you	 hit	 with	  a	giant
rubber	mallet	to	prove	how	 strong	you	are,	the	mallet	resting	on	his	shoulder.	He
was	in	  full	  drummer	 mode,	 in	 his	 faded	 Social	 Distortion	  T-shirt,	  with	 his
drumsticks	stuck	 in	the	 back	pocket	 of	his	 jeans,	and	his	 wallet	 chain	hanging
below	the	sticks.
     "Lemme	 show	 ya	how	 it's	 done,	 ladies.	Stand	 back.	You	 don't	 wanna	 get
hurt."
     The	girls	 giggled	 as	Link	 gave	it	 his	best	shot.	 The	little	 meter	climbed	 up,
measuring	Link's	 strength	 and	his	 chances	of	hooking	 up	 at	the	 same	time.	 It
passed	a	REAL	WUSS	and	WIMPY	and	headed	toward	the	bell	at	the	top,	a	real	stud.
But	it	 didn't	quite	 make	it,	 stopping	about	halfway,	 at	CHICKEN	LITTLE.	The	girls
rolled	their	eyes	and	headed	for	the	Ring	Toss.
     "This	  thing's	  rigged.	  Everyone	 knows	  that,"	  Link	   shouted	 after	 them,
dropping	 the	 mallet	 in	 the	 dirt.	 He	 was	 probably	 right,	  but	 it	 didn't	 matter.
Everything	  in	 Gatlin	  was	 rigged.	  Why	  would	  the	 carnival	  games	 be	 any
different?
     "Hey,	 you	got	any	money?"	Link	 pretended	to	dig	 around	in	his	pockets,	like
he	might	actually	have	more	than	a	dime.
     I	handed	him	a	five,	shaking	my	 head.	"You	need	a	job,	man."
     "I've	 got	a	job.	I'm	a	drummer."
     "That's	not	a	job.	It's	not	 called	a	job	unless	you	get	paid."
     Link	 scanned	the	crowd,	 looking	 for	girls	 or	 funnel	cake.	It	 was	hard	to	 tell
which,	since	he	responded	equally	to	both.	"We're	tryin'	 to	line	up	a	gig."
     "Are	 the	Holy	Rollers	 playing	at	the	fair?"
     "This	 lame	scene?	Nah."	He	kicked	the	ground.

106
     "They	wouldn't	 book	you?"
     "They	said	we	sucked.	But	people	thought	Led	Zeppelin	 sucked,	too."
     As	we	walked	 through	the	fair,	it	 was	hard	not	to	notice	that	the	rides	seemed
to	get	 a	little	  smaller	 and	the	 games	a	little	  shabbier	every	 year.	 A	 pathetic-
looking	clown	 dragged	a	cluster	of	balloons	past	us.
     Link	 stopped,	hitting	me	on	the	arm.	"Check	 it	out.	Six	 o'clock.	Third	 Degree
Burns."	As	far	as	Link	 was	concerned,	a	girl	couldn't	get	hotter	than	that.
     He	was	pointing	 at	a	blond	 who	was	headed	in	our	direction,	 smiling.	 It	 was
Liv.
     "Link	 --"	 I	tried	to	tell	 him,	but	he	was	on	a	mission.
     "As	my	 mom	would	say,	the	Good	Lord	 has	good	taste,	hallelujah	amen."
     "Ethan!"	 She	waved	at	us.
     Link	 looked	at	me.	"Are	 you	kiddin'	 me?	You've	already	got	Lena.	That's	just
wrong."
     "I	 don't	have	Liv,	and	these	days	I	don't	even	know	if	I	 have	Lena.	Be	cool."	I
smiled	at	Liv,	 until	I	 noticed	she	was	wearing	a	faded	Led	Zeppelin	T-shirt.
     Link	 saw	it	at	the	same	time	I	did.	"The	perfect	girl."
     "Hey,	 Liv.	 This	is	Link."	 I	 elbowed	him,	hoping	 he'd	close	his	mouth.	"Liv	 is
Marian's	summer	research	assistant.	She	works	with	me	at	the	library."	  Liv	 held
out	her	hand.
     Link	  stood	 there	gawking.	  "Wow."	  The	 thing	  about	Link	  was,	 he	 never
embarrassed	himself,	just	me.
     "She's	an	exchange	student	from	England."
     "Holy	 wow."
     I	looked	at	Liv	 and	shrugged.	"I	told	 you."
     Link	 broke	out	his	biggest	smile	for	 Liv.	 "Ethan	didn't	 tell	me	he	was	workin'
with	a	hot	babe	a	cosmic	proportions."
     Liv	 looked	 at	me,	pretending	 to	be	surprised.	"You	 didn't?	 I	 find	that	 rather
tragic."	She	laughed	and	linked	her	arms	through	 ours.	"Come	on,	boys.	Explain
to	me	exactly	how	it	is	you	 make	this	strange	cotton	into	candy."
     "I	 can't	give	away	national	secrets,	ma'am."
     "I	 can."	Link	 squeezed	her	arm	with	his.
     "Tell	 me	everything."
     "Tunnel	 of	Love	or	the	Kissing	 Booth?"	Link	 grinned	even	wider.
     Liv	 tilted	 her	 head.	"Hmm.	 That's	a	tough	 one.	I'm	 going	 to	go	 with	 ...	the
Ferris	Wheel."
     That's	when	I	 caught	sight	of	 the	familiar	 black	hair	 and	the	scent	of	lemons
and	rosemary	in	the	breeze.
     Nothing	 else	was	familiar.	 Lena	 was	a	few	yards	 away,	standing	behind	 the

107
ticket	booth	 in	 what	had	to	 be	Ridley's	 clothes.	Her	 black	tank	 rode	up	 on	her
stomach,	and	her	black	skirt	 was	about	 five	 inches	too	short.	There	 was	a	long
streak	of	blue	 in	her	 hair,	twisting	 down	 from	 where	it	 parted	around	 her	face,
and	down	her	back.	 But	that	 wasn't	what	 shocked	me	most.	Lena,	the	 girl	 who
never	put	 anything	 on	her	 face	but	 sunscreen,	was	covered	 in	 makeup.	Some
guys	liked	 girls	 with	 crap	all	 over	their	 faces,	but	I	 wasn't	one	of	 them.	 Lena's
black-rimmed	eyes	were	especially	disturbing.
     Surrounded	by	cutoff	 denim	and	dust	and	straw	and	sweat	and	red	and	white
plastic	checkered	tablecloths,	she	looked	even	more	 out	of	 place.	Her	old	 boots
were	the	 only	  thing	 I	 recognized.	 And	 her	 charm	 necklace,	 dangling	 like	  a
lifeline	 back	to	the	real	Lena.	She	wasn't	the	kind	of	girl	who	 wore	stuff	like	 that.
At	least,	she	didn't	used	to	be.
     The	lowlifes	 were	 checking	her	out,	three	guys	 deep.	I	had	to	resist	the	urge
to	punch	all	of	them	in	the	face.
     I	dropped	Liv's	 arm.	"I'll	 meet	you	guys	over	there."
     Link	 couldn't	believe	his	luck.	 "No	problem,	 man."
     "We	can	wait,"	 Liv	 offered.
     "Don't	 worry	 about	it.	 I'll	 catch	up	 with	 you."	 I	hadn't	expected	to	 see	Lena
here,	and	I	didn't	 know	 what	to	 say	without	 sounding	even	more	 whipped	than
Link	 already	thought	 I	was.	 As	if	 there's	something	 you	can	say	to	 sound	cool
after	your	girlfriend	 takes	off	with	 another	guy.
     "Ethan,	I've	 been	looking	for	you."	 Lena	walked	toward	 me,	and	she	sounded
like	herself,	 her	old	self	 --	the	Lena	 I	remembered	from	 a	few	months	 ago.	The
one	I	 was	desperately	in	 love	 with,	  the	one	who	 loved	 me	 back.	Even	 if	 she
looked	like	 Ridley.	She	stood	on	her	tiptoes	 to	push	my	hair	 out	of	my	 face,	her
fingers	dragging	slowly	 down	my	jawline.
     "That's	funny,	 because	the	last	time	I	saw	you,	you	were	ditching	 me."	I	tried
to	sound	casual,	but	I	just	sounded	angry.
     "I	 wasn't	ditching	you,	exactly."	 She	was	defensive.
     "No,	 you	were	throwing	 trees	at	me	and	jumping	 on	 the	back	of	 a	bike	with
some	other	guy."
     "I	 wasn't	throwing	trees."
     I	raised	an	eyebrow.	"Yeah?"
     She	shrugged.	"More	like	branches."
     But	I	 could	tell	 I	 had	gotten	to	her.	She	twisted	 the	tiny	paper-clip	 star	I	had
given	her,	 until	 I	 thought	it	 was	going	 to	 snap	off	 of	her	 necklace.	"I'm	 sorry,
Ethan.	I	 don't	 know	  what's	 going	 on	 with	 me."	 Her	 voice	 was	 soft,	 honest.
"Sometimes	I	  feel	 like	 everything	 is	 closing	 in,	  and	I	 can't	 take	 it.	 I	 wasn't
ditching	you	at	the	lake.	I	was	ditching	 me."

108
     "You	 sure	about	that?"
     She	looked	back	up	at	me,	a	tear	sliding	 down	her	cheek.	She	wiped	it	 away,
her	fingers	 balled	 in	 frustration.	 She	opened	her	 fist	 and	put	 her	hand	 on	my
chest,	resting	it	over	my	heart.
     It's	not	you.	I	 love	you.
     "I	 love	 you."	 She	said	 it	 out	loud	 this	 time	 and	the	 words	 hung	in	 the	air
between	us,	so	 much	 more	public	  than	when	 we	 Kelted.	 My	 chest	 tightened
when	she	said	it,	and	my	breath	caught	in	my	throat.	I	tried	to	think	 of	something
sarcastic	to	say,	but	I	couldn't	think	about	anything	 except	how	beautiful	she	was
and	how	much	I	loved	her,	too.
     But	 I	 wasn't	 letting	 her	off	  that	easy	this	 time.	 I	 broke	 the	 truce.	"What's
going	on,	L?	If	 you	love	me	so	much,	what's	the	deal	with	John	Breed?"
     She	looked	away	without	saying	a	word.
     Answer	me.
     "It's	 not	 like	  that,	Ethan.	 John's	just	 a	 friend	 of	 Ridley's.	  There's	nothing
going	on	between	us."
     "How	 long	has	nothing	 been	going	on?	Since	you	took	that	 picture	of	him	 in
the	graveyard?"
     "It	 wasn't	 a	picture	 of	 him.	 It	 was	his	 bike.	 I	 was	meeting	 Ridley,	 and	 he
happened	to	be	there."	I	noticed	she	ignored	the	question.
     "Since	when	have	you	been	hanging	out	with	 Ridley?	Did	 you	forget	 the	part
where	she	separated	us	so	your	mother	could	get	you	 alone	and	try	 to	convince
you	to	go	over	to	the	Dark	side?	Or	when	Ridley	 almost	killed	my	 father?"
     Lena	pulled	 her	arm	away	from	 me,	and	I	 could	feel	 her	withdrawing	 again,
moving	back	 into	 that	place	I	 couldn't	 reach.	"Ridley	 warned	 me	you	wouldn't
understand.	You're	a	 Mortal.	 You	 don't	 know	 anything	 about	me,	 not	the	 real
me.	That's	why	I	didn't	 tell	you."	 I	felt	a	sudden	breeze	as	the	storm	clouds	rolled
in	like	a	warning.
     "How	 do	you	know	 whether	I	 would	understand	or	not?	You	 haven't	told	me
anything.	Maybe	 if	 you	gave	me	 the	chance	instead	of	sneaking	around	 behind
my	back	--"
     "What	 do	you	want	me	to	 tell	you?	That	 I	have	no	idea	what's	going	 on	with
me?	That	something's	changing,	something	I	don't	 understand?	That	I	feel	like	 a
freak,	and	Ridley's	the	only	one	who	can	help	me	figure	it	 out?"
     I	could	 hear	everything	she	was	saying,	but	she	was	right.	I	didn't	understand.
"Are	 you	listening	 to	 yourself?	You	 think	 Ridley's	 trying	 to	help	 you,	that	 you
can	trust	her?	She's	a	Dark	 Caster,	L.	Look	 at	 yourself!	 You	 think	 this	is	 you?
The	things	you're	feeling,	she's	probably	causing	them."
     I	waited	 for	 the	downpour,	but	instead	the	clouds	 parted.	Lena	moved	closer

109
and	put	her	hands	on	 my	chest	again,	 staring	up	at	 me,	pleading.	 "Ethan,	she's
changed.	She	doesn't	want	to	be	Dark.	 It	 ruined	her	 life	 when	she	Turned.	 She
lost	everyone,	including	  herself.	Ridley	 says	going	 Dark	 changes	the	way	 you
feel	about	people.	You	can	sense	the	feelings	you	had,	the	things	 you	loved,	but
Rid	says	the	feelings	are	distant.	Almost	like	they	belong	to	 someone	else."
     "But	 you	said	it	wasn't	something	she	could	control."
     "I	 was	wrong.	Look	 at	Uncle	Macon.	He	knew	how	 to	control	it,	 and	Ridley's
learning,	too."
     "Ridley	 is	not	Macon."
     Heat	lightning	 flashed	across	the	sky.	"You	don't	know	anything."
     "That's	  right.	  I'm	  a	 stupid	  Mortal.	  I	  don't	  know	  anything	 about	  your
supersecret	Caster	world	  and	 skanky	 Caster	 cousin,	 or	 Caster	 Boy	 and	 his
Harley."
     Lena	snapped.	"Ridley	 and	 I	 were	like	 sisters,	and	I	 can't	turn	 my	 back	on
her.	I	told	you,	I	 need	her	right	now.	And	she	needs	me."
     I	didn't	 say	anything.	Lena	was	so	frustrated,	I	was	surprised	the	Ferris	Wheel
hadn't	come	loose	and	rolled	away.	I	 could	see	the	lights	from	 the	Tilt-A-Whirl,
spinning	in	 the	corner	 of	my	 eye,	churning	 and	dizzying.	 It	 was	the	 way	I	 felt
when	I	let	myself	 get	lost	in	Lena's	eyes.	Sometimes	love	feels	that	way,	and	you
find	your	way	 to	a	truce	when	you	don't	really	want	to.
     Sometimes	the	truce	finds	you.
     She	reached	up	and	laced	her	fingers	behind	my	 neck,	pulling	 me	into	 her.	I
found	her	lips,	 and	we	 were	all	 over	each	other	 as	if	 we	were	afraid	 we	 might
never	have	the	chance	to	touch	again.	This	 time,	when	 her	mouth	tugged	at	 my
bottom	lip,	biting	 gently	into	 my	skin,	there	was	no	blood.	Just	urgency.	I	turned,
pushing	her	against	the	rough	 wooden	wall	 behind	 the	ticket	 booth.	Her	 breath
was	ragged,	echoing	 in	 my	 ear	even	 louder	 than	my	 own.	 I	 raked	 my	 hands
through	her	curls,	guiding	her	mouth	to	 mine.	The	pressure	in	my	chest	started	to
build,	the	shortness	of	breath,	the	sound	of	the	air	as	I	tried	 to	fill	 my	 lungs.	The
fire.
     Lena	felt	 it,	 too.	She	pushed	away	from	 me,	and	 I	bent	over	 trying	 to	catch
my	breath.
     "Are	 you	okay?"
     I	took	a	deep	breath	and	stood	up	again.	"Yeah,	I'm	all	right.	 For	a	Mortal."
     She	smiled	 a	real	smile	 and	reached	for	 my	 hand.	I	 noticed	she	had	drawn
crazy-looking	  designs	on	 her	 palm	  in	 Sharpie.	 The	 black	 curls	  and	 spirals
swirled	from	 her	palm	 around	her	wrist	 and	up	the	base	of	her	arm.	The	pattern
looked	like	 the	 henna	the	fortune-teller	 wore,	 in	 the	tent	 that	smelled	 like	 bad
incense	at	the	other	edge	of	the	fairgrounds.

110
     "What	 is	that?"	I	held	 her	wrist,	but	she	pulled	 it	away.	Remembering	Ridley
and	her	tattoo,	I	hoped	it	was	Sharpie.
     It	is.
     "Maybe	 we	should	get	 you	something	to	 drink."	 She	led	me	around	the	side
of	the	booth,	and	I	 let	her.	 I	couldn't	 stay	mad,	not	if	 there	was	a	possibility	 the
wall	between	us	was	finally	  coming	down.	 When	we	kissed	a	minute	ago,	that's
what	I	 felt.	It	 was	the	opposite	of	 the	kiss	on	 the	lake,	a	kiss	that	 had	taken	my
breath	away	for	different	 reasons.	I	might	 never	know	 what	that	kiss	 was.	But	I
knew	this	kiss,	and	I	knew	it	 was	all	I	had	--	a	chance.
     Which	 lasted	two	seconds.
     Because	then	I	saw	Liv,	 carrying	two	 cotton	candies	in	one	hand	and	waving
at	me	with	 the	other,	 and	I	knew	 the	wall	 was	about	 to	go	 back	up,	maybe	for
good.	"Ethan,	come	on.	I	have	your	 cotton	candy.	We're	going	to	 miss	the	Ferris
Wheel!"
     Lena	dropped	my	hand.	I	 knew	how	 it	must	have	looked	 --	a	tall	 blond,	with
long	legs	and	two	 cotton	 candies	and	an	expectant	smile.	I	 was	doomed	before
Liv	even	got	to	the	word	 we.
     That's	Liv,	Marian's	 research	assistant.	She	works	with	me	at	the	library.
     Do	you	work	at	 the	Dar-ee	Keen	together,	too?	And	the	fair?
     Another	flash	of	 heat	lightning	tore	across	the	sky.
     It	isn't	 like	that,	L.
     Liv	 handed	me	the	cotton	candy	and	smiled	at	Lena,	holding	out	her	hand.
     A	blond?	Lena	looked	at	me.	Seriously?
     "Lena,	right?	I'm	 Liv."
     Ah,	the	accent.	That	explains	everything.
     "Hi,	 Liv."	 Lena	 pronounced	her	name	like	 it	was	an	 inside	joke	 between	us.
She	didn't	touch	Liv's	hand.
     If	 Liv	 noticed	 the	slight,	 she	ignored	it,	 letting	 her	hand	drop.	"Finally!	  I've
been	trying	 to	get	 Ethan	to	 introduce	 us	properly,	 since	it	 seems	he	and	 I	 are
chained	together	for	the	summer."
     Clearly.
     Lena	wouldn't	 look	at	me,	and	Liv	wouldn't	 stop	looking	 at	her.
     "Liv,	  this	 really	 isn't	 a	 good	 --"	 I	  couldn't	 stop	it.	  They	 were	 two	 trains
colliding	 in	painfully	 slow	motion.
     "Don't	 be	silly,"	 Lena	 interrupted,	looking	 at	Liv	 carefully,	 as	if	 she	was	the
Sybil	in	her	family	 and	she	could	read	Liv's	face.	"So	nice	to	meet	you."
     He's	all	yours.	Take	the	whole	town	while	 you're	at	it.
     It	took	 Liv	 about	two	seconds	to	realize	she'd	walked	into	something,	but	 she
tried	to	fill	  the	silence	all	the	same.	"Ethan	and	I	 talk	about	you	 all	the	time.	 He

111
says	you	play	the	viola."
     Lena	stiffened.
     Ethan	 and	I.	  There	was	 nothing	 mean	about	 the	way	 Liv	  said	 it,	 but	 the
words	themselves	were	enough.	I	knew	what	 they	meant	to	Lena.	Ethan	and	the
Mortal	girl,	 the	girl	 who	was	everything	Lena	couldn't	be.
     "I've	 gotta	go."	Lena	turned	around	before	I	could	catch	her	arm.
     Lena	--
     Ridley	was	right.	 It	was	only	a	matter	of	time	before	another	 new	girl	came	to
town.
     I	wondered	what	else	Ridley	had	been	telling	her.
     What	are	you	talking	 about?	We're	just	friends,	L.
     We	were	just	friends	once,	too.
     Lena	took	 off,	 pushing	 her	way	 through	the	sweaty	 crowd,	 causing	a	chain
reaction	of	chaos	as	she	went.	Her	ripple	 effect	seemed	endless.	I	couldn't	see	it
perfectly,	but	 somewhere	between	us	a	clown	 fumbled	 as	the	balloon	character
in	 his	 hands	popped,	 a	 child	 cried	 as	 a	 snow	 cone	dropped,	 and	 a	 woman
screamed	as	a	popcorn	 machine	 began	to	 smoke	 and	catch	 fire.	 Even	 in	 the
slippery	blur	of	 heat	and	arms	and	noise,	Lena	affected	everything	in	her	wake,	a
pull	as	powerful	 as	the	moon	to	the	tides,	or	the	 planets	to	the	sun.	I	was	caught
in	her	orbit,	even	as	she	pulled	away	from	mine.
     I	took	 a	step,	and	Liv	 put	 her	hand	on	my	 arm.	Her	eyes	narrowed	 as	if	she
was	analyzing	the	situation,	or	registering	it	 for	the	first	 time.	"I'm	 sorry,	Ethan.	I
didn't	mean	to	interrupt.	 I	 mean,	if	 I	was	interrupting,	 you	 know.	Something."	 I
knew	she	wanted	me	to	tell	her	what	happened	without	having	to	ask.	I	didn't	say
anything,	which	I	 guess	was	my	answer.
     The	thing	is,	I	 didn't	take	another	step.	I	let	Lena	go.
     Link	 walked	 toward	 us,	fighting	 his	 way	 through	the	 crowd,	 carrying	three
Cokes	and	his	 own	cotton	 candy.	 "Man,	 the	line	 at	the	 drink	 booth	is	 brutal."
Link	handed	Liv	 a	Coke.	"What'd	I	 miss?	Was	that	Lena?"
     "She	left,"	 Liv	 said	quickly,	as	if	things	 were	that	simple.
     I	wished	they	were.
     "Whatever.	 Forget	the	 Ferris	Wheel.	 We'd	 better	get	over	 to	the	 main	 tent.
They're	gonna	 announce	the	winners	 a	the	 pie-bakin'	 contest	any	 minute,	 and
Amma	will	 tan	your	hide	if	 you	aren't	there	to	watch	her	moment	a	glory."
     "Apple	 pie?"	Liv	 brightened.
     "Yep.	 And	 you	eat	it	 wearin'	Levi's,	 with	 a	napkin	 tucked	into	 your	shirt	 up
here.	Drinkin'	  a	Coke	 and	 drivin'	 a	 Chevy,	 while	 singing	 'American	 Pie.'	 "	 I
listened	to	Link	 ramble	 and	Liv's	 easy	laugh	as	they	walked	ahead	of	me.	 They
didn't	have	nightmares.	They	weren't	haunted.	They	weren't	even	worried.

112
    Link	 was	right.	 We	couldn't	miss	Amma's	moment	of	glory.	I	 sure	wasn't
winning	any	ribbons	today.	The	truth	was,	I	didn't	need	to	bring	the	mallet	down
on	the	old,	 rigged	carnival	scale	to	know	what	 it	 would	say.	Link	 might	be
CHICKEN	LITTLE,	but	I	felt	lower	than	A	REAL	WUSS.	I	could	pound	away	all	I
wanted,	but	the	answer	would	always	be	the	same.	No	matter	what	I	did	lately,	I
was	caught	somewhere	between	LOSER	and	ZERO,	and	it	was	starting	to	feel	like
Lena	was	holding	the	hammer.	I	finally	understood	why	Link	 wrote	all	those
songs	about	getting	dumped.

113
6.15	

114
                                           Tunnel	     of	  Love



If	 it	gets	any	hotter	in	here,	people	are	goin'	to	start	droppin'	like	flies.	Flies	are
gonna	start	droppin'	like	flies."	Link	wiped	his	sweaty	forehead	with	his	sweaty
hand,	which	sprayed	liquid	Link	on	those	of	us	lucky	to	be	standing	next	to	him.
    "Thanks	for	 that."	Liv	 wiped	her	face	with	one	hand	and	pulled	her	damp
shirt	away	from	her	body	with	the	other.	She	looked	miserable.	The	Southern
Crusty	tent	was	packed,	and	the	finalists	were	already	standing	on	the	makeshift
wooden	stage.	I	tried	to	see	over	the	row	of	enormous	women	in	front	of	us,	but
it	was	like	standing	in	the	Jackson	cafeteria	line	on	cookie	day.
    "I	 can	barely	see	the	stage."	Liv	stood	on	her	toes.	"Is	something	supposed	to
be	happening?	Did	we	miss	it?"
    "Hold	 on."	 Link	 tried	 to	edge	between	the	smaller	of	 the	two	 enormous
women	in	front	of	us.	"Yeah,	we	can't	get	any	closer.	I	give	up."
    "There's	Amma."	I	pointed.	"She's	won	first	place	almost	every	year."
    "Amma	Treadeau,"	Liv	said.
    "That's	right.	How	did	you	know?"
    "Professor	Ashcroft	must	have	mentioned	her."
    Carlton	 Eaton's	voice	blared	over	the	 loudspeaker	as	he	fussed	with	the
portable	mic.	He	always	announced	the	winners	because	the	only	thing	he	loved
more	than	opening	everyone's	mail	was	the	spotlight.	"If	y'all	will	bear	with	me,
folks,	we	got	some	technical	difficulties	...	 hold	on	now	 ...	can	someone	call
Red?	How	am	I	supposed	to	know	how	to	fix	 a	darn	microphone?	Shoot,	it's
hotter	than	Hades	in	here."	 He	mopped	his	forehead	with	 his	handkerchief.
Carlton	Eaton	never	managed	to	remember	when	the	microphone	was	on.
    Amma	stood	proudly	to	his	right,	in	 her	best	dress,	with	the	tiny	violets	all
over	it,	holding	her	prizewinning	sweet	potato	pie.	Mrs.	Snow	and	Mrs.	Asher
were	next	to	her,	holding	their	own	creations.	They	were	already	dressed	for	the
Mother-Daughter	Peach	Pageant	that	started	right	after	Pies.	They	were	equally
frightening	in	their	respective	aqua	and	pink	pageant	mother	gowns,	which	made
them	look	like	aging	prom	dates	from	the	eighties.	Thankfully,	Mrs.	Lincoln	was
not	in	the	pageant,	so	she	stood	next	to	Mrs.	Asher	in	one	of	her	standard	church
dresses,	holding	her	famous	chess	pie.	It	was	still	hard	to	look	at	Link's	mom
without	remembering	the	insanity	of	Lena's	last	birthday.	You	don't	see	your
girlfriend's	mother	stepping	out	of	 your	 best	friend's	mom's	body	too	 many

115
nights	of	the	year.	When	 I	saw	Mrs.	 Lincoln	 now,	that's	what	 I	thought	of	 --	the
moment	Sarafine	emerged	like	a	snake	shedding	its	skin.	I	shuddered.
     Link	  elbowed	 me.	"Dude,	 look	  at	Savannah.	She's	 got	the	 crown	 on	 and
everything.	She	sure	knows	how	to	milk	 it."
     Savannah,	Emily,	 and	Eden	were	sitting	 in	the	front	 row	 with	 the	rest	of	the
Peach	Pageant	contestants,	 sweating	 away	 in	 their	 tackiest	 pageant	 evening
wear.	Savannah	was	in	yards	of	glittery	 Gatlin	 peach,	with	her	rhinestone	Peach
Princess	crown	balanced	perfectly	on	her	head,	even	though	the	train	of	her	dress
kept	snagging	on	 the	bottom	 of	 her	cheap	metal	folding	  chair.	Little	  Miss,	 the
local	 dress	shop,	 probably	 had	 to	 special-order	 it	  for	 her	 all	 the	 way	 from
Orlando.
     Liv	 edged	her	 way	 closer	to	 me,	eyeing	 the	cultural	 phenomenon	that	 was
Savannah	Snow.	 "Is	  she	 the	 queen	 of	  Southern	 Crusty,	 then?"	 Liv's	   eyes
twinkled,	and	I	 tried	to	imagine	how	strange	this	all	must	look	 to	an	outsider.
     I	almost	smiled.	"Just	about."
     "I	 didn't	 realize	 baking	 was	so	 important	 to	 Americans.	 Anthropologically
speaking."
     "I	 don't	know	 about	other	places,	but	 in	the	South,	women	 take	their	 baking
seriously.	And	this	is	the	biggest	pie-baking	 contest	in	Gatlin	County."
     "Ethan,	 over	here!"	 Aunt	 Mercy	 was	 waving	 her	handkerchief	 in	one	 hand
and	carrying	her	infamous	coconut	 pie	in	the	other.	 Thelma	was	walking	 behind
her,	shoving	people	aside	with	Aunt	Mercy's	 wheelchair.	Every	year	Aunt	 Mercy
entered	the	contest,	and	every	year	she	got	an	honorable	mention	for	her	coconut
pie,	even	 though	she'd	forgotten	 how	 to	 make	it	 about	 twenty	 years	ago,	 and
none	of	the	judges	were	brave	enough	to	taste	it.
     Aunt	 Grace	and	Aunt	Prue	were	arm	in	 arm,	dragging	Aunt	 Prue's	Yorkshire
terrier,	Harlon	James,	behind	them.
     "Well,	  fancy	 seein'	you	 here,	Ethan.	 Did	 you	 come	ta	 see	Mercy	 win	 her
ribbon?"
     "Of	 course	he	 did,	 Grace.	What	 else	would	 he	 be	doin'	 in	 a	tent	 fulla	 old
ladies?"
     I	wanted	to	 introduce	Liv,	 but	 the	Sisters	didn't	give	me	 a	chance.	They	kept
talking	 over	one	another.	I	 should've	known	 Aunt	 Prue	would	 take	care	of	 that
for	me.	"Who's	this,	Ethan?	Your	 new	girlfriend?"
     Aunt	 Mercy	 adjusted	her	spectacles.	"What	 happened	ta	the	other	one?	The
Duchannes	girl,	with	the	dark	hair?"
     Aunt	 Prue	looked	 at	 her	suspiciously.	 "Well,	  Mercy,	 that's	jus'	 none	a	 our
concern.	You	shouldn't	be	askin'	anything	about	it.	She	mighta	up	and	left	him."
     "Why	 would	 she	do	 that?	Ethan,	 you	didn't	 ask	that	 girl	 ta	get	 nekkid,	 did

116
ya?"
     Aunt	 Prue	 gasped.	"Mercy	  Lynne!	 If	  the	Good	 Lord	 doesn't	 strike	 us	all
down	on	account	a	that	talk	..."
     Liv	 looked	dizzy.	 She	obviously	 wasn't	used	to	following	  the	banter	of	three
hundred-year-old	women	with	 thick	Upcountry	 accents	and	fractured	grammar.
     "Nobody	 tried	 --	 nobody	left	 anyone.	 Everything	 is	fine	 between	Lena	 and
me,"	I	 lied.	 Even	 though	 they'd	find	  out	the	 truth	 the	next	 time	 they	 went	to
church,	if	their	 hearing	aids	were	turned	up	high	enough	to	hear	the	gossip.	"This
is	Liv,	 Marian's	summer	research	assistant.	We	work	together	at	the	library.	 Liv,
this	is	Aunt	Grace,	Aunt	 Mercy,	and	Aunt	Prudence,	my	great-great-aunts."
     "Don't	 you	be	addin'	any	extra	greats	in	 there."	Aunt	Prue	pulled	 herself	up	a
little	straighter.
     "That's	her	name.	Lena!	It	was	on	the	tip	a	my	 tongue."	Aunt	Mercy	 smiled	at
Liv.
     Liv	 smiled	back.	"Of	 course.	It's	a	pleasure	to	meet	you	all."
     Carlton	Eaton	 tapped	on	the	mic	just	in	 time.	"All	  right,	 y'all,	 I	think	 we	can
get	started."
     "Girls,	 we	need	ta	get	up	ta	the	front.	 They'll	 be	callin'	my	 name	in	no	time."
Aunt	 Mercy	 was	already	 working	 her	 way	 through	 the	aisles,	rolling	  forward
like	an	army	tank.	"We'll	 see	you	in	two	shakes	of	a	rabbit's	tail,	Sweet	Meat."
     People	filed	 into	 the	 tent	from	 all	 three	 entrances,	and	Lacy	 Beecham	and
Elsie	Wilks,	 the	 winners	of	 Casseroles	and	Barbeque,	took	their	 places	next	 to
the	stage,	holding	their	 blue	ribbons.	 Barbeque	was	a	big	category,	even	bigger
than	Chili,	so	Mrs.	Wilks	 was	about	as	puffed	up	as	I'd	ever	seen	her.
     I	 watched	Amma's	face,	so	proud,	 not	glancing	 at	one	of	 those	women	even
once.	Then	I	watched	it	darken,	and	she	looked	off	toward	one	side	of	the	tent.
     Link	  ribbed	 me	 again.	 "Hey,	 lookit.	  I	  mean,	you	 know,	  the	 Look."	  We
followed	 Amma's	stinkeye	to	the	far	corner	of	 the	tent.	When	I	saw	who	she	was
looking	at,	I	tensed.
     Lena	was	slouching	 against	one	of	 the	tent	poles,	eyes	on	 the	stage.	I	knew
she	couldn't	have	cared	less	about	a	 pie-baking	contest,	 unless	she	was	here	to
root	for	 Amma.	 And	 from	 the	looks	 of	 it,	 Amma	 didn't	 think	 that's	why	 Lena
was	here.
     Amma	shook	her	head	at	Lena,	ever	so	slightly.
     Lena	looked	away.
     Maybe	 she	was	looking	 for	 me,	 though	I	 was	probably	 the	 last	person	she
wanted	to	see	right	now.	So	what	was	she	doing	here?
     Link	 grabbed	my	arm.	"It's	--	 she's	--"
     Lena	glanced	across	to	the	pole	 opposite	her.	Ridley	 leaned	against	the	pole

117
in	a	pink	miniskirt,	  unwrapping	a	lollipop.	 Her	eyes	were	fixed	 on	the	stage,	like
she	actually	cared	about	who	 was	going	 to	win.	 I	 knew	 she	didn't,	because	the
only	 thing	 she	cared	 about	was	 causing	trouble.	 Since	 there	 were	about	 two
hundred	people	 too	many	 in	 the	 tent,	 this	seemed	about	 as	good	 a	place	 for
trouble	as	any.
     Carlton	 Eaton's	voice	echoed	over	the	crowd.	 "Testin',	 testin'.	Can	y'all	 hear
me?	All	 right,	then,	 on	to	Cream	Pies.	We	have	ourselves	a	close	one	this	 year,
folks.	Had	 myself	 the	pleasure	a	tastin'	 a	few	 a	these	pies,	and	I'm	 here	to	 tell
you	every	single	one	a	'em's	a	winner	in	 my	O-pinion.	 But	 I	reckon	we	 can	only
have	one	first-place	winner	 here	tonight,	so	let's	see	who	it's	 gonna	be."	Carlton
fumbled	with	 the	first	 envelope,	ripping	 the	paper	loudly.	 "Here	 it	 is,	folks,	 our
third-place	winner	is	 ...	Tricia	Asher's	Creamsicle	Pie."	Mrs.	 Asher	scowled	for	 a
millisecond,	then	flashed	her	phony	smile.
     I	 kept	 my	 eyes	locked	 on	Ridley.	  She	had	to	 be	 up	to	 something.	 Ridley
didn't	give	 a	crap	about	pie,	 or	anything	 that	happened	in	Gatlin.	 Ridley	 turned
and	nodded	toward	the	back	of	the	tent.	I	looked	behind	me.
     Caster	Boy	was	watching	with	 a	smile.	He	 was	standing	by	the	rear	entrance,
his	eyes	on	the	finalists.	Ridley	turned	her	attention	back	to	the	stage	and	slowly,
deliberately,	began	sucking	on	her	lollipop.	 Never	a	good	sign.
     Lena!
     Lena	didn't	even	blink.	 Her	hair	 began	to	twist	in	 the	stagnant	air,	blowing	in
what	I	knew	 was	the	Casting	Breeze.	I	don't	know	 if	 it	was	the	heat	or	 the	close
quarters	or	the	 grim	 look	 on	 Amma's	 face,	but	 I	 was	starting	 to	worry.	  What
were	Ridley	 and	John	 up	to,	 and	why	 was	Lena	 Casting	here?	Whatever	 they
were	trying	to	do,	Lena	must	be	trying	 to	counteract	it.
     Then	I	 figured	it	 out.	Amma	 wasn't	the	only	 one	dealing	out	 the	Look	 like	a
bad	spread	of	cards.	Ridley	and	John	were	staring	down	Amma,	too.	Was	Ridley
stupid	enough	to	mess	with	Amma?	Was	anyone?
     Ridley	 held	up	the	lollipop	 as	if	to	answer.
     "Uh-oh."	 Link	 stared.	"We	should	probably	get	outta	here."
     "Why	 don't	you	 take	Liv	 to	 the	Ferris	Wheel?"	 I	 said,	trying	 to	catch	Link's
eye.	"I	think	things	 are	going	to	be	pretty	boring	for	 a	while."
     "Now	 we've	reached	the	most	excitin'	 part	a	the	judgin',"	 said	Carlton	 Eaton,
as	if	on	cue.	"All	  right,	 y'all,	this	 is	it.	 Let's	see	which	one	a	these	here	ladies	is
gonna	be	takin'	 home	a	second-place	ribbon	 and	five	  hundred	dollars'	 worth	 a
brand	new	 bakeware,	or	 a	 first-place	 ribbon	 and	 seven	hundred	 fifty	  dollars,
compliments	a	 Southern	Crusty.	 'Cause	if	 it	 ain't	 Southern	 Crusty,	it	 ain't	  the
South,	and	it	 ain't	 Crusty	 --"	 Carlton	 Eaton	 never	finished,	 because	before	he
could	say	the	words,	something	else	came	out	--

118
     Of	the	pies.
     The	pie	tins	 began	to	move,	and	it	took	 people	a	few	seconds	to	realize	what
was	happening,	before	they	started	screaming.	Grubs	and	maggots	and	palmetto
bugs,	Carolina	cockroaches,	started	crawling	 out	of	 the	pies.	It	 was	as	if	 all	the
hate	and	lies	and	hypocrisy	of	the	whole	town	 --	of	Mrs.	 Lincoln	 and	Mrs.	Asher
and	Mrs.	Snow,	 the	principal	 of	 Jackson	High,	 and	the	DAR	 and	 the	PTA	 and
every	church	auxiliary,	 all	 rolled	into	 one	--	had	been	baked	into	those	pies,	and
now	it	 was	coming	 to	 life.	 Bugs	 were	pouring	 out	 of	every	 pie	 onstage,	more
bugs	than	the	pie	tins	could	possibly	hold.
     Every	pie	 except	Amma's.	She	shook	her	head,	her	eyes	narrowing	 into	 slits
like	some	kind	 of	challenge.	Hordes	of	 cream-covered	grubs	and	roaches	hit	the
floor	around	the	 contestants'	feet.	But	the	trail	 of	scurrying	 insects	diverged	in	a
neatly	forking	 path	around	Amma.
     Mrs.	  Snow	 reacted	 first.	  She	 hurled	  her	 pie,	 sticky	  fruit-covered	  bugs
rocketing	into	 the	air	and	landing	 all	 over	the	front	 row.	 Mrs.	Lincoln	  and	Mrs.
Asher	followed	  suit,	 maggots	raining	 down	 on	the	 Peach	Pageant	contestants'
satin	 dresses.	 Savannah	 started	  screaming,	 not	  fake	  screaming	  but	  real,
bloodcurdling	 screams.	Everywhere	you	 looked,	there	were	 pie-covered	worms
and	people	trying	 not	to	 puke	at	the	sight	 of	them.	 Some	were	more	successful
than	others.	I	saw	Principal	 Harper	doubled	over	 a	trash	can	by	the	exit,	 getting
rid	 of	 a	whole	  day's	worth	  of	 funnel	 cake.	If	  Ridley	 was	 looking	  to	stir	  up
trouble,	she	had	succeeded.
     Liv	  looked	 ill.	 Link	  tried	 to	 push	 forward	 into	 the	 crowd,	 most	 likely	  to
rescue	his	 mom.	 He	 had	 been	doing	 that	 a	 lot	 lately,	  and	 considering	 how
unrescuable	his	mother	was,	I	had	to	give	him	credit.
     Liv	 grabbed	my	arm	as	the	crowd	surged	forward	toward	the	exits.
     "Liv,	  get	out	of	 here.	Go	 out	that	way.	 Everyone's	heading	 for	the	 sides."	I
pointed	to	the	back	exit	 of	 the	tent.	John	Breed	was	still	 standing	there,	smiling
at	his	handiwork,	his	 green	eyes	fixed	on	the	stage.	Green	eyes	or	not,	he	wasn't
one	of	the	good	guys.
     Link	 was	 on	the	 stage	brushing	 worms	and	 bugs	off	 his	 mother,	 who	was
completely	hysterical.	I	 worked	my	way	closer	to	the	front.
     "Somebody	 help	me!"	 Mrs.	 Snow	 looked	 like	 someone	in	 a	horror	 movie,
terrified	 and	screaming,	her	dress	alive	with	 squirming	 bugs.	Even	 I	didn't	 hate
her	enough	to	wish	this	on	her.
     I	caught	a	glimpse	 of	Ridley,	 sucking	away	 on	her	lollipop,	 bringing	 bugs	to
life	 with	  every	lick.	  I	 didn't	  know	 she	could	 pull	  off	 something	 this	 big	 by
herself,	but	then	again	she	had	Caster	Boy	to	help	her.
     Lena,	what's	happening?

119
     Amma	was	still	 standing	on	 the	stage,	looking	like	 she	could	bring	 down	the
whole	tent	with	 a	single	look.	Bugs	 and	worms	were	crawling	 over	each	other	at
her	feet,	but	 not	 one	was	brave	 enough	to	 touch	Amma.	 Even	 the	bugs	 knew
better.	She	was	staring	down	at	Lena,	 her	eyes	narrow	and	her	jaw	 tight,	 as	she
had	been	from	the	moment	 the	first	 grub	crawled	 its	way	 out	of	 Mrs.	 Lincoln's
chess	pie.	"You	fixin'	 to	make	me	do	this	now?"
     Lena	 stood	 at	the	 edge	 of	 the	 tent,	her	 hair	 still	  twisting	  in	 the	 Casting
Breeze,	the	corners	of	her	mouth	upturned	into	 the	smallest	shadow	of	a	smile.	I
recognized	it	for	what	it	 was.	Satisfaction.
     Now	everyone	knows	what's	really	in	their	 pies.
     Lena	hadn't	been	trying	to	stop	them.	She	was	part	of	it.
     Lena!	Stop!
     But	 there	was	no	stopping	 now.	This	 was	payback	for	 the	 Guardian	Angels
and	the	Disciplinary	  Committee	 meeting,	 for	 every	 token	casserole	left	 at	 the
gates	of	  Ravenwood	 and	 every	 pitying	  look,	  for	 every	 insincere	  sentiment
offered	by	 the	folks	 of	Gatlin.	 Lena	 was	handing	it	 right	 back	as	if	 she'd	saved
every	bit,	 storing	 it	all	 up	 until	 it	 exploded	in	 their	 faces.	I	 guess	this	was	her
way	of	saying	good-bye.
     Amma	 spoke	to	Lena	 as	if	 they	were	 the	only	 people	in	 the	tent.	 "Enough,
child.	You	 can't	get	what	you	 want	from	 these	folks.	Sorry	 from	a	sorry	 town	is
nothin'	but	a	whole	lot	more	a	the	same.	A	pie	tin	fulla	 nothin'."
     Aunt	 Prue's	voice	pierced	the	din.	 "Good	Lord,	 help!	 Grace	is	havin'	 a	heart
attack!"	Aunt	 Grace	 was	lying	 on	the	 ground,	unconscious.	Grayson	 Petty	was
kneeling	 over	her,	 taking	 her	 pulse	while	  Aunt	 Prue	 and	Aunt	  Mercy	 batted
palmetto	bugs	away	from	their	sister.
     "I	 said	enough!"	Amma	 roared	from	the	 stage,	and	as	I	ran	for	Aunt	Grace,	I
could've	sworn	the	tent	was	going	to	come	down	on	top	of	us.
     As	I	 bent	down	 to	help,	 I	saw	Amma	 pull	 something	out	 of	her	 pocketbook
and	hold	it	high	 above	her	head.	The	One-Eyed	Menace,	our	old	wooden	spoon,
in	its	full	 glory.	Amma	 brought	it	 down	on	the	table	in	front	of	 her	with	a	crack.
     "Oww!"	  Across	the	 room,	Ridley	 winced	 and	the	lollipop	  dropped	right	 out
of	her	hand,	rolling	 across	the	dirt	 as	if	 Amma	had	smashed	it	with	 the	Menace
itself.
     In	that	second,	everything	stopped.
     I	looked	 over	to	 Lena,	but	she	was	gone.	The	 spell,	or	whatever	 it	was,	was
broken.	The	palmetto	bugs	scampered	out	of	the	tent,	leaving	only	 the	grubs	and
worms	behind.
     And	me,	leaning	over	Aunt	 Grace	to	make	sure	she	was	breathing.
     Lena,	what	have	you	done?

120
Link	 followed	 me	out	of	 the	tent,	confused	as	usual.	"I	 don't	 get	it.	Why	 would
Lena	help	Ridley	 and	Caster	Boy	 pull	 a	stunt	like	 that?	Someone	coulda	 really
gotten	hurt."
     I	 scanned	the	 rides	closest	 to	 us	to	 see	if	 there	 was	any	 sign	 of	 Lena	 or
Ridley.	 But	 I	didn't	 see	them,	 just	the	 4-H	 volunteers	fanning	 old	 women	and
handing	out	plastic	 cups	of	 water	to	 the	victims	 of	 the	pie-baking	 contest	from
hell.
     "You	 mean,	like	my	Aunt	 Grace?"
     Link	 yanked	on	 his	shorts	to	 make	sure	they	were	 grub-free.	"I	 thought	 she
was	a	goner.	Lucky	she	just	fainted.	Probably	the	heat."
     "Yeah.	 Lucky."	 But	 I	didn't	 feel	 lucky.	 I	was	 too	angry.	I	 had	to	 find	 Lena,
even	if	 she	didn't	want	 to	be	found.	 She	was	going	 to	have	to	 tell	 me	why	 she
would	 terrorize	 everyone	in	  that	tent	 to	 get	 even	with	  --	 who?	A	  few	 aging
beauty	queens?	Link's	  mom,	 who	 was	 just	 aging?	 It	  was	something	 Ridley
would	do,	not	Lena.
     It	 was	getting	dark,	 and	Link	 scanned	the	crowd	 through	 the	flashing	 lights
and	hysterical	church	ladies.	"Where'd	Liv	 go?	Wasn't	she	with	you?"
     "I	 don't	know.	I	told	 her	to	go	out	the	back	when	the	bugfest	started."
     Link	 cringed	at	the	word	bug.	"Should	we	 look	for	her?"
     There	was	a	group	of	 people	in	line	 at	the	Fun	 House,	so	I	headed	that	way.
"I	 get	 the	impression	 Liv	  knows	 how	 to	 take	 care	of	 herself.	 I	 think	  this	 is
something	we	have	to	do	on	our	own."
     "Right	 on."
     We	turned	 the	corner	a	few	 yards	from	 the	 entrance	to	the	Tunnel	 of	Love.
Ridley,	Lena,	and	John	were	standing	in	front	 of	the	dingy	plastic	 cars	painted	to
look	like	 gondolas.	Lena	was	standing	in	 the	middle,	a	leather	jacket	 slung	over
her	shoulders.	Only	she	didn't	have	a	leather	jacket.	John	did.
     I	called	her	name,	without	 even	thinking.	"Lena!"
     Leave	me	alone,	Ethan.
     No.	What	were	you	thinking?
     I	wasn't	thinking.	 I	was	finally	 doing	something.
     Yeah.	Something	stupid.
     Don't	tell	 me	you're	on	their	side	now.
     I	was	walking	 fast.	 Link	 struggled	to	keep	up	with	 me.	"You're	 gonna	start	a
fight,	 aren't	you?	Man,	 I	 hope	Caster	Boy	 doesn't	set	us	on	fire	 or	 turn	us	into
statues	or	 somethin'."	 Link	  was	usually	 up	 for	  a	fight.	  Even	 though	he	 was
skinny,	 he	was	almost	 as	tall	  as	me,	and	 twice	 as	crazy.	 But	 the	prospect	 of

121
fighting	 a	Supernatural	didn't	 have	the	 same	appeal.	We'd	been	burned	on	 that
one	before.
     I	wanted	to	let	him	 off	the	hook.	"I've	 got	this.	Go	find	 Liv."
     "No	way,	 dude.	I've	got	your	back."
     When	we	 got	to	the	gondolas,	John	stepped	forward	 protectively,	 in	 front	of
the	girls,	as	if	we	were	the	ones	they	needed	to	be	protected	from.
     Ethan,	get	out	of	here.
     I	 could	 hear	the	 fear	in	 her	 voice,	 but	this	 time	 I	 was	the	 one	who	 didn't
answer.
     "Hey,	  Boyfriend,	  how's	 it	  goin'?"	 Ridley	  smiled	 and	 unwrapped	 a	 blue
lollipop.
     "Screw	you,	Ridley."
     She	noticed	 Link	 behind	me,	 and	her	smile	 changed.	"Hiya,	 Hot	 Rod.	 You
wanna	take	a	ride	 through	the	 Tunnel	of	 Love?"	 Ridley	 tried	 to	sound	playful,
but	she	sounded	nervous	instead.
     Link	 grabbed	her	by	the	arm	and	pulled	her	toward	him,	 almost	like	 he	really
was	her	boyfriend.	 "What	did	 you	think	 you	 were	doin'	back	there?	You	 coulda
gotten	someone	killed.	  Ethan's	four-hundred-year-old	  aunt	almost	 had	a	 heart
attack."
     Ridley	  snatched	her	  arm	 back.	 "It	  was	 only	  a	 few	  bugs.	 Don't	  be	 so
melodramatic.	I	think	 I	liked	 you	better	when	you	were	a	little	more	compliant."
     "Yeah,	I	 bet."
     Lena	stepped	out	 from	 behind	John.	 "What	 happened?	Is	your	aunt	 okay?"
She	seemed	like	  my	 Lena	 again,	 kind	 and	 concerned,	but	 I	 didn't	  trust	 her
anymore.	A	 few	 minutes	ago,	 she	was	taking	 down	 the	women	 she	hated	and
everyone	else	in	the	tent	with	them,	and	now	she	was	the	girl	 I	kissed	behind	the
ticket	booth.	It	didn't	 add	up.
     "What	 were	 you	 doing	 back	 there?	 How	 could	 you	 help	 them?"	 I	  didn't
realize	how	mad	I	was	until	I	 heard	myself	yelling.	 But	John	did.
     He	slammed	his	palm	against	my	chest,	and	I	stumbled	back.
     "Ethan!"	 Lena	was	scared,	I	could	tell	that	much.
     Stop!	You	don't	know	what	you're	doing.
     Like	you	said.	At	least	I'm	 finally	 doing	something.
     Do	something	else.	Get	out	of	here!
     "You	 can't	 talk	to	 her	like	  that.	Why	 don't	 you	leave	 before	you	 get	hurt."
What	had	 I	missed?	Lena	 had	walked	 away	from	 me	 barely	 an	hour	ago,	 and
now	John	Breed	was	defending	her	like	she	was	already	his	girlfriend?
     "Yeah?	You	should	be	careful	who	 you	push	around,	Caster	Boy."
     "Caster	Boy?"	 He	 took	a	step	closer	 to	me,	curling	 his	 hands	into	fists.	 Big

122
fists.	"Don't	call	 me	that."
     "What	should	I	 call	you?	Dirtbag?"	 I	wanted	him	to	hit	 me.
     He	lunged	 at	me,	but	I	 threw	 the	first	 punch.	I'm	 stupid	that	way.	 I	 released
all	the	 frustration	 and	anger	I'd	 been	holding	inside	 the	second	my	 soft	human
fist	made	contact	with	his	steel	supernatural	jaw.	It	was	like	 hitting	 cement.
     John	blinked,	 his	green	eyes	turning	 as	black	as	coal.	He	hadn't	 felt	a	 thing.
"I'm	not	a	Caster."
     I	 had	been	in	my	 share	of	fights,	 but	 none	of	them	 could	have	prepared	me
for	what	it	 felt	 like	 to	be	hit	by	 John	Breed.	I	remembered	watching	 Macon	and
his	brother	 Hunting	  fighting,	 their	 incredible	  strength	and	 speed.	John	barely
moved,	and	my	back	hit	the	ground.	I	thought	I	 was	going	to	pass	out.
     "Ethan!	 John,	stop!"	 Lena	 was	screaming,	black	 makeup	running	 down	 her
face.
     I	 heard	John	slam	Link	 into	 the	dirt.	 To	his	 credit,	Link	 got	 up	faster	than	 I
did.	Only	he	was	back	down	again	faster,	too.	I	 picked	myself	 up	off	the	ground.
I	wasn't	that	 banged	up,	but	I	 was	going	 to	have	a	hard	time	 hiding	 the	bruises
from	Amma.
     "That's	enough,	John."	 Ridley	tried	 to	sound	cool,	 but	her	voice	 had	an	edge
and	she	looked	scared	--	as	scared	as	Ridley	could	look.	She	grabbed	John's	arm.
"Let's	go.	We've	got	somewhere	to	be."
     Link	 looked	her	right	 in	 the	eye,	which	took	 some	effort,	considering	 he	was
lying	in	 the	dirt.	"Don't	 do	me	any	favors,	Rid.	I	can	take	care	of	myself."
     "I	 can	 see	that.	 You're	 a	real	 Golden	 Glove."	  Link	 winced	 at	 the	 dig,	 or
maybe	it	was	the	pain.
     Either	 way,	 he	wasn't	 used	to	 being	the	 one	on	 the	 ground	in	 a	 fight.	 He
pushed	himself	to	 his	feet	and	held	 up	his	fists,	 ready	to	go	 again.	"They're	 the
fists	a	fury,	Baby,	and	they're	just	gettin'	 started."
     Ridley	 stepped	between	John	and	Link.	"No.	They're	finished."
     Link	 dropped	his	hands,	kicking	 the	dust.	"Yeah,	well,	 I	 could	take	him	 if	he
wasn't	a	--	what	the	hell	are	you,	man?"
     I	 didn't	 give	 John	a	chance	to	 answer,	because	I	 was	pretty	 sure	I	 already
knew.	"He's	 some	kind	of	 Incubus."	 I	looked	 at	Lena.	 She	was	still	 crying,	 her
arms	hugging	her	waist,	but	I	 didn't	try	 to	talk	to	her.	I	 wasn't	even	sure	who	she
was	anymore.
     "You	 think	I'm	 an	Incubus?	A	Demon	Soldier?"	John	laughed.
     Ridley	 rolled	 her	 eyes.	"Don't	 be	such	a	 show-off.	 No	 one	calls	 Incubuses
Demon	Soldiers	anymore."
     John	cracked	his	knuckles.	"I'm	old	 school."
     Link	 looked	 confused.	"I	  thought	all	 you	 vampire	 dudes	had	to	stay	 inside

123
durin'	the	day."
     "And	 I	 thought	 all	 you	 hillbillies	  drove	Trans	 Ams	 with	 Confederate	flags
painted	on	the	hoods."	John	laughed,	but	it	 wasn't	funny.	Ridley	 stayed	between
them.
     "What	 does	it	 matter	to	 you,	 Shrinky	 Dink?	 John's	not	really	 a	 rules	kinda
guy.	He's	sort	of	 ...	unique.	 I	like	 to	 think	 of	him	 as	the	best	of	both	 worlds."	 I
had	no	idea	what	 Ridley	 was	talking	 about.	But	 whatever	John	Breed	 was,	she
wasn't	saying.
     "Yeah?	I	like	 to	think	 about	him	as	crawlin'	back	to	his	own	 world	and	stayin'
outta	ours."	  Link	 talked	  tough,	 but	 when	 John	looked	  at	him,	  all	 the	 color
drained	out	of	Link's	 face.
     Ridley	 turned	to	 John.	"Let's	 go."	 They	turned	back	 to	the	 Tunnel	of	 Love,
the	cars	still	 making	 the	 loop	 under	the	 old	wooden	 arch	painted	 to	 look	 like
some	bridge	in	Venice.	Lena	hesitated.
     "Lena,	don't	go	with	 them."
     She	stood	there	for	 a	second,	like	 she	was	thinking	 about	running	 back	into
my	 arms.	But	  something	 was	stopping	 her.	 John	 whispered	 to	 her,	 and	she
climbed	into	 the	plastic	 gondola.	I	 looked	at	 the	only	 girl	 I'd	ever	 loved.	Black
hair	and	golden	eyes,	instead	of	green.
     I	couldn't	 pretend	the	gold	didn't	mean	anything,	not	anymore.
     I	watched	 the	car	disappear,	leaving	Link	 and	me	behind.	 As	banged	up	and
bruised	as	the	day	we	had	taken	on	Emory	 and	his	brother	on	the	playground	 in
fifth	 grade.
     "Come	on.	Let's	 get	outta	here."	Link	 was	already	walking	 away.	It	 was	dark
now,	and	the	lights	from	 the	Ferris	Wheel	flashed	as	it	 turned.	"Why'd	 you	think
he	was	an	Incubus?"	Link	  was	taking	 comfort	 in	the	 fact	he	had	gotten	 his	ass
kicked	by	a	Demon,	not	some	regular	guy.
     "His	 eyes	went	black,	and	it	felt	like	 I	was	hit	by	a	two-by-four."
     "Yeah,	 but	he	 was	walkin'	 around	 durin'	 the	day.	And	 he's	got	 those	green
eyes,	like	Lena's	..."	He	stopped,	but	I	knew	what	he	was	about	to	say.
     "Used	 to	be?	I	 know.	 It	 doesn't	 make	sense."	Nothing	 about	 tonight	 did.	I
couldn't	shake	 the	way	 Lena	had	 looked	 at	me.	 For	a	 second,	I	 was	sure	she
wasn't	going	 to	 follow	   them.	I	  was	thinking	  about	 Lena,	 but	 Link	 was	 still
talking	about	John.
     "And	 what	 was	 all	 that	crap	 about	 the	best	a	 both	 worlds?	 What	 worlds?
Creep	and	creepier?"
     "I	 don't	know.	I	was	sure	he	was	an	Incubus."
     Link	 rotated	his	shoulder,	assessing	the	damage.	"Whatever	he	is,	that	dude's
got	some	serious	superpowers.	I	wonder	what	else	he	can	do."

124
     We	turned	the	corner,	near	the	exit	of	 the	Tunnel	of	Love.	 I	stopped	walking.
The	best	of	 both	 worlds.	 What	 if	  John	could	 do	 a	 lot	 more	 than	rip	  like	 an
Incubus	and	beat	the	 two	of	 us	to	 a	pulp?	 He	had	green	eyes.	What	 if	 he	was
some	kind	 of	Caster,	with	  his	own	 version	of	 Ridley's	 Power	 of	Persuasion?	I
didn't	think	 Ridley	could	 influence	Lena	by	herself,	but	what	 if	John	was	helping
her?
     It	 would	explain	 why	 Lena	was	acting	so	crazy	 --	why	 she'd	looked	like	 she
wanted	to	come	with	me,	until	 John	whispered	in	her	ear.	How	 long	had	he	been
whispering	to	her?
     Link	 hit	my	arm	with	 the	back	of	his	hand.	"Hey.	 You	know	 what's	weird?"
     "What?"
     "They	haven't	come	out."
     "What	do	you	 mean?"
     He	pointed	 to	the	exit	 of	 the	Tunnel	of	 Love.	 "They	 didn't	get	off	 the	 ride."
Link	 was	right.	 There	was	no	 way	they	 could	have	come	 out	before	we	 turned
the	corner.	We	watched	as	the	gondolas	kept	coming	out	empty.
     "Then	where	are	they?"
     Link	 shook	his	head,	all	tapped	out	of	 insight	for	 now.	"I	 don't	know.	 Maybe
the	three	of	 them	 are	doin'	 somethin'	kinky	  in	 there."	We	 both	 winced.	 "Let's
check	it	out.	There's	no	one	around."	Link	was	already	halfway	 to	the	exit.
     He	was	 right.	 The	cars	kept	 coming	 out	empty.	 Link	 hopped	 over	the	 gate
around	the	ride	 and	ducked	 into	 the	tunnel.	 Inside,	there	 was	a	little	  space	on
either	side	 of	the	 track,	 but	it	 was	 tricky	 to	 walk	 by	 the	moving	 cars	without
getting	hit.
     One	of	the	cars	caught	Link	 in	the	shin.	"There's	no	one	in	here.	Where	could
they	have	gone?"
     "They	 couldn't	have	disappeared."	I	 remembered	the	way	John	Breed	ripped
out	of	Macon's	funeral.	Maybe	he	could,	but	 Ridley	and	Lena	couldn't	Travel.
     Link	  ran	his	 hands	along	 the	 walls.	 "You	 think	  there's	some	kinda	 secret
Caster	door	in	here,	or	somethin'?"
     The	 only	 Caster	doors	 I	 knew	 about	 led	to	 the	 Tunnels,	 the	underground
labyrinth	 of	 passageways	that	 slept	 quietly	 under	 Gatlin	  and	the	 rest	 of	 the
Mortal	world.	 It	 was	a	world	within	 a	world,	 so	different	from	 ours	that	it	altered
both	time	 and	distance.	But,	 as	far	 as	I	knew,	 all	 the	entrances	to	 the	Tunnels
were	inside	buildings	 --	Ravenwood,	the	Lunae	Libri,	  the	crypt	at	Greenbrier.	 A
few	sheets	of	painted	plywood	didn't	qualify	 as	a	building,	 and	there	was	nothing
under	the	 Tunnel	 of	 Love	 except	 dirt.	 "A	 door	 leading	 where?	 This	 thing	 is
sitting	in	the	middle	 of	the	fair.	They	 just	set	it	up	a	couple	of	days	ago."
     Link	 inched	 his	 way	 back	out	 of	 the	tunnel.	 "Where	 else	could	 they	 have

125
gone?"
     If	 John	and	Ridley	were	using	their	 powers	to	control	Lena,	I	 had	to	find	 out.
It	wouldn't	 explain	 away	 the	last	few	 months	or	 her	golden	 eyes,	but	maybe	it
would	explain	what	 she	was	doing	with	John.	"I've	gotta	get	down	there."
     Link	 had	already	pulled	 the	keys	out	of	his	 back	pocket.	"How'd	 I	 know	you
were	gonna	say	that?"
     He	followed	 me	to	 the	Beater,	the	gravel	crunching	 under	his	sneakers	as	he
jogged	to	 keep	up.	He	 yanked	the	 rusty	 door	open	and	 slid	 behind	the	 wheel.
"Where	are	we	goin'?	Or	 am	I	better	off	 --"	 He	was	still	 talking	 when	I	 heard	it,
the	tiny	words	tugging	at	the	bottom	of	 my	heart.
     Good-bye,	Ethan.
     They	were	gone,	the	voice	 and	the	girl.	 Like	 a	soap	bubble,	or	cotton	candy,
or	the	last	silvery	sliver	of	 a	dream.

126
6.15	

127
                                                Unmistakable



The	 Beater	skidded	 to	a	 stop	in	 front	 of	 the	Historical	 Society,	 the	front	 tires
halfway	up	the	curb,	the	engine	dying	out	on	the	empty	street.
     "Can	 you	take	 it	 down	 a	notch?	Someone's	gonna	 hear	us."	 Not	that	 Link
ever	drove	 any	 differently.	   Still,	 we	 were	 parked	 only	  a	few	  feet	 from	 the
building	that	served	as	the	DAR	headquarters.	I	noticed	the	roof	 had	finally	 been
rebuilt	 --	it	 had	 blown	 off	 in	 Hurricane	 Lena,	a	few	 days	before	 her	birthday.
Though	Jackson	 High	 had	been	 hit	 by	 the	same	storm,	 I	 guess	those	 repairs
could	wait.	We	had	our	priorities	 around	here.
     Almost	 everyone	in	 South	Carolina	 was	related	to	a	Confederate,	so	joining
the	Daughters	of	the	Confederacy	was	easy.	But	 to	join	 the	DAR,	 you	needed	a
bloodline	  going	  back	 to	  someone	 who	  fought	  in	  the	 war	  for	  American
independence.	The	problem	was	the	proof.	 Unless	you	 were	an	actual	signer	of
the	Declaration	of	 Independence,	you	had	to	 establish	a	paper	trail	a	 mile	long.
Even	then	you	had	to	 be	invited,	 which	required	 sucking	up	to	 Link's	 mom	and
signing	whatever	 petition	 she	happened	to	be	 passing	around.	Maybe	 it	 was	a
bigger	deal	down	here	than	up	North,	 like	we	 needed	to	prove	we	had	all	fought
for	 the	 same	side	 in	 a	 war	 once.	The	 Mortal	  part	 of	 our	 town	  was	just	  as
confusing	as	the	Caster	one.
     Tonight	the	building	 looked	empty.
     "It's	 not	 like	 there's	anyone	around	to	 hear	us.	Until	  the	Demolition	  Derby
ends,	everyone	we	know	 is	 at	the	 fairgrounds."	 Link	 was	right.	 Gatlin	 may	 as
well	have	been	a	ghost	town.	 Most	folks	 were	still	 at	the	fair,	 or	at	home	on	the
phone	reporting	the	details	 of	a	certain	 Southern	Crusty	bake-off	 that	would	 go
down	in	 history	 for	 decades	to	come.	I	 was	 pretty	sure	Mrs.	 Lincoln	  wouldn't
have	let	any	of	 the	DAR	  members	miss	watching	 her	try	 to	beat	Amma	 out	 of
first	place	in	 Pies.	Although,	right	 about	now,	I	 bet	Link's	mom	 was	wishing	she
had	stuck	to	pickled	okra	this	year.
     "Not	 everyone."	 I	was	 out	of	 ideas	and	explanations,	 but	I	 knew	 where	we
could	get	some	of	both.
     "You	 sure	this	is	 a	good	idea?	What	if	 Marian's	not	 here?"	Link	 was	jumpy.
The	 sight	 of	 Ridley	  hanging	 out	 with	 some	 kind	  of	 mutant	 Incubus	 wasn't
bringing	 out	the	 best	in	 him.	 Not	 that	he	had	 anything	to	 worry	 about.	 It	 was
pretty	clear	who	John	Breed	was	after,	and	it	wasn't	Ridley.

128
    I	 checked	my	cell.	It	was	almost	eleven.	"It's	a	bank	holiday	in	Gatlin.	You
know	what	that	means.	Marian	should	be	in	the	Lunae	Libri	by	now."	That's	how
it	worked	around	here.	Marian	was	the	Gatlin	County	Head	Librarian	from	nine
in	the	morning	until	six	at	night	every	weekday.	But	on	bank	holidays,	she	was
the	Head	Caster	Librarian	from	nine	at	night	until	six	in	the	morning.	The	Gatlin
Library	was	closed,	which	meant	the	Caster	Library	was	open.	And	the	Lunae
Libri	had	a	door	leading	into	the	Tunnels.
    I	 slammed	the	door	of	the	Beater	as	Link	pulled	a	Maglite	out	of	his	glove
box.	"I	know,	I	know.	The	Gatlin	Library's	closed	and	the	Caster	Library's	open
all	night	long,	on	account	a	most	a	Marian's	clients	don't	come	around	durin'	the
day."	Link	 waved	the	 flashlight	across	the	building	 in	 front	of	 us.	 A	 brass
placard	read	DAUGHTERS	OF	THE	AMERICAN	REVOLUTION.	"Still,	if	my	mom	or	Mrs.
Asher	or	Mrs.	Snow	found	out	what	was	in	the	basement	a	their	buildin'	..."	He
was	holding	the	heavy	metal	flashlight	like	he	was	brandishing	a	weapon.
    "You	 planning	to	take	someone	out	with	that	thing?"
    Link	 shrugged.	"Never	know	what	we're	gonna	find	down	there."
    I	 knew	what	he	was	thinking.	Neither	one	of	us	had	been	back	to	the	Lunae
Libri	 since	Lena's	birthday.	Our	last	visit	 had	been	more	about	danger	than
dictionaries.
    Danger	and	death.	We	did	something	wrong	that	night,	and	some	of	it	had
happened	right	here.	If	I	had	gotten	to	Ravenwood	earlier,	if	I	had	found	The
Book	of	Moons,	if	I	could	have	helped	Lena	fight	Sarafine	--	if	we	had	done	one
thing	differently,	would	Macon	be	alive	right	now?
    We	 made	our	way	around	to	the	back	of	the	old	red	brick	building,	in	 the
moonlight.	Link	 shined	his	flashlight	 on	the	 grating	near	the	ground,	and	 I
crouched	down	next	to	it.	"Ready,	man?"
    The	light	was	shaking	in	his	hand.	"Whenever	you	are."
    I	 reached	through	the	familiar	grating	built	into	the	back	of	the	building.	My
hand	disappeared,	as	always,	into	the	illusionary	entrance	of	the	Lunae	Libri.
Nothing	much	in	Gatlin	was	what	it	 first	appeared	to	be	--	at	least	not	where
Casters	were	concerned.
    "I'm	 surprised	that	spell	still	works."	Link	watched	as	I	pulled	my	hand	back
out	of	the	grate,	as	good	as	new.
    "Lena	told	me	it's	not	a	hard	one.	Some	kind	of	hiding	spell	Larkin	Cast."
    "Ever	wonder	if	it	 could	be	a	trap?"	The	flashlight	was	shaking	so	badly,	the
light	was	barely	shining	on	the	grating.
    "Only	 one	way	to	find	out."	I	shut	my	eyes	and	stepped	through.	One	minute
I	was	standing	in	the	overgrown	bushes	behind	the	DAR,	and	the	next	I	was
inside	the	stone	stairwell	leading	down	 into	 the	heart	of	 the	Lunae	Libri.	 I

129
shivered	when	I	crossed	the	Charmed	threshold	into	the	library,	but	not	because	I
felt	 anything	 supernatural.	The	 shiver,	 the	 wrongness,	came	from	  not	feeling
anything	different	 at	 all.	 Air	 was	air	 on	either	 side	of	 the	grate,	even	 if	 it	 was
pitch-black.	I	 didn't	feel	magical	 right	now,	 not	anywhere	in	Gatlin	 or	beneath	it.
I	felt	 bruised	and	angry	but	hopeful.	 I	had	been	convinced	Lena	had	feelings	for
John.	But	 if	 there	was	a	possibility	  I	 was	wrong	 --	 that	John	and	 Ridley	 were
influencing	her	--	 it	was	worth	being	on	the	wrong	 side	of	the	grate	again.
     Link	 stumbled	 through	 the	doorway	 after	me	 and	dropped	his	 flashlight.	 It
clattered	down	 the	stairwell	 in	 front	 of	 us,	and	we	 stood	in	 the	dark,	 until	 the
torches	lining	the	steep	passageway	lit	themselves	one	by	one.	"Sorry.	That	thing
always	throws	me	off."
     "Link,	 if	 you	don't	want	to	do	this	--"	 I	couldn't	 see	his	face	in	the	shadows.
     It	took	 a	second	before	I	heard	his	voice	in	the	dark.	"Of	course	I	don't	wanna
do	this,	but	I	gotta	do	it.	 I	mean,	I'm	not	sayin'	Rid's	 the	love	a	my	life.	 She's	not.
That	would	 be	crazy.	 But	 what	if	  Lena	was	tellin'	  the	truth,	 and	Rid	 wants	to
change?	What	if	Vampire	 Boy	 is	doin'	 somethin'	to	 her,	too?"	I	 doubted	Ridley
was	under	anyone's	influence	except	her	own.	But	I	didn't	say	anything.
     This	 wasn't	just	about	Lena	 and	me.	Ridley	 was	still	 under	Link's	 skin,	 in	 a
bad	way.	You	 don't	 want	to	 fall	 in	 love	 with	 a	Siren.	Falling	 for	 a	 Caster	was
rough	enough.
     I	 followed	  him	  down	 into	 the	 flickering,	  torch-lit	  darkness	 of	 the	 world
beneath	our	town.	 We	left	 Gatlin	 for	 the	Caster	world,	 a	place	 where	anything
could	happen.	I	tried	not	to	think	 back	to	a	time	when	that	was	all	I	wanted.


Whenever	I	stepped	through	the	stone	archway	bearing	the	carved	words	DOMUS
LUNAE	LIBRI,	I	was	entering	another	world,	 a	parallel	 universe.	 By	 now,	some
parts	of	the	world	were	 familiar	 --	the	smell	of	 the	mossy	stone,	the	musky	scent
of	parchment	 dating	back	 to	the	 Civil	 War	 and	beyond,	 the	smoke	drifting	  up
from	the	torches	hovering	near	the	carved	ceilings.	I	could	 smell	the	damp	walls,
hear	the	 occasional	 drip	 of	 underground	 water	 making	 its	 way	 down	  to	 the
patterns	in	 the	 stone	 floor.	  But	 there	 were	 other	 parts	that	 would	  never	 be
familiar.	 The	darkness	at	the	 edges	of	the	stacks,	the	sections	of	 the	library	  no
Mortal	had	ever	seen.	I	wondered	how	much	my	mother	had	seen.
     We	reached	the	base	of	the	stairs.
     "What	 now?"	 Link	 found	 his	 flashlight	 and	aimed	 it	 at	the	 column	next	 to
him.	 A	 menacing	 stone	 griffin's	  head	snarled	 back.	He	 pulled	  the	flashlight
away,	and	it	flickered	 on	a	fanged	gargoyle.	"If	  this	is	a	library,	 I'd	 hate	to	see	a
Caster	prison."

130
     I	heard	the	sound	of	the	flames	erupting	into	light.	 "Wait	 for	it."
     One	by	 one,	 the	torches	surrounding	 the	 rotunda	burst	 into	 flame,	 and	we
could	 see	the	 carved	colonnade,	 with	  rows	 of	 fierce	 mythological	  creatures,
some	Caster,	some	Mortal,	snaking	around	every	pedestal.
     Link	 cringed.	"This	 place	is	messed	up.	Just	sayin'."
     I	touched	a	woman's	face	twisted	into	 carved	agony	in	stone	flames.	Link	 ran
his	hand	over	 another	face,	revealing	 massive	rows	of	 canines.	"Check	 out	the
dog.	It	looks	like	 Boo."	He	looked	 again	and	realized	the	fangs	were	growing	out
of	a	man's	head.	He	yanked	his	hand	away.
     There	was	a	swirl	 of	carved	rock	 that	appeared	to	be	made	of	both	stone	and
smoke.	A	 face	emerged	from	 the	twists	 and	folds	of	 the	column,	 and	it	 looked
familiar.	 It	was	hard	 to	tell	 because	there	was	so	much	rock	around	it.	 The	face
seemed	to	be	fighting	  the	stone,	 trying	 to	 push	its	 way	 out	toward	 me.	 For	a
second,	I	thought	I	saw	the	lips	on	the	face	move,	as	if	it	was	trying	 to	speak.
     I	backed	away.	"What	the	hell	 is	that?"
     "What's	what?"	 Link	 stood	next	to	me,	 staring	at	the	column,	which	 was	just
a	column	 swirled	  with	 curving	  waves	 and	spirals	 again.	 The	 face	 had	been
swallowed	back	into	 the	pattern,	like	 a	head	disappearing	under	the	sea's	waves.
"The	ocean,	maybe?	Smoke	from	a	fire?	Why	do	you	care?"
     "Forget	 it."	 I	couldn't,	 even	if	 I	 didn't	 understand	it.	 I	knew	 that	face	 in	the
stone.	I	 had	seen	it	 somewhere	before.	This	 room	 was	eerie,	warning	 that	 the
Caster	world	was	a	Dark	place,	no	matter	whose	side	you	were	on.
     Another	 torch	ignited,	 and	the	 stacks	of	old	 books,	manuscripts,	 and	Caster
Scrolls	revealed	themselves.	They	radiated	out	from	the	rotunda	in	all	 directions,
like	spokes	on	a	wheel,	and	disappeared	into	the	darkness	beyond.	The	last	torch
burst	into	  flame,	 and	I	 could	  see	the	curving	  mahogany	desk	 where	 Marian
should	have	been	sitting.
     It	was	empty.	 Though	Marian	 always	said	the	Lunae	Libri	 was	a	place	of	old
magic,	neither	Dark	nor	Light,	 without	 her	the	whole	library	 felt	pretty	Dark.
     "No	one's	here."	Link	 sounded	defeated.
     I	grabbed	a	torch	off	 the	wall	and	handed	it	to	him,	 taking	another	for	myself.
"They're	down	here."
     "How	 do	you	know?"
     "I	 just	do."
     I	 plowed	ahead	into	 the	stacks	as	if	I	 knew	 where	I	 was	going.	The	 air	was
thick	with	 the	 smell	of	 the	bent	and	crumbling	 spines	of	 old	 books	and	ancient
scrolls,	the	dusty	oak	shelves	straining	under	the	weight	of	hundreds	of	years	and
centuries	of	words.	I	 held	my	torch	 up	to	the	nearest	shelf.	"Toes:	to	 Caste	Hair
on	 Your	 Maiden's.	 Tongues	 for	 Binding	  and	 Casting.	 Toffee:	 Casts	 Hidden

131
Inside.	We	must	be	in	the	T's."
     "Destruction	 of	 Mortal	 Life,	 Total.	That	 should	be	in	 the	D's."	 Link	 reached
for	the	book.
     "Don't	 touch	that.	It'll	 burn	your	 hand."	I	had	learned	the	hard	way,	from	 The
Book	of	Moons.
     "Shouldn't	we	 at	least	hide	it	or	something?	Behind	the	Toffee	one?"	Link	had
a	point.
     We	hadn't	 gone	ten	feet	when	I	 heard	a	laugh.	 A	girl's	 laugh,	 unmistakable,
echoing	off	the	carved	ceilings.	"You	 hear	that?"
     "What?"	 Link	 waved	 his	torch,	 almost	 setting	the	nearest	pile	 of	 scrolls	 on
fire.
     "Watch	it.	 There's	no	fire	escape	down	here."
     We	reached	a	 crossroads	in	the	stacks.	I	 heard	it	 again,	the	 almost	musical
laughter.	It	was	beautiful	 and	familiar,	and	the	sound	of	it	 made	me	feel	safe,	the
world	I	 was	standing	in	a	little	less	foreign.	"I	 think	it's	 a	girl	laughing."
     "Maybe	 it's	Marian.	 She's	a	girl."	 I	looked	 at	him	 like	he	was	insane,	and	he
shrugged.	"Sort	of."
     "It's	 not	Marian."	 I	 motioned	 for	him	 to	 listen,	but	 the	sound	was	gone.	We
walked	 in	 the	direction	  of	 the	 laughter,	 and	the	 passageway	turned	until	  we
reached	another	rotunda,	similar	to	the	first.
     "You	 think	it's	Lena	and	Ridley?"
     "I	 don't	know.	 This	way."	 I	could	 barely	follow	 the	sound,	but	I	 knew	who	 it
was.	Part	of	me	always	 suspected	I	could	find	 Lena	no	matter	 where	she	was.	I
couldn't	explain	it,	 I	just	knew.
     It	 made	sense.	If	 our	 connection	 was	so	 strong	we	 could	 dream	 the	same
dreams	and	speak	without	speaking,	why	 wouldn't	 I	 be	able	to	sense	where	she
was?	It's	like	 when	 you	 drive	 home	from	 school,	or	 some	place	 you	go	 every
day,	and	you	 remember	leaving	 the	parking	 lot,	 then	the	 next	thing	 you	 know
you're	pulling	into	 your	driveway	 and	you	don't	remember	how	you	got	there.
     She	was	 my	 destination.	 I	 was	always	 on	 the	 way	 to	Lena,	 even	 when	 I
wasn't.	Even	when	she	wasn't	on	her	way	to	me.
     "A	 little	 farther."
     The	next	twist	 in	 the	passage	revealed	a	corridor	covered	with	ivy.	 I	 held	up
my	torch,	 and	a	brass	lantern	lit	 itself	 in	 the	middle	 of	the	 leaves.	"Look."	 The
light	 from	 the	lantern	illuminated	  the	outline	 of	 a	doorway	 hidden	beneath	the
vines.	I	felt	 along	the	wall	 until	 I	 found	the	cold,	 round	iron	 of	the	 latch.	It	 was
in	the	shape	of	a	crescent.	A	Caster	moon.
     I	heard	it	 again,	laughter.	It	had	to	 be	Lena.	There	are	some	things	a	guy	just
knows.	I	knew	L.	 And	I	knew	 my	heart	wouldn't	lead	me	astray.

132
    My	  chest	was	pounding.	I	pushed	open	the	door,	heavy	and	groaning.	It
opened	into	a	magnificent	study.	Along	the	far	wall	of	the	study,	a	girl	was	lying
on	an	enormous	four-poster	bed,	scribbling	in	a	tiny	red	notebook.
    "L!"
    She	looked	up,	surprised.
    Only	it	 wasn't	Lena.
    It	 was	Liv.

133
6.15	

134
                                            Wayward	     Soul



The	first	moment	hung	in	the	air,	silent	and	awkward.	The	second	erupted	into
noisy	confusion.	Link	yelled	at	Liv,	who	yelled	at	me,	and	I	yelled	at	Marian,
who	waited	for	us	to	stop.
    "What	are	you	doin'	here?"
    "Why	 did	you	leave	me	at	the	fair?"
    "What	is	she	doing	here,	Aunt	Marian?"
    "Come	in."	 Marian	pulled	the	paneled	door	open	and	stepped	back	to	let	us
pass.	The	door	banged	shut	behind	me,	and	I	heard	her	bolt	the	lock.	I	felt	a
surge	of	panic,	or	claustrophobia,	which	didn't	make	any	sense	because	the	room
wasn't	small.	But	it	felt	close.	The	air	was	heavy,	and	I	had	the	feeling	that	I	was
standing	someplace	very	private,	like	 a	bedroom.	Like	 the	 laughter,	it	 felt
familiar,	even	if	it	wasn't.	Like	the	face	in	the	stone.
    "Where	are	we?"
    "One	question	at	a	time,	EW.	I'll	answer	one	of	yours,	and	you'll	answer	one
of	mine."
    "What's	Liv	 doing	here?"	I	don't	know	 why	I	 was	angry,	but	I	was.	Could
anybody	in	my	life	be	a	normal	person?	Did	everyone	have	to	have	a	secret	life?
    "Sit.	Please."	Marian	gestured	to	the	circular	table	in	the	center	of	the	room.
    Liv	  looked	irritated,	and	got	 up	from	 her	spot	on	the	 bed	in	front	 of	 an
impossibly	lit	fireplace,	the	smoldering	fire	white	and	bright	instead	of	orange
and	burning.
    "Olivia	 is	here	because	she	is	my	summer	research	assistant.	Now	I	have	a
question	for	you."
    "Wait.	 That's	not	 a	real	answer.	I	already	knew	that."	 I	 was	every	bit	as
stubborn	as	Marian	was.	My	voice	echoed	across	the	chamber,	and	I	noticed	an
intricate	chandelier	hanging	from	the	high,	vaulted	ceiling.	It	was	made	of	some
kind	of	smooth,	white	polished	horn,	or	was	it	bone?	The	ironwork	held	long
tapered	candles	that	lit	the	room	with	a	 delicate	flickering	light,	 illuminating
some	corners	while	leaving	others	dark	and	unexposed.	In	the	shadows	of	the	far
corner,	I	noticed	the	spindles	of	a	tall,	ebony	four-poster	bed.	I	had	seen	a	bed
exactly	like	it	somewhere	before.	Everything	about	today	was	one	monster	deja
vu,	and	it	was	driving	me	crazy.
    Marian	 sat	back	in	 her	 chair,	undeterred.	"Ethan,	how	did	 you	find	 this

135
place?"
    What	 could	I	 say	with	 Liv	 standing	next	to	me?	I	 thought	I	 heard	Lena,
sensed	her?	But	my	instincts	led	me	to	Liv	instead?	I	didn't	understand	it	myself.
    I	 looked	away.	Black	wooden	bookcases	ran	from	floor	to	ceiling,	crammed
with	books	and	objects	of	curiosity	that	were	obviously	the	personal	collection
of	someone	who	had	been	around	the	world	and	back	more	times	than	I	had	been
to	the	Stop	&	Steal.	A	 collection	of	antique	bottles	and	vials	lined	one	of	the
shelves,	like	in	an	old	apothecary.	Another	was	stacked	with	books.	It	reminded
me	of	Amma's	room,	without	the	stacks	of	old	newspapers	and	jars	of	graveyard
dirt.	But	one	book	stood	out	from	the	others:	Darkness	and	Light:	The	Origins	of
Magic.
    I	  recognized	it	  --	 and	 the	 bed,	 and	 the	 library,	 and	 the	 immaculate
arrangement	of	beautiful	things.	This	room	could	only	belong	to	one	person,
who	wasn't	even	a	person.	"This	was	Macon's	room,	wasn't	it?"
    "Possibly."
    Link	  dropped	a	strange	ceremonial	dagger	he	had	been	playing	with.	 It
clattered	to	the	floor,	and	he	tried	to	put	it	back	on	the	shelf,	flustered.	Dead	or
not,	Macon	Ravenwood	still	scared	Link	plenty.
    "I'm	  guessing	a	 Caster	Tunnel	 connects	it	 directly	 to	  his	 bedroom	at
Ravenwood."	This	 room	 was	 almost	a	 mirror	  image	 of	 his	 bedroom	 in
Ravenwood,	with	 the	exception	of	  the	heavy	 drapes	that	blocked	 out	the
sunlight.
    "It	 may."
    "You	 brought	that	book	down	here	because	you	didn't	want	me	to	see	it	after
I	had	the	vision	in	the	archive."
    Marian	answered	carefully.	"Let's	say	you're	right,	and	this	is	Macon's	private
study,	the	place	where	he	collected	his	thoughts.	Even	so,	how	did	you	find	us
tonight?"
    I	 kicked	the	thick	Indian	rug	under	my	feet.	It	was	black	and	white,	stitched
in	a	complicated	pattern.	I	didn't	want	to	explain	how	I	found	this	place.	It	was
confusing.	And	if	I	said	it,	it	might	be	true.	But	how	could	it	be?	How	could	my
instincts	lead	me	to	anyone	but	Lena?
    Then	again,	if	I	didn't	tell	Marian,	I'd	probably	never	get	out	of	this	room.	So
I	settled	for	half	 of	the	truth.	 "I	 was	looking	for	 Lena.	She's	down	here	with
Ridley,	and	her	friend	John,	and	I	think	 she's	in	trouble.	Lena	did	something
today,	at	the	fair	--"
    "Let's	just	say,	Ridley	was	bein'	Ridley.	But	Lena	was	bein'	Ridley,	too.	The
lollipops	might	be	workin'	overtime."	Link	 was	unwrapping	a	Slim	Jim,	so	he
didn't	notice	me	staring	him	down.	I	hadn't	planned	on	telling	Marian	or	Liv	the

136
details.
     "We	 were	in	 the	stacks,	and	I	 heard	a	girl	 laughing.	 She	sounded	--	 I	 don't
know	 --	happy,	 I	 guess.	I	 followed	 her	 here.	I	 mean,	her	 voice.	 I	 can't	really
explain	it."	 I	stole	a	glance	at	Liv.	 I	 saw	the	pink	flush	 in	her	pale	skin.	 She	was
staring	at	a	particular	spot	of	nothing	on	the	wall.
     Marian	  clapped	 her	 hands	together,	 the	 sign	  of	 a	 great	 discovery.	 "I'm
guessing	the	laughter	was	familiar."
     "Yeah."
     "And	 you	followed	 it	without	 a	thought.	More	of	 an	instinct."
     "You	 could	say	that."	I	 wasn't	sure	where	this	was	going,	but	Marian	had	that
mad	scientist	look	in	her	eye.
     "When	you're	with	 Lena,	can	you	sometimes	speak	to	her	without	words?"
     I	nodded.	"You	 mean,	Kelting?"
     Liv	 looked	 up	at	me,	 shocked.	"How	 could	 a	regular	Mortal	  possibly	know
about	Kelting?"
     "That	 is	 an	 excellent	  question,	Olivia."	   The	 way	 the	 two	  of	 them	 were
looking	 at	 each	 other	 irritated	  me.	 "One	 that	 deserves	 an	answer."	  Marian
walked	to	the	shelves,	rummaging	 through	Macon's	library	 like	 she	was	looking
for	car	keys	in	her	purse.	Watching	her	flip	 through	 his	books	bothered	me,	even
though	he	wasn't	here	to	see	it.
     "It	 just	happened.	We	sort	of	found	each	other	in	our	heads."
     "You	 can	read	minds,	and	you	didn't	 tell	 me?"	Link	 stared	at	me	like	 he	just
found	out	I	 was	the	Silver	 Surfer.	He	rubbed	his	head	nervously.	 "Hey,	man,	all
that	stuff	 about	 Lena?	I	 was	 yankin'	 your	 chain."	 He	looked	 away.	 "Are	 you
doin'	it	 now?	You're	 doin'	it,	 aren't	you?	Dude,	get	out	 of	my	 head."	He	backed
away	from	me	and	into	the	bookshelf.
     "I	 can't	read	your	mind,	 you	idiot.	 Lena	 and	I	can	hear	each	other's	thoughts
sometimes."	Link	 look	 relieved,	but	he	wasn't	 getting	off	 that	easy.	"What	 were
you	thinking	 about	Lena?"
     "Nothin'.	  I	 was	 messin'	 with	  you."	  He	 pulled	 a	 book	 off	  the	 shelf	 and
pretended	to	look	through	it.
     Marian	 took	 the	book	 out	of	 Link's	 hands.	"There	 it	 is.	 Exactly	 the	book	 I
was	looking	 for."	 She	opened	the	tattered	 leather	volume,	 flipping	 through	 the
crackling	 pages	 so	 quickly	  it	 was	 obvious	  she	 was	 looking	  for	 something
specific.	It	looked	 like	an	old	textbook	 or	reference	manual.
     "There."	 She	held	the	book	out	to	Liv.	 "Does	any	of	this	sound	familiar?"	 Liv
leaned	closer,	 and	 they	 started	 to	 turn	 the	 pages	together,	 nodding.	 Marian
straightened	and	took	the	book	from	 Liv.	 "Now.	 How	can	a	regular	Mortal	 Kelt,
Olivia?"

137
     "He	 can't.	Unless	he's	not	a	 regular	Mortal,	 Professor	Ashcroft."	  They	were
smiling	at	me	like	 I	was	a	kid	 who	had	taken	his	first	 steps,	or	like	someone	was
about	to	tell	me	 I	had	a	terminal	 illness,	and	the	combined	effect	 made	me	want
to	bolt.
     "You	 mind	letting	 me	in	on	the	joke?"
     "It's	no	joke.	 Why	don't	you	 see	for	yourself?"	Marian	handed	me	the	book.
     I	looked	 at	the	page.	I	was	right	 about	the	textbook	part.	It	 was	some	kind	of
Caster	encyclopedia,	with	 drawings	and	languages	I	 didn't	 understand	on	every
page.	But	some	of	it	was	in	 English.	"The	 Wayward."	 I	looked	up	 at	Marian.	"Is
that	what	you	think	I	 am?"
     "Keep	going."
     "The	    Wayward:	     the	    one	    who	     knows	    the	    way.	    Synonyms:
dux,speculator,gubernator.	 General.	Scout.	Navigator.	 The	 one	who	 marks	the
path."	I	looked	up,	confused.
     For	once,	Link	 wasn't.	"So	he's	like	a	human	compass?	As	far	as	superpowers
go,	that's	pretty	lame.	You're	like	the	Caster	equivalent	of	Aquaman."
     "Aquaman?"	Marian	 didn't	read	a	lot	of	comics.
     "He	talks	to	fish."	 Link	 shook	his	head.	"Not	exactly	 X-ray	vision."
     "I	 don't	have	any	superpowers."	Did	I?
     "Keep	reading."	 Marian	pointed	to	the	page.
     "Since	before	 the	Crusades,	we	have	served.	We	have	had	many	names,	and
none.	Like	the	whisper	in	 the	ear	of	China's	first	emperor	as	he	contemplated	the
Great	Wall,	or	 the	loyal	 companion	at	the	side	of	 Scotland's	most	valiant	knight
as	he	toiled	 for	  his	country's	 independence,	Mortals	  with	 great	 purpose	have
always	had	those	who	guided	them.	 As	the	lost	vessels	of	Columbus	 and	Vasco
da	Gama	had	those	who	guided	them	to	 New	Worlds,	 we	exist	to	 guide	Casters
whose	paths	hold	great	meaning.	We	are	--"	I	couldn't	make	sense	of	the	words.
     Then	I	 heard	Liv's	 voice	 next	 to	me,	 as	if	 she	had	committed	 the	words	 to
memory.	"The	one	who	finds	what	 is	lost.	The	one	who	knows	the	way."
     "Finish	 it."	 Marian	 was	suddenly	serious,	as	if	 the	words	were	some	kind	 of
prophecy.
     "We	 are	given	to	the	great,	for	 great	purpose,	to	great	ends.	We	are	given	 to
the	grave,	for	 grave	 purpose,	to	 grave	ends."	I	 closed	 the	book	 and	handed	it
back	to	Marian.	I	didn't	 want	to	know	any	more.
     Marian's	expression	was	difficult	  to	read.	She	turned	the	book	 over	and	over
in	her	hands	and	looked	at	Liv.	"Do	 you	think?"
     "It's	possible.	There	have	been	others."
     "Not	 for	a	Ravenwood.	Or	a	Duchannes,	for	that	matter."
     "But	  you	  said	  it	  yourself,	  Professor	 Ashcroft.	   Lena's	 decision	  carries

138
consequences.	If	she	chooses	to	go	Light,	all	the	Dark	 Casters	in	her	family	 will
die,	and	if	she	choose	to	go	Dark	 ..."	Liv	 didn't	 finish.	 We	all	 knew	the	rest.	All
the	Light	  Casters	in	 her	family	  would	 die.	 "Wouldn't	  you	say	 her	path	 holds
great	meaning?"
     I	 didn't	  like	 the	 way	 this	  conversation	was	 going,	  even	though	 I	  wasn't
completely	sure	where	it	was	headed.	"Hello?	I'm	 sitting	right	 here.	Want	to	clue
me	in?"
     Liv	 spoke	slowly,	 as	if	 I	was	a	kid	 at	the	library	 for	 a	read	aloud.	"Ethan,	 in
the	Caster	world,	  only	 those	with	 great	 purpose	have	a	 Wayward.	 Waywards
don't	come	along	often,	 maybe	once	in	a	century,	 and	never	by	accident.	If	 you
are	a	Wayward,	 you're	here	for	 a	reason	--	 a	great	or	terrible	 purpose,	all	 your
own.	You're	a	bridge	between	worlds	 for	Casters	and	Mortals,	and	whatever	you
do,	you	have	to	be	very	careful."
     I	 sat	down	 on	the	bed,	 and	Marian	 sat	next	 to	me.	"You	  have	a	destiny	 of
your	own,	like	 Lena.	Which	means	things	could	become	very	complicated."
     "You	 think	these	past	few	months	haven't	been	complicated?"
     "You	 have	 no	 idea	of	 the	 things	 I've	 seen.	The	things	 your	 mother	 saw."
Marian	looked	away.
     "So	 you	  think	  I'm	  one	 of	 those	 Waywards?	  I'm	 a	 human	  compass	or
something,	like	Link	 said?"
     "It's	 more	than	that.	 Waywards	don't	 just	know	 the	way.	 They	 are	the	way.
They	guide	 Casters	along	the	path	they	 are	destined	to	take,	 a	path	they	 might
not	otherwise	find	on	their	 own.	You	might	 be	the	Wayward	for	 a	Ravenwood	or
a	Duchannes.	It's	not	clear	which	at	the	moment."	 Liv	 seemed	to	know	what	she
was	talking	 about,	 which	 didn't	 make	sense.	That's	what	 my	 mind	 kept	going
back	to	as	I	stumbled	over	what	they	were	saying.
     "Aunt	 Marian,	  tell	 her.	I	 can't	 be	one	of	 these	Waywards.	 My	  parents	are
regular	Mortals."	 Nobody	 said	the	obvious,	that	my	 mom	had	been	a	part	of	the
Caster	world,	like	 Marian,	 only	 in	a	way	 no	one	would	 ever	talk	 about,	at	least
not	to	me.
     "Waywards	 are	Mortals,	 a	 bridge	between	 the	Caster	world	 and	 ours."	Liv
reached	for	another	book.	 "Of	 course,	your	 mother	was	hardly	 what	 you	could
call	a	regular	Mortal,	 any	more	than	I	am,	or	Professor	Ashcroft."
     "Olivia!"	  Marian	froze.
     "You	 don't	mean	--"
     "His	 mother	didn't	want	 him	to	know.	 I	promised,	if	 anything	were	to	 happen
--"
     "Stop!"	 I	slammed	the	book	down	 on	the	table.	"I'm	 not	in	the	mood	for	 your
rules.	Not	tonight."

139
    Liv	 fidgeted	with	her	science	experiment	of	a	watch,	nervously.	"I'm	such	an
idiot."
    "What	do	you	know	about	my	mother?"	I	turned	on	Liv.	"Tell	me	right	now."
    Marian	 crumpled	into	the	chair	next	to	me.	The	pink	spots	on	Liv's	cheeks
flushed.	"I'm	 so	 sorry."	She	 shook	her	head,	looking	 from	 Marian	 to	 me,
helplessly.
    Marian	held	up	her	hand.	"Olivia	knows	all	about	your	mother,	Ethan."
    I	 turned	to	Liv.	I	knew	what	she	was	going	to	tell	me,	before	she	said	it.	The
truth	had	been	pushing	its	way	into	my	mind.	Liv	knew	too	much	about	Casters
and	Waywards,	and	she	was	here,	in	the	Tunnels,	standing	in	Macon's	study.	If	I
hadn't	been	so	confused	about	what	they	thought	I	was,	I	would've	realized	what
Liv	was.	I	don't	know	why	it	had	taken	me	this	long	to	see	it.
    "Ethan."
    "You're	one	of	them,	like	Aunt	Marian	and	my	mom."
    "Them?"	Liv	asked.
    "You're	a	Keeper."	The	words	made	it	real,	and	I	was	feeling	everything	and
nothing	at	the	same	time	--	my	mom,	down	here	in	the	Tunnels	with	Marian's
massive	ring	of	Caster	keys.	My	mom	with	her	secret	life,	in	this	secret	world
my	father	and	I	had	never	been,	and	could	never	be,	part	of.
    "I'm	 not	a	Keeper."	Liv	looked	embarrassed.	"Not	yet.	One	day,	maybe.	I'm
training."
    "Training	 to	be	more	than	the	Gatlin	County	librarian,	which	is	why	you're
here,	in	the	middle	of	nowhere	with	your	fancy	scholarship.	If	there	is	one.	Or
was	that	a	lie,	too?"
    "I'm	  a	terrible	liar.	 I	 do	have	a	scholarship,	but	it's	 paid	by	 a	society	of
scholars	that	far	predates	Duke	University."
    "Or	 the	Harrow	School."
    She	nodded.	"Or	Harrow."
    "What	about	the	Ovaltine?	Was	that	even	true?"
    Liv	 smiled	ruefully.	"I'm	from	 Kings	Langley,	and	I	do	love	Ovaltine,	but	if
I'm	to	be	perfectly	honest,	I've	come	to	prefer	Quik	since	arriving	in	Gatlin."
    Link	  sat	down	on	 the	bed,	 speechless.	"I	don't	understand	a	word	she's
sayin'."
    Liv	 turned	the	pages	of	the	book	until	a	timeline	of	Keepers	appeared.	My
mom's	name	stared	back	at	me.	"Professor	Ashcroft	is	right.	I	studied	Lila	Evers
Wate.	Your	mother	was	a	brilliant	Keeper,	a	tremendous	writer.	It's	part	of	my
coursework	to	read	the	notes	left	by	the	Keepers	who	have	come	before	me."
    Notes?	My	mom	had	notes	Liv	had	seen,	and	I	hadn't?	I	resisted	the	urge	to
punch	a	hole	through	the	wall.	 "Why?	So	you	 don't	make	the	mistakes	they

140
made?	So	you	 don't	 end	up	 dead	in	 an	accident	 nobody	saw	 and	no	 one	can
explain?	So	you	don't	leave	your	family	 behind,	wondering	 about	your	secret	life
and	why	you	never	told	them	about	it?"
     The	two	 pink	  spots	appeared	on	Liv's	  cheeks	again.	I	 was	getting	 used	to
them.	"So	 I	 can	continue	 their	 work	 and	keep	 their	 voices	alive.	 So	one	 day,
when	I	 become	a	Keeper,	I'll	  know	 how	to	 safeguard	the	Caster	archive	 --	the
Lunae	Libri,	 the	scrolls,	the	records	of	the	Casters	themselves.	That	isn't	possible
without	the	voices	of	the	Keepers	who	came	before	me."
     "Why	 not?"
     "Because	they're	my	 teachers.	I	learn	from	 their	 experiences,	the	knowledge
they	gathered	while	  they	were	 Keepers.	Everything	 is	 connected,	and	without
their	records,	I	can't	make	sense	of	the	things	I	discover	myself."
     I	shook	my	head.	"I	 don't	understand."
     "You	 don't	understand?	What	the	hell	are	we	even	talkin'	 about?"	Link	 spoke
up	from	the	bed.
     Marian	put	her	hand	on	my	shoulder.	"The	 voice	you	heard,	the	laughter	from
the	hall,	I	imagine	it	 was	your	mother.	Lila	 led	you	here,	most	likely	 because	she
wanted	us	to	have	this	conversation.	So	you	would	understand	your	purpose,	and
Lena's	or	Macon's.	Because	you're	Bound	to	one	of	their	Houses	and	one	of	their
destinies.	I	just	don't	know	whose	yet."
     I	 thought	about	the	face	 in	the	 column,	the	laughter,	 and	the	feeling	 of	 deja
vu	in	 Macon's	room.	Was	 it	my	 mom?	I'd	 been	waiting	 months	for	 a	sign	from
her,	since	the	afternoon	in	 the	study	when	 Lena	and	I	found	 the	message	in	the
books.
     Was	she	finally	trying	 to	contact	me	now?
     What	if	 she	wasn't?
     I	 realized	 something	else.	"If	  I	 am	 one	of	 these	Waywards	 --	 and	I'm	 not
saying	I'm	buying	 any	of	this	--	 then	I	can	find	 Lena,	right?	I'm	 supposed	to	take
care	of	her	because	I'm	her	compass,	or	whatever."
     "We	 don't	know	 that	for	 sure.	You're	Bound	 to	someone,	but	we	don't	know
who."
     I	 pushed	back	the	chair	and	walked	 over	to	 the	bookcase.	Macon's	book	 sat
on	the	edge	of	the	shelf.	"I	bet	I	know	someone	who	does."	I	reached	for	it.
     "Ethan,	 stop!"	  Marian	 shouted.	 My	 fingers	 had	 barely	 scraped	 the	cover
when	I	felt	the	floor	 give	way	into	 the	nothingness	of	another	world.
     At	the	last	second,	a	hand	grabbed	mine.	"Take	me	with	you,	Ethan."
     "Liv,	 no	--"

    A	 girl	 with	long	brown	 hair	 clung	desperately	to	a	tall	 boy,	her	face	buried	in

141
his	chest.	The	branches	of	 a	huge	oak	 reached	down	around	 them,	creating
the	impression	they	were	alone	 instead	of	a	few	 yards	away	from	 clusters	of
Duke	University's	ivy-covered	buildings.
   He	 cradled	her	 tear-stained	face	gently	 in	his	hands.	"Do	 you	think	 this	is
easy	for	 me?	I	  love	you,	 Jane,	 and	I	  know	I'll	  never	 feel	 this	 way	about
anyone	again.	But	we	don't	have	a	choice.	You	knew	there	would	come	a	time
when	we	would	have	to	say	good-bye."
   Jane	lifted	 her	chin,	resolute.	"There	are	 always	choices,	Macon."
   "Not	 in	this	situation.	 Not	a	choice	that	wouldn't	 put	you	in	danger."
   "But	 your	mother	said	there	might	 be	a	way.	What	about	the	prophecy?"
   Macon	  slammed	his	 palm	 against	 the	 tree,	 frustrated.	 "Damn	  it,	 Jane.
That's	an	old	wives'	tale.	There's	no	way	it	doesn't	end	with	you	dead."
   "So	 we	can't	be	together	 physically	--	 I	don't	 care	about	 that.	We	can	still
be	together.	That's	all	that	matters."
   Macon	  pulled	 away,	 his	 face	 twisted	 in	  pain.	 "Once	 I	 change,	 I'll	  be
dangerous,	a	Blood	Incubus.	 They	thirst	 for	blood,	 and	my	father	 says	I	will
be	one	of	them	like	 he	is,	 and	his	father	 before	him.	 Like	 all	 the	men	in	 my
family,	as	far	back	as	my	great-great-great-grandfather	 Abraham."
   "Grandfather	  Abraham,	 the	one	who	believed	 the	greatest	sin	imaginable
was	 for	  a	 Supernatural	  to	  fall	  in	  love	 with	  a	  Mortal	  --	  to	 taint	  the
supernatural	bloodlines?	 And	 you	can't	 trust	your	 father.	 He	feels	the	 same
way.	He	 wants	to	 keep	us	 apart	 so	you'll	  return	 to	 Gatlin,	 that	 god-awful
town,	and	creep	around	underground	like	 your	brother.	Like	 a	monster."
   "It's	  too	 late.	 I	 can	already	 feel	 the	Transformation.	  I	 stay	 up	all	  night
listening	 to	the	 thoughts	of	 Mortals,	  hungering.	 Soon	I'll	  be	hungering	 for
more	than	 their	 thoughts.	 Already,	 it	 feels	 like	 my	body	 can't	 hold	 what's
inside	me,	as	if	the	beast	might	literally	 burst	free."
   Jane	turned	 away,	her	eyes	welling	up	with	 tears	again.	 But	Macon	wasn't
going	to	let	her	ignore	 him	this	time.	He	loved	her.	 And	because	he	loved	her,
he	had	to	make	her	understand	why	they	couldn't	be	together.	"Even	standing
here,	the	light	is	beginning	 to	burn	 through	my	skin.	I	 can	feel	the	heat	of	the
sun	with	 such	intensity,	 all	 the	time	 now.	I'm	 changing	 already,	 and	it	 will
only	get	worse."
   Jane	 buried	 her	face	 in	her	 hands,	sobbing.	 "You're	 saying	this	 to	 scare
me,	because	you	don't	want	to	find	a	way."
   Macon	 grabbed	Jane's	shoulders,	forcing	 her	to	look	at	 him.	"You're	right.
I	am	 trying	 to	 scare	you.	 Do	you	 know	what	 my	brother	  did	to	 his	 Mortal
girlfriend	 after	the	Transformation?"	 Macon	 paused.	"He	ripped	her	apart."
   Without	  warning,	   Macon's	 head	 jerked	  back,	  his	 golden-yellow	  eyes

142
    shining	 around	 strange	black	pupils,	 like	 the	eclipse	of	twin	 suns.	He	turned
    his	 head	away	from	Jane.	"Don't	 ever	forget,	Ethan.	Things	are	 never	as	they
    seem."




I	opened	my	 eyes,	but	 I	couldn't	 see	anything	 until	 the	fog	 lifted.	 The	 vaulted
ceiling	of	the	study	came	into	focus.
     "That	 was	 creepy,	man.	 Like	 The	 Exorcist	 creepy."	 Link	 was	 shaking	 his
head.	I	held	out	my	arm,	and	he	pulled	me	up.	My	heart	was	still	 pounding,	and	I
tried	not	to	look	 at	Liv.	 I	had	never	shared	a	vision	with	anyone	except	Lena	and
Marian,	and	I	 wasn't	too	 comfortable	 doing	it	 now.	 Every	time	 I	looked	 at	her,
all	I	 could	think	 about	was	the	 moment	I	 walked	into	 this	room.	 The	moment	 I
thought	she	was	Lena.
     Liv	 sat	up,	groggy.	"You	 told	 me	about	the	visions,	Professor	Ashcroft.	But	 I
had	no	idea	they	were	so	physical."
     "You	  shouldn't	 have	 done	 that."	 It	  felt	  like	 I	  was	 betraying	 Macon	  by
bringing	Liv	 into	 his	private	life.
     "Why	 not?"	She	rubbed	her	eyes,	trying	to	readjust.
     "Maybe	you	 weren't	supposed	to	see	it."
     "What	 I	 see	in	a	vision	 is	 totally	 different	 from	 what	 you	see.	You're	 not	a
Keeper.	No	offense,	but	you	have	no	training."
     "Why	 do	you	say	'no	offense'	when	you're	planning	to	offend	 me?"
     "Enough."	 Marian	looked	at	us	expectantly.	"What	 happened?"
     But	 Liv	  was	right.	 I	  didn't	 understand	what	 the	vision	  meant,	except	 that
Incubuses	couldn't	be	 with	 Mortals	 any	more	 than	Casters	could.	 "Macon	 was
there	with	a	girl,	and	he	was	talking	about	becoming	a	Blood	 Incubus."
     Liv	  looked	  smug.	 "Macon	   was	 going	  through	 the	  Transformation.	  He
appeared	to	be	in	a	very	vulnerable	state.	I	don't	know	why	 the	vision	showed	us
that	particular	moment,	but	it	must	be	significant."
     "Are	 you	sure	you	weren't	seeing	Hunting,	not	Macon?"	Marian	 asked.
     "No,"	 we	 said,	our	 voices	overlapping.	 I	 looked	at	 Liv.	 "Macon	 wasn't	like
Hunting."
     Liv	 thought	 for	 a	 moment,	then	 reached	for	 the	notebook	 on	the	 bed.	She
scribbled	something	and	snapped	it	shut.
     Great.	Another	girl	 with	 a	notebook.
     "You	 know	what?	You're	 the	experts.	I'm	going	to	let	 you	two	figure	 this	one
out.	I'm	 going	 to	 find	  Lena	before	 Ridley	 and	 her	friend	  convince	 her	to	 do

143
something	she'll	regret."
     "Are	 you	 suggesting	Lena	 is	under	 Ridley's	 influence?	That's	 not	 possible,
Ethan.	Lena's	a	Natural.	A	Siren	can't	control	her."	Marian	 dismissed	the	idea.
     But	she	didn't	know	 about	John	Breed.	"What	if	Ridley	 had	help?"
     "What	sort	of	 help?"
     "An	 Incubus	who	 can	walk	around	 in	the	daylight,	 or	a	Caster	with	 Macon's
strength	 and	the	  ability	  to	 Travel.	  I'm	 not	 sure	 which."	  It	  wasn't	 the	 best
explanation,	but	I	didn't	know	 what	John	Breed	really	was.
     "Ethan,	 you	must	 be	mistaken.	There's	no	 record	of	 an	Incubus	 or	a	Caster
with	those	abilities."	 Marian	was	already	pulling	 a	book	from	the	shelves.
     "There	 is	now.	 His	 name	is	John	Breed."	 If	 Marian	 didn't	 know	 what	 John
was,	we	weren't	going	to	find	the	answer	in	one	of	those	books.
     "If	  what	you're	 describing	 is	 accurate,	and	I	 find	 it	  hard	to	 believe	 that	it
could	be,	I'm	not	sure	what	he	might	be	capable	of."
     I	looked	 at	Link.	 He	 was	twisting	 the	chain	on	his	 wallet.	We	 were	thinking
the	same	thing.	"I	have	to	find	Lena."	 I	didn't	wait	 for	a	response.
     Link	 unlocked	the	door.
     Marian	 stood	 up.	 "You	  can't	 go	 after	 her.	 It's	 too	  dangerous.	There	 are
Casters	and	creatures	of	unfathomable	power	in	those	Tunnels.	You've	only	been
down	here	once	before,	and	the	sections	you've	seen	are	passageways	compared
to	the	larger	Tunnels.	They're	like	another	world."
     I	 didn't	need	permission.	 My	 mom	 may	have	led	 me	here,	but	she	was	 still
gone.	"You	can't	stop	me	because	you	can't	get	involved,	right?	All	 you	can	do	is
sit	there	and	watch	 me	screw	things	 up	and	write	 about	it	 so	someone	like	 Liv
can	study	it	later."
     "You	 don't	 know	 what	you'll	 find,	 and	 when	you	 find	 it,	 I	won't	 be	able	 to
help	you."
     It	 didn't	 matter.	 I	 was	 at	 the	 door	 by	 the	time	 Marian	  finished.	 Liv	  was
following	 me.	"I'm	 going,	 Professor	Ashcroft.	 I'll	 make	sure	nothing	happens	to
them."
     Marian	moved	to	 the	doorway.	"Olivia.	 This	isn't	your	 place."
     "I	 know.	But	they'll	 need	me."
     "You	 cannot	change	what	is	to	be.	You	 have	to	stay	out	of	it.	 No	matter	how
much	it	 pains	you.	 A	 Keeper's	 role	is	 only	 to	 record	and	bear	 witness,	not	 to
change	what	unfolds."
     "You're	 like	a	hall	cop."	 Link	 grinned.	"Like	 Fatty."
     Liv's	 eyes	narrowed.	 They	must	 have	truant	officers	  in	England,	 too.	"You
don't	need	to	explain	the	Order	of	 Things	to	me,	Professor	Ashcroft.	 I've	studied
it	since	my	K	levels.	 But	how	can	I	witness	what	I'm	 never	allowed	to	see?"

144
     "You	 can	read	about	it	in	the	Caster	Scrolls,	like	the	rest	of	us."
     "I	  can?	 The	  Sixteenth	 Moon?	  The	 Claiming	   that	 could've	  broken	  the
Duchannes	curse?	Could	 you	  have	read	 about	 any	of	  that	 in	 a	 scroll?"	 Liv
glanced	at	her	 moon	 watch.	"There's	 something	 happening.	This	 Supernatural
with	unprecedented	power,	Ethan's	visions	 --	and	there	are	scientific	 anomalies.
Subtle	changes	I've	picked	up	on	my	selenometer."
     Subtle,	as	in	nonexistent.	I	recognized	a	scam	when	I	saw	one.	Olivia	 Durand
was	as	trapped	as	the	rest	of	us,	and	we	were	her	ticket	 out.	She	wasn't	worried
about	Link	 and	me	in	the	Tunnels.	She	wanted	to	have	a	life.	 Like	 another	girl	I
knew,	not	too	long	ago.
     "Remember	--"
     The	door	closed	before	Marian	could	finish,	 and	we	were	gone.

145
6.15	

146
                                                      Exile



The	door	slammed	behind	us.	Liv	straightened	her	worn	leather	knapsack,	and
Link	grabbed	a	torch	from	the	wall	of	the	tunnel.	They	were	ready	to	follow	me
into	the	great	unknown,	but	instead	we	stood	there,	staring	at	each	other.
    "Well?"	 Liv	 looked	at	 me	expectantly.	"It's	not	rocket	science.	You	either
know	the	way,	or	you	--"
    "Shh.	Give	him	a	second."	Link	clamped	his	hand	over	Liv's	mouth.	"Use	the
force,	young	Skywalker."	This	Wayward	thing	apparently	carried	some	weight.
They	actually	thought	I	knew	where	to	go,	which	only	left	one	problem.	I	didn't.
    "This	way."	I	was	going	to	have	to	make	it	up	as	I	went	along.


Marian	said	the	Caster	Tunnels	were	endless,	a	world	beneath	our	own,	but	I
never	really	understood	what	she	meant	until	now.	As	we	turned	the	first	corner,
the	passage	changed,	narrowing	into	damper	and	darker	circular	walls	that	felt
more	like	 a	tube	than	 a	tunnel.	I	 pressed	against	the	walls	to	 push	myself
forward,	and	my	torch	fell	in	the	mud.
    "Crap."	 I	 gripped	the	 torch's	wooden	handle	between	my	teeth	and	kept
going.
    "This	sucks."	Link	was	muttering	behind	me	as	his	torch	burned	out.
    Liv	 was	behind	him.	"Mine's	out,	too."	We	were	in	complete	darkness.	The
ceiling	was	so	low,	we	had	to	duck	beneath	the	muddy	rock.
    "This	is	really	freakin'	me	out."	Link	had	never	liked	the	dark.
    Liv	 called	out	from	behind	us.	"Eventually	you're	going	to	reach	the	..."
    I	 hit	my	head	against	something	hard	and	splintery	in	the	darkness.	"Ouch!"
    "...	Doorwell."
    Link	 must	have	pulled	his	flashlight	out	of	his	pocket,	because	a	flickering
circle	of	light	hit	the	round	door	in	front	of	me.	It	was	some	kind	of	cold	metal,
not	the	splintering	wood	or	 crumbling	stone	of	the	other	doors	we'd	seen.	It
looked	more	like	a	manhole	cover	in	the	wall.	I	pushed	my	shoulder	against	it,
but	it	didn't	budge.
    "What	 now?"	I	 called	back	to	Liv,	 my	 stand-in	for	Marian	 on	all	 Caster-
related	issues.	I	heard	her	flipping	pages	in	her	notebook.
    "I	 don't	know.	Maybe	push	harder?"

147
     "You	 had	to	check	your	little	 book	for	that?"	I	 was	annoyed.
     "You	 want	me	to	crawl	up	there	and	do	it	for	 you?"	Liv	 wasn't	happy	either.
     "Come	on,	kids.	I'll	 push	Ethan,	you	push	me,	Ethan	pushes	the	door."
     "Brilliant,"	  Liv	 said.
     "Shoulder	to	shoulder,	MJ."
     "Excuse	me?"
     "Marian	 Junior.	 You're	 the	one	who	 wanted	an	adventure.	You	 got	 a	better
idea?"
     The	door	had	no	handle	or	valve.	It	fit	 into	 a	perfect	seam,	a	circle	of	metal	in
a	circular	 doorway.	Not	 even	a	slit	 of	 light	 escaped	through	the	cracks.	"Link's
right.	 We	don't	 have	a	 choice,	 and	we're	not	 going	 back	 now."	 I	 wedged	my
shoulder	against	the	door.	"One,	two,	three.	Push!"
     When	the	 tips	of	 my	 fingers	touched	the	 door,	it	 swung	open	 as	if	 my	skin
was	somehow	 the	  genetic	 recognition,	 the	 key	  that	 opened	the	 door.	  Link
smashed	into	me,	 and	Liv	  tumbled	 on	 top	 of	 both	of	 us.	 I	 cracked	my	  head
against	what	seemed	like	stone	as	I	hit	 the	ground.	I	felt	 so	dizzy,	 I	couldn't	 see
anything.	When	I	opened	my	eyes,	I	was	staring	up	at	a	streetlamp.
     "What	happened?"	Link	 sounded	as	disoriented	as	I	was.
     I	felt	 around	the	edge	of	 the	stones	with	my	 fingertips.	 Cobblestones.	"I	 just
touched	the	door,	and	it	opened."
     "Amazing."	 Liv	 stood	up,	taking	it	 all	in.
     I	was	lying	 in	a	city	 street	that	looked	like	London	 or	an	old	town	right	 out	of
a	history	 book.	 Behind	 me,	I	 could	 see	the	round	 doorway,	 at	the	 road's	end.
There	was	a	brass	street	sign	 next	 to	it	 that	said	 WESTERN	DOORWELL,	CENTRAL
LIBRARY.
     Link	 sat	up	next	to	me,	rubbing	his	head.	"Holy	 crap.	This	is	like	one	of	 those
alleys	where	people	got	hacked	up	by	Jack	the	Ripper."	 He	was	right.	 We	could
have	been	standing	in	the	mouth	 of	an	alley	 in	 nineteenth-century	London.	 The
street	was	dark,	 lit	 by	 only	 the	 dim	 glow	 of	 a	 few	 lampposts.	The	 alley	 was
framed	on	both	sides	by	the	backs	of	tall	brick	row	 houses.
     Liv	 stood	up	and	made	her	way	down	the	deserted	cobblestone	street,	looking
up	at	an	old	iron	 street	sign:	THE	KEEP.	"That	must	be	the	name	of	this	particular
tunnel.	 Unbelievable.	  Professor	 Ashcroft	  told	 me,	 but	  I	 never	  imagined.	 I
suppose	books	couldn't	really	do	it	justice,	could	they?"
     "Yeah,	 it	 looks	 nothin'	 like	 the	postcards."	Link	  pulled	 himself	 to	 his	feet.
"All	 I	 wanna	know	 is,	 where'd	the	ceilin'	  go?"	The	curved	 arch	of	 the	tunnel's
ceiling	was	gone,	and	in	its	place	was	a	dark	evening	sky,	as	big	and	real	and	full
of	stars	as	any	sky	I'd	ever	seen.
     Liv	 pulled	 out	her	notebook	and	started	writing.	 "Don't	 you	get	it?	 These	are

148
Caster	Tunnels.	They're	 not	some	 supernatural	subway	system,	so	 Casters	can
creep	around	under	Gatlin	borrowing	library	 books."
     "Then	what	 are	they?"	I	ran	my	hand	along	the	rough	 brick	on	the	side	of	 the
nearest	building.
     "More	  like	 roads	 to	 another	 world.	  Or,	 in	 a	 way,	 a	 whole	 world	  all	 to
themselves."
     I	 heard	 something,	 and	 my	  heart	 jumped.	 I	  thought	 Lena	 was	 Kelting,
reconnecting	with	me.	But	I	 was	wrong.
     It	was	music.
     "Do	 you	hear	 that?"	Link	 asked.	I	 was	relieved.	 For	once,	the	 music	wasn't
coming	from	inside	 my	head.	It	was	coming	from	 the	end	of	the	alley.	It	sounded
like	the	 Caster	music	from	 the	party	 at	Ravenwood	 last	Halloween,	 the	night	 I
saved	Lena	from	Sarafine's	psychic	attack.
     I	listened	for	 Lena,	felt	for	 her,	remembering	that	night.	Nothing.
     Liv	  checked	her	 selenometer	 and	wrote	  something	 else	in	 her	 notebook.
"Carmen.	I	was	transcribing	one	yesterday."
     "English,	 please."	Link	 was	 still	 staring	up	 at	the	sky,	 trying	 to	figure	 it	 all
out.
     "Sorry.	It	 means	'Charmed	Song.'	It's	Caster	music."
     I	 took	off,	 following	  the	 sound	down	the	 alley.	"Whatever	 it	 is,	 it's	coming
from	down	here."
     Marian	 had	been	right.	It	 was	one	thing	to	 wander	through	the	damp	tunnels
of	the	 Lunae	Libri,	  but	 this	was	 something	entirely	 different.	  We	had	no	 idea
what	we	had	gotten	ourselves	into.	I	already	knew	that	much.
     As	 I	  walked	  down	 the	 alley,	  the	 music	  grew	 louder,	  the	 cobblestones
smoothed	their	way	 into	 asphalt	beneath	my	 feet,	and	 the	street	changed	from
Old	World	 London	to	modern-day	slum.	 It	was	a	street	you	could	find	 in	any	big
city,	 in	  some	 forgotten	 run-down	  neighborhood.	 The	  buildings	 looked	  like
abandoned	warehouses,	iron	 grating	 covered	 the	 shattered	windows,	 and	 the
remnants	of	broken	signs	blinked	fluorescent	 light	into	 the	darkness.	There	were
cigarette	butts	and	trash	all	over	the	street,	and	a	strange	sort	of	Caster	graffiti	 --
symbols	I	couldn't	 begin	to	understand	--	on	the	sides	of	 the	buildings.	I	 pointed
it	out	to	Liv.	 "Do	 you	know	what	any	of	 that	means?"
     She	shook	 her	 head.	"No,	  I've	 never	 seen	anything	 like	  it.	 But	 it	 means
something.	Every	symbol	in	the	Caster	world	 has	significance."
     "This	 place	is	even	freakier	than	 the	Lunae	Libri."	 Link	  was	trying	 to	play	it
cool	in	front	 of	Liv,	 but	he	was	having	a	hard	time	pulling	 it	off.
     "Do	 you	wanna	go	back?"	I	 wanted	to	give	him	 an	out,	but	I	 knew	he	had	as
much	of	a	reason	to	be	down	here	as	I	did.	His	reason	was	just	blonder.

149
     "Are	 you	callin'	me	a	wuss?"
     "Shh,	shut	up	--"	I	 heard	it.
     The	Caster	music	 drifted	 through	 the	air,	 the	seductive	melody	 replaced	by
something	else.	This	time,	I	was	the	only	one	who	could	hear	the	words.


          Seventeen	moons,	seventeen	fears,
          Pain	of	death	and	shame	of	tears,
          Find	the	marker,	 walk	the	mile,
          Seventeen	knows	just	exile	...


     "I	 hear	it.	We	 must	be	close."	I	followed	  the	song	as	it	looped	over	and	over
in	my	head.
     Link	 looked	at	me	like	I	 was	crazy.	"Hear	what?"
     "Nothing.	 Just	follow	 me."
     The	huge	 metal	doors	lining	  the	filthy	  street	were	all	 the	same,	dented	and
scratched,	as	if	they'd	been	attacked	by	an	enormous	animal	or	something	worse.
Except	for	 the	last	 door,	the	 one	with	 Seventeen	Moons	playing	 inside.	 It	 was
painted	black	 and	covered	 with	 more	 Caster	graffiti.	  But	 one	 of	 the	symbols
looked	different,	 and	it	 wasn't	spray-painted	on	the	door.	It	 was	carved	into	 it.	I
ran	my	 fingers	 over	 the	 cuts	 in	 the	wood.	  "This	 one	 looks	 different,	 almost
Celtic."
     Liv's	  voice	  was	 a	 whisper.	  "Not	  Celtic.	  Niadic.	  It's	 an	 ancient	  Caster
language.	A	lot	of	the	older	scrolls	 in	the	Lunae	Libri	 are	written	in	it."
     "What	does	it	say?"
     She	examined	 the	symbol	  carefully.	 "Niadic	  doesn't	translate	 directly	 into
words.	I	  mean,	you	 can't	 think	 about	 the	 words	 as	words,	 not	 exactly.	 This
symbol	means	place,	or	moment,	 either	in	 physical	 space	or	time."	 She	ran	her
finger	over	 a	slash	in	the	 wood.	"But	 this	 line	cuts	 through	it,	 see?	So	now	the
place	becomes	a	lack	of	place,	a	no	place."
     "How	 can	a	place	be	a	no	place?	You're	either	in	 a	place,	or	you're	not."	 But
as	I	said	it,	I	knew	it	 wasn't	true.	I	had	been	in	a	no	place	for	months	now,	and	so
had	Lena.
     She	looked	up	at	me.	"I	think	 it	says	something	like	'Exile.'	 "
     Seventeen	knows	just	exile.
     "That's	exactly	what	 it	says."
     Liv	 gave	me	a	strange	look.	"You	 can't	know	 that,	or	do	you	 suddenly	speak
Niadic?"	 She	had	a	gleam	in	 her	eye,	 as	if	 this	was	further	 proof	 I	 might	 be	a

150
Wayward.
     "I	 heard	it	in	a	song."	I	reached	for	the	door,	but	Liv	 grabbed	my	arm.	"Ethan,
this	isn't	a	game.	This	isn't	the	pie-baking	contest	at	the	county	fair.	You're	 not	in
Gatlin	 anymore.	 There	 are	 dangerous	things	 down	  here,	 creatures	far	 more
deadly	than	Ridley	and	her	lollipops."
     I	knew	 she	was	trying	 to	scare	me,	but	it	 wasn't	working.	 Since	 the	night	of
Lena's	birthday,	 I	 knew	 more	about	 the	dangers	of	 the	Caster	world	  than	any
librarian	 could,	Keeper	 or	not.	 I	 didn't	 blame	her	 for	 being	afraid.	 You	 would
have	to	be	stupid	not	to	be	--	like	me.
     "You're	 right.	 It's	not	the	library.	 I'll	 understand	if	 you	guys	don't	 want	to	go
in	there,	but	I	have	to.	Lena's	here,	somewhere."
     Link	 pushed	open	the	door	and	walked	in	like	 it	was	the	Jackson	High	locker
room.	"Whatever.	I'm	 into	dangerous	creatures."
     I	shrugged	and	followed	 him.	 Liv	 tightened	her	 hand	around	the	strap	of	her
knapsack,	ready	to	swing	it	 at	someone's	head	if	necessary.	She	took	a	tentative
step,	and	the	door	closed	behind	her.
     Inside	 it	  was	 even	 darker	 than	 on	 the	  street.	Huge	  crystal	 chandeliers,
completely	out	 of	 place	among	the	 exposed	pipes	overhead,	provided	 the	only
light.	 The	rest	of	 the	room	 was	pure	industrial	 rave.	It	 was	one	 gigantic	space,
with	 circular	 booths	covered	in	 dark	red	 velvet	scattered	around	the	 perimeter.
Some	were	surrounded	by	heavy	drapes	attached	to	tracks	in	the	ceiling	 so	they
could	be	 closed	around	 the	booth,	 the	 way	the	 curtains	 close	around	 hospital
beds.	There	was	a	bar	in	the	back,	in	front	of	a	round	chrome	door	with	 a	handle.
     Link	 spotted	it,	too.	"Is	that	what	 I	think	it	 is?"
     I	nodded.	"A	 vault."
     The	 weird	 chandeliers,	the	 bar	 that	 looked	 more	like	  a	counter,	 the	 huge
windows	covered	haphazardly	 with	 black	tape,	the	vault.	 This	place	could	 have
been	a	bank	once,	if	 Casters	had	banks.	I	wondered	what	 they	had	kept	 behind
that	door	--	or	maybe	I	didn't	want	 to	know.
     But	nothing	 was	weirder	 than	the	people,	or	whatever	 they	were.	The	crowd
surged	and	receded	like	at	one	of	Macon's	parties,	where	time	seemed	to	fade	in
and	 out,	 depending	 on	 where	  you	 looked.	  From	 turn-of-the-century	   suited
gentlemen	who	 looked	 like	 Mark	  Twain,	 with	  stiff	 white-winged	  collars	 and
striped	silk	  ties,	 to	 Goth-looking	  leather-clad	 punks,	 they	 were	 all	 drinking,
dancing,	and	mingling.
     "Dude,	 tell	 me	those	creepy-lookin'	 see-through	people	 aren't	ghosts."	Link
backed	away	from	one	hazy	figure,	 nearly	stepping	into	 another.	I	didn't	want	 to
tell	 him	  that's	exactly	  what	 they	 were.	 They	  looked	 like	  Genevieve	in	  the
graveyard,	partially	 materialized,	only	 here	there	were	at	least	a	dozen	of	 them.

151
But	we	 had	never	seen	Genevieve	move.	 These	ghosts	weren't	floating	 around
like	 the	 ones	in	 cartoons.	 They	 were	 walking,	  dancing,	 moving	 like	  normal
people,	except	they	were	 doing	it	 above	the	 ground	--	 the	same	pace	and	even
strides,	but	their	feet	weren't	touching	 the	floor.	 One	glanced	our	way	and	raised
an	empty	glass	from	the	table	as	if	offering	a	toast.
     "Am	 I	seein'	things,	or	did	that	ghost	pick	 up	a	glass?"	Link	elbowed	Liv.
     She	stepped	between	us,	her	hair	brushing	against	my	neck.	Her	voice	was	so
quiet	 we	had	 to	 lean	 in	 to	 hear	 her.	"Technically,	  they	 aren't	 called	 ghosts.
They're	Sheers	--	souls	 who	haven't	 been	able	to	 cross	over	to	 the	Otherworld
because	they	have	unfinished	business	in	the	Caster	or	Mortal	  world.	 I	have	no
idea	why	  there	 are	so	 many	 out	 tonight.	  They	 usually	 keep	 to	 themselves.
Something's	off."
     "Everything	 about	 this	place	is	 off."	 Link	 was	 still	 watching	 the	Sheer	with
the	glass.	"And	you	didn't	answer	the	question."
     "Yes,	 they	 can	pick	 up	 anything	 they	 want.	 How	 do	 you	 think	 they	 slam
doors	and	move	furniture	in	haunted	houses?"
     I	wasn't	 interested	in	haunted	houses.	"What	kind	 of	 unfinished	 business?"	I
knew	enough	dead	people	 with	 unfinished	 business.	I	 didn't	want	 to	 meet	any
more	tonight.
     "Something	 they	left	 unresolved	 when	they	 died	--	 a	powerful	 curse,	a	 lost
love,	a	shattered	destiny.	Use	your	imagination."
     I	 thought	 about	 Genevieve	 and	 the	locket	  and	wondered	 how	 many	 lost
secrets,	how	  much	  unfinished	  business	 there	 was	  in	  the	 graveyards	 and
cemeteries	of	Gatlin.
     Link	 stared	at	a	beautiful	girl	 with	 elaborate	markings	around	her	neck.	They
looked	similar	  to	 the	ones	inked	 on	 Ridley	 and	 John.	"I'd	  like	 to	 have	some
unfinished	business	with	her."
     "She'd	like	  it,	 too.	She	 would	 have	you	 jumping	 off	  a	cliff	  in	 no	 time."	 I
scanned	the	room.
     There	 was	no	 sign	 of	 Lena.	 The	 more	 I	 looked	 around,	 the	 more	 I	 was
grateful	for	 the	darkness.	The	booths	were	filling	  up	with	 couples,	drinking	 and
making	out,	 while	 the	dance	floor	 was	packed	 with	 girls,	 spinning	and	 turning
like	 they	 were	 weaving	 some	kind	  of	 web.	 Seventeen	Moons	wasn't	 playing
anymore,	if	it	 was	ever	playing	at	all.	Now	 the	music	was	harder,	more	intense,	a
Caster	version	of	Nine	Inch	Nails.	 The	girls	were	all	 dressed	differently,	one	in	a
medieval	gown,	another	in	 skintight	leather.	Then	there	were	the	Ridleys	 --	girls
in	miniskirts	  and	black	tank	 tops,	with	 red,	blue,	 or	violet	 streaks	in	 their	 hair,
sliding	around	 one	another,	spinning	a	 different	 kind	of	 web.	Maybe	 they	were
all	 Sirens.	I	 couldn't	 tell.	 But	  they	were	 all	 beautiful,	 and	 they	 all	 had	some

152
version	of	Ridley's	dark	tattoo.
     "Let's	 check	in	the	back."	 I	let	 Link	 go	ahead	so	Liv	could	 walk	 between	us.
Even	though	she	was	checking	 out	every	corner	 of	the	club	 as	if	 she	wanted	to
remember	it	all,	I	 knew	she	was	nervous.	This	was	no	place	for	 a	Mortal	 girl,	 or
a	Mortal	guy,	 and	I	felt	responsible	for	 dragging	Link	 and	Liv	 into	this.	 We	kept
close	to	 the	 wall,	 circling	  the	 perimeter.	 But	 it	 was	 crowded,	 and	I	  felt	 my
shoulder	bump	against	someone.	Someone	with	a	body.
     "Sorry."	 I	said	instinctively.
     "No	  problem."	 The	 guy	 stopped,	 noticing	  Liv.	  "Quite	 the	 opposite."	  He
winked	 at	her.	 "You	  lost?"	 He	 smiled,	 his	shiny	 black	 eyes	 gleaming	 in	 the
darkness.	She	froze.	The	red	liquid	swirled	in	his	glass	as	he	leaned	closer.
     Liv	 cleared	her	throat.	"No.	I'm	 fine,	thanks.	Just	looking	for	 a	friend."
     "I'll	 be	your	friend."	 He	smiled.	 His	white	teeth	were	unnaturally	 bright	in	 the
dim	light	 of	the	club.
     "A	 ...	 different	  sort	of	  friend,	 I'm	 afraid."	 I	 could	 see	 Liv's	 hand	 shaking
where	it	held	the	strap	of	her	knapsack.
     "If	  you	 find	  her,	 I'll	  be	 over	  here."	 He	 turned	 back	 to	  the	 bar,	 where
Incubuses	were	lined	up	to	refill	 their	glasses	with	red	liquid	from	 a	strange	glass
tap.	I	tried	not	to	think	 about	it.
     Link	 pulled	 us	against	one	of	 the	velvet	curtains	 on	the	wall.	 "I'm	 startin'	 to
get	the	feelin'	this	was	a	bad	idea."
     "When	 did	you	come	 to	this	brilliant	  conclusion?"	Liv's	 sarcasm	was	lost	on
Link.
     "I	  don't	 know,	 right	  about	 the	 time	 I	 saw	 that	 dude's	 drink.	 Which	  I'm
guessin'	wasn't	punch."	Link	 glanced	around	the	room.	 "How	 do	we	even	know
if	they're	here,	man?"
     "They're	 here."	Lena	had	 to	be	here.	I	 was	about	to	 tell	 Link	 about	how	 I'd
heard	the	song	and	could	 sense	she	was	here,	when	a	stripe	 of	pink	 and	blond
hair	spun	onto	the	dance	floor.
     Ridley.
     When	 she	saw	us,	 she	stopped	spinning,	 and	I	 could	 see	across	the	dance
floor	behind	 her.	John	Breed	was	dancing	with	 a	girl,	 her	arms	wrapped	around
his	neck,	and	 his	hands	resting	 on	her	hips.	 Their	 bodies	were	 pressed	against
each	other,	and	they	seemed	to	be	in	their	own	 world.	 At	least,	that's	how	 it	felt
when	my	hands	were	 resting	on	those	hips.	 My	 hands	balled	into	 fists,	and	my
stomach	lurched.	I	knew	it	was	her	even	before	I	saw	the	black	curls.
     Lena	--
     Ethan?

153
6.15	

154
                                                     Vexed



It's	not	what	you	think.
    What	do	I	think?
    She	pushed	John	away	as	I	crossed	the	dance	floor.	He	turned	around,	his
eyes	black	and	menacing.	Then	he	smiled	to	let	me	know	I	wasn't	a	threat.	He
knew	I	was	no	match	for	him	physically,	and	after	seeing	him	and	Lena	on	the
dance	floor	together,	I	  bet	he	 didn't	consider	me	 any	other	 kind	 of	 threat
anymore.
    What	did	I	think?
    I	  knew	I	 was	in	 the	 moment	before	the	thing	 happens	--	the	thing	 that
changes	your	life	forever.	It	 was	 like	time	 stopped,	even	though	everything
around	me	was	still	moving.	The	thing	I	had	dreaded	for	months	was	actually
happening.	Lena	was	slipping	through	my	fingers.	And	it	wasn't	because	of	her
birthday,	or	her	mother	and	Hunting,	or	any	curse	or	Cast	or	attack.
    It	 was	another	guy.
    Ethan!	You	have	to	go.
    I'm	not	going	anywhere.
    Ridley	 stepped	in	front	of	me,	the	dancers	swelling	around	us.	"Slow	down,
Boyfriend.	I	knew	you	had	guts,	but	this	is	crazy."	She	sounded	concerned,	like
she	actually	gave	a	crap	about	what	happened	to	me.	It	was	a	lie,	like	everything
else	about	her.
    "Get	out	of	my	way,	Ridley."
    "You're	done	here,	Short	Straw."
    "Sorry,	the	lollipops	don't	work	on	me,	or	whatever	you	and	John	are	using	to
manipulate	Lena."
    She	grabbed	my	arm,	her	icy	fingers	cutting	into	 my	skin.	I	 had	forgotten
how	strong	she	was,	and	how	cold.	She	lowered	her	voice.	"Don't	be	stupid.
You're	way	out	of	your	league	and	way	out	of	your	mind."
    "You	 should	know."
    She	tightened	her	grip	on	my	arm.	"You	don't	wanna	do	this.	You	shouldn't
be	in	here.	Go	home	before	--"
    "Before	what?	Before	you	cause	even	more	trouble	than	usual?"	Link	caught
up	to	me.	Ridley	 locked	eyes	with	him.	For	 a	second,	I	thought	there	was	a
flutter,	the	slightest	spark	in	her	eye,	like	the	sight	of	Link	called	up	something

155
almost	human	 in	 her.	 Something	 that	 made	 her	 as	vulnerable	 as	 he	was.	 It
disappeared	as	quickly	as	it	had	surfaced.
     Ridley	 was	 rattled	 and	starting	 to	 panic.	 I	 could	 tell	 by	 the	 way	 she	was
unwrapping	a	 lollipop	  before	she	could	 even	get	 the	words	 out	 of	her	 mouth.
"What	the	hell	are	you	doing	 here?	Get	out	of	here	now,	and	take	him	with	 you."
The	playful	tone	was	gone.	"Go!"	 She	shoved	us	both	as	hard	as	she	could.
     I	stood	my	ground.	"I'm	 not	going	 until	I	 talk	to	Lena."
     "She	doesn't	want	you	here."
     "She'll	have	to	tell	 me	that	herself."
     Say	it	to	my	face,	L.
     Lena	was	 winding	 her	 way	through	 the	 crowd.	 John	Breed	hung	 back,	his
eyes	fixed	on	us.	I	didn't	want	to	imagine	 what	she	must	have	said	to	him	to	keep
him	there.	That	 she	would	 handle	this?	It	 was	nothing,	 just	a	guy	 who	couldn't
get	over	her?	Some	desperate	Mortal	who	couldn't	 compete	with	 everything	she
had	now?
     Like	 him.
     She	had	John,	and	he	had	me	beat	in	the	only	way	 that	counted.	He	was	part
of	her	world.
     I'm	not	leaving	 unless	you	say	it.
     Ridley	 dropped	 her	voice,	 more	 serious	than	 I'd	 ever	 seen	her.	"We	 don't
have	time	  to	 screw	 around.	 I	 know	  you're	 bent	 outta	 shape,	but	 you	 don't
understand.	He'll	kill	  you,	and	if	 you're	lucky,	 the	rest	of	 them	won't	 join	 in	for
fun."
     "Who,	 Vampire	 Boy?	 We	can	take	 him."	 Link	 was	lying,	  but	there	was	 no
way	he	wouldn't	go	down	swinging,	 either	for	 me	or	for	her.
     Ridley	 shook	her	head,	pushing	him	farther	 back.	"You	 can't,	you	idiot.	 This
is	no	place	for	 a	couple	of	Boy	 Scouts.	Get	out	of	 here."	She	reached	for	Link's
cheek,	but	he	grabbed	her	 wrist	 before	she	could	touch	 him.	 Ridley	 was	like	 a
beautiful	snake	--	you	couldn't	let	her	get	close	without	 the	risk	of	being	bitten.
     Lena	was	only	a	few	feet	away.
     If	you	don't	 want	me	here,	tell	me	yourself.
     A	 part	of	me	believed	 if	 we	were	close	enough,	I	could	 break	whatever	hold
Ridley	and	John	had	over	her.
     Lena	stopped	behind	Ridley.	 Her	expression	was	unreadable,	but	I	 could	see
the	silvery	streak	where	a	single	tear	had	fallen.
     Say	it,	L.	Say	it,	or	come	with	me.
     Lena's	eyes	flickered,	 and	she	looked	past	me	 to	where	Liv	  was	standing	at
the	edge	of	the	dance	floor.
     "Lena,	you	shouldn't	 be	here.	I	don't	know	what	 Ridley	and	John	are	doing	to

156
you	--"
     "No	 one	is	doing	anything	 to	me,	and	I'm	 not	the	one	in	danger	here.	I'm	not
a	Mortal."	Lena	looked	 over	at	Liv.
     Like	her.
     Lena's	face	darkened,	and	I	could	see	her	stray	curls	beginning	to	twist.
     "You're	 not	like	them	either,	L."
     The	lights	 in	 the	bar	flickered,	 and	the	bulbs	 shattered	over	the	dance	floor,
sending	sparks	and	tiny	 pieces	of	 glass	over	 both	of	 us.	The	 crowd,	 even	that
crowd,	started	 moving	 away	from	  us.	"You're	 wrong.	 I	 am	 like	 them.	This	 is
where	I	belong."
     "Lena,	we	can	figure	this	 out."
     "No,	we	 can't,	Ethan.	Not	this."
     "Haven't	we	made	it	through	 everything	else	together?"
     "No.	 Not	  together.	 You	 don't	 know	  anything	 about	 me	anymore."	  For	 a
second,	something	passed	across	her	face.	Sadness,	maybe?	Regret?
     I	wish	things	could	 be	different,	but	they	can't.
     She	started	to	walk	away.
     I	can't	go	where	you're	 going,	Lena.
     I	know.
     You'll	be	all	 alone.
     She	didn't	turn	around.
     I'm	already	 alone,	Ethan.
     Then	tell	me	to	go.	If	that's	what	 you	really	want.
     She	stopped	walking	and	turned	slowly	to	 look	at	me.
     "I	 don't	 want	 you	 here,	 Ethan."	 Lena	 disappeared	across	the	 dance	floor,
away	from	me.	Before	I	could	 take	a	step,	I	heard	the	rip	--
     John	Breed	 materialized	 in	 front	 of	 me,	 black	 leather	jacket	 and	 all.	 "Me
neither."
     We	were	 only	 a	few	feet	 apart.	"I'm	 going,	 but	it's	 not	because	of	you."	 He
smiled,	and	his	green	eyes	glowed.
     I	 turned	and	pushed	my	 way	through	 the	crowd.	 I	didn't	 care	if	 I	 pissed	off
someone	who	could	drink	 my	blood	 or	make	me	jump	 off	a	cliff.	  I	kept	moving
because	more	than	anything	else,	I	wanted	to	get	out	of	there.	The	heavy	wooden
door	slammed	behind	me,	shutting	out	the	music,	the	lights,	and	the	Casters.
     But	 it	didn't	 shut	out	 what	I	 was	hoping	 for.	The	 image	of	 his	hands	on	her
hips,	swaying	 to	the	 music,	her	 twisting	 black	 hair.	 Lena	in	 the	arms	of	 some
other	guy.

157
I	barely	 noticed	 as	the	alley	 turned	from	 modern-day	 asphalt	and	filth	  back	to
cobblestones.	How	long	 had	it	been	going	 on,	and	what	 had	happened	between
them?
     Casters	and	Mortals	 can't	 be	together.	 That's	what	 the	visions	 were	 telling
me,	as	if	the	Caster	world	didn't	think	 I	understood	by	now.
     I	 heard	the	sound	of	 footsteps	echoing	 against	the	cobblestones	behind	me.
"Ethan,	are	you	 okay?"	Liv	  put	her	 hand	on	my	 shoulder.	I	 hadn't	realized	she
was	following	 me.
     I	turned	 around,	but	I	didn't	 know	 what	to	say.	I	 was	standing	on	a	street	out
of	the	 past,	in	 an	underground	 Caster	Tunnel,	 thinking	 about	Lena	 with	 some
guy	 who	 was	 my	  polar	 opposite.	 A	  guy	  who	 could	 take	  whatever	 I	 had,
whenever	he	wanted.	Tonight	had	proven	it.
     "I	 don't	know	what	 to	do.	This	isn't	Lena.	Ridley	 and	John	have	some	kind	of
hold	on	her."
     Liv	 bit	 her	bottom	lip	 nervously.	 "I	know	 it's	 not	what	you	 want	to	hear,	but
Lena's	making	her	own	decisions."
     Liv	 didn't	 understand.	She	had	never	seen	what	Lena	 was	really	 like	 before
Macon	died	and	John	Breed	 showed	up.	"There's	no	 way	you	 can	be	sure.	You
heard	Aunt	Marian.	We	don't	know	 what	kind	 of	powers	John	has."
     "I	 can't	imagine	how	hard	this	is	for	 you."	 Liv	 was	speaking	in	absolutes,	and
there	was	nothing	absolute	about	what	was	happening	to	Lena	and	to	me.
     "You	 don't	know	her	--"
     Liv's	 voice	dropped	to	a	whisper.	"Ethan,	her	eyes	are	gold."
     The	words	echoed	in	my	 head,	like	I	was	underwater.	My	 emotions	sank	like
a	stone	as	logic	and	reason	fought	their	way	to	the	surface.
     Her	eyes	are	gold.
     It	was	such	a	small	 detail,	but	it	 meant	everything.	No	 one	could	force	her	to
go	Dark,	or	make	her	eyes	turn	gold.
     Lena	wasn't	being	 controlled.	 No	one	was	 using	the	Power	of	 Persuasion	to
manipulate	her	into	 jumping	 onto	 the	back	of	 John's	bike.	 No	one	 was	forcing
her	to	be	with	him.	She	was	making	her	own	choices,	and	she	was	choosing	him.
I	don't	 want	 you	here,	 Ethan.	 I	heard	 the	words	 over	and	 over.	Which	  wasn't
even	the	worst	part.	She	meant	them.
     Everything	 felt	hazy	and	slow,	like	 none	of	this	could	really	 be	happening.
     Liv's	 face	 was	full	  of	 concern	as	 she	stared	up	 at	me	 with	 her	 blue	eyes.
There	was	something	soothing	 about	their	 blueness	--	 not	the	green	of	 a	Light
Caster,	or	 the	 black	 of	 an	 Incubus,	 or	 the	 gold	 of	 a	 Dark	 Caster.	 She	was
different	 from	 Lena	in	 the	 most	important	 way.	 She	was	a	 Mortal.	 Liv	 wasn't
going	to	go	 Light	 or	Dark	 or	run	 off	 with	a	 guy	with	 superhuman	strength	who

158
could	suck	your	 blood	or	steal	your	 dreams	while	you	 slept.	Liv	 was	training	 to
be	a	Keeper,	but	even	then	 she	would	still	  be	an	observer.	Like	 me,	she	would
never	really	be	part	of	 the	Caster	world.	 Right	then,	 there	was	nothing	I	 wanted
more	than	to	be	as	far	away	from	that	world	as	I	could	get.
     "Ethan?"
     But	I	 didn't	answer	her.	I	pushed	her	shiny	blond	hair	away	from	 her	face	and
leaned	down,	our	faces	only	 inches	apart.	She	inhaled	softly,	 our	lips	 so	close	I
could	 feel	  her	 breath	 and	 the	 scent	 of	  her	 skin,	  like	  honeysuckle	 in	  the
springtime.	She	smelled	like	 sweet	tea	and	old	 books,	like	 she	had	always	been
here.
     I	pulled	 my	 fingers	through	 her	hair	and	held	it	 at	the	back	 of	her	neck.	Her
skin	was	soft	 and	warm,	 like	 a	Mortal	 girl's.	 There	 was	no	electric	 current,	 no
shocks.	We	could	kiss	for	as	long	as	we	wanted.	If	we	had	a	fight,	 there	wouldn't
be	a	flood	 or	a	hurricane,	or	 even	a	storm.	I	 wouldn't	 find	 her	on	the	ceiling	 of
her	bedroom.	No	windows	would	 shatter.	No	exams	would	catch	fire.
     Liv	 held	up	her	face	to	be	kissed.
     She	wanted	me.	 Not	 lemons	and	rosemary,	 not	 green	eyes	and	black	 hair.
Blue	eyes	and	blond	hair	...
     I	 didn't	realize	 I	 was	Kelting,	 reaching	out	 for	 someone	who	wasn't	there.	 I
pulled	away	 so	fast,	Liv	  didn't	 have	time	 to	react.	 "I'm	 sorry.	 I	shouldn't	 have
done	that."
     Liv's	 voice	 was	shaky,	and	 she	put	her	hand	 on	her	 neck,	where	my	 hands
had	been	a	moment	before.	"It's	okay."
     It	 wasn't.	 I	 watched	 the	emotions	 play	 out	 in	 her	 eyes	--	 disappointment,
embarrassment,	regret.	 "It's	 no	  big	 deal."	 She	 was	 lying.	  Her	 cheeks	 were
flushed,	and	she	was	staring	at	the	ground.	"You're	upset	about	Lena.	I	get	it."
     "Liv,	 I'm	 --"
     Link's	 voice	interrupted	my	lame	attempt	at	an	apology.	"Hey,	 man,	nice	exit.
Thanks	for	 ditchin'	 me."	 He	pretended	he	was	 joking,	 but	his	 voice	 was	edgy.
"At	least	your	cat	waited	for	 me."	Lucille	 was	trotting	 casually	behind	him.
     "How	 did	she	get	here?"	I	bent	down	to	scratch	her	head,	and	she	purred.	Liv
didn't	look	at	either	of	 us.
     "Who	  knows?	 That	 cat's	 as	 crazy	 as	 your	 great-aunts.	 It	  was	 probably
followin'	 you."
     We	started	walking,	 and	even	Link	  could	feel	 the	weight	of	 the	silence.	"So
what	happened	back	there?	Was	Lena	with	Vampire	Boy,	or	what?"	I	 didn't	want
to	think	 about	it,	but	 I	could	 tell	 he	was	trying	 not	to	think	 about	someone,	too.
Ridley	wasn't	just	under	his	skin.	She	was	crawling	around	in	 there.
     Liv	 was	walking	a	foot	 or	so	ahead	of	us,	but	she	was	listening.

159
    "I	 don't	know.	That's	how	it	looked."	There	was	no	point	in	trying	to	deny	it.
    "The	Doorwell	 should	be	straight	ahead."	Liv	held	her	head	high	and	almost
tripped	over	a	cobblestone.	I	could	see	how	awkward	things	were	going	to	be
between	us.	How	many	things	could	a	guy	screw	up	in	one	day?	I	had	probably
set	some	kind	of	record.
    Link	  put	his	 hand	on	my	 shoulder.	"I'm	 sorry,	dude.	That's	real	--"	  Liv
stopped	so	fast	neither	of	us	noticed,	until	Link	bumped	right	into	her.	"Hey,
what's	up,	MJ?"	Link	nudged	Liv	with	his	elbow	playfully.
    But	 she	didn't	move	or	make	a	sound.	Lucille	froze,	 the	hair	on	her	back
standing	on	end,	her	eyes	transfixed.	I	followed	her	gaze	to	see	what	she	was
staring	at,	but	I	had	no	idea	what	it	was.	There	was	a	shadow	across	the	street,
lurking	just	 inside	a	stone	archway.	It	was	formless,	a	dense	fog,	constantly
shifting	in	a	way	that	gave	it	shape.	It	was	wrapped	in	some	kind	of	material,
like	a	shroud	or	a	cloak.	It	had	no	eyes,	but	I	could	tell	it	was	watching	us.
    Link	 took	a	step	backward.	"What	the	--"
    "Shh."	 Liv	 hissed.	"Don't	attract	its	attention."	The	color	drained	from	her
face.
    "I	 think	it's	too	late	for	that,"	I	whispered.	The	thing,	whatever	it	was,	shifted
slightly,	moving	closer	to	the	street	and	to	us.
    I	 took	her	hand	without	thinking.	It	was	buzzing,	and	I	realized	it	wasn't	her
hand	but	the	contraption	on	her	wrist.	Every	dial	was	spinning.	Liv	stared	at	its
face,	unbuckling	the	black	plastic	strap	to	get	a	better	look.
    "I'm	 getting	insane	readings,"	she	whispered.
    "I	 thought	you	made	that	up."
    "I	 did,"	she	whispered	again.	"At	first."
    "Then	what?	What	does	it	mean?"
    "I	  have	no	idea."	She	couldn't	take	her	eyes	off	the	device,	but	the	black
shadow	shifted	closer	to	us.
    "I	 hate	to	bother	you	when	you're	having	so	much	fun	with	your	watch,	but
what	is	that	thing?	A	Sheer?"
    She	looked	up	from	the	spinning	dials,	her	hand	shaking	in	mine.	"I	wish.	It's
a	Vex.	I've	only	read	about	them.	I've	never	seen	one,	and	I	bloody	well	hoped	I
never	would."
    "Fascinatin'.	Why	don't	we	bolt	and	talk	about	this	later?"	The	Doorwell	was
in	sight,	but	Link	was	already	turning	around,	willing	to	take	his	chances	with
the	Dark	Casters	and	creatures	at	Exile.
    "Don't	run."	Liv	 put	her	hand	on	Link's	arm.	"They	can	Travel,	disappear	and
materialize	anywhere	faster	than	you	can	blink."
    "Like	 an	Incubus."

160
     She	nodded.	"This	 could	 explain	why	 we	 saw	so	many	 Sheers	at	Exile.	 It's
possible	they	were	responding	to	 some	kind	of	 disturbance	in	 the	natural	order.
The	Vex	is	most	likely	 that	disturbance."
     "Speak	English,	real	English."	 Link	 was	panicking.
     "Vexes	 are	part	of	 the	 Demon	world,	 the	 Underground.	They're	 the	closest
things	to	pure	evil	in	the	Caster	or	Mortal	 world."	 Liv's	 voice	was	shaky.
     The	Vex	 continued	 to	move	 slightly,	 as	if	 it	 was	being	 blown	 by	the	wind.
But	it	didn't	 come	any	closer.	It	seemed	to	be	waiting	for	something.
     "They	 aren't	Sheers,	ghosts	 as	you	call	 them.	 Vexes	 don't	have	 a	physical
being,	unless	 they	 possess	the	living.	  They	  have	to	 be	 summoned	from	  the
Underground	by	someone	very	powerful,	for	 only	the	Darkest	tasks."
     "Hello.	 We're	already	underground."	Link	 didn't	take	his	eyes	off	the	Vex.
     "Not	 the	kind	of	Underground	 I'm	talking	 about."
     "What	 does	it	want	with	 us?"	Link	  risked	a	glance	down	the	street,	mentally
calculating	the	distance	to	Exile.
     The	Vex	began	to	move,	dissolving	 into	mist	and	back	into	shadow	again.
     "I	 think	we're	about	to	find	 out."	I	squeezed	Liv's	hand,	trembling	 in	my	own.
     The	 black	fog,	 the	 Vex	 itself,	 thrust	 forward	 like	 angry	 open	jaws.	 And	 a
sound,	loud	and	shrill,	erupted	from	 deep	within.	It	 was	impossible	to	describe	--
fierce	and	menacing	like	 a	roar,	but	 terrifying	 like	 a	scream.	Lucille	 hissed,	her
ears	flattening	against	her	head.	The	sound	intensified,	and	the	Vex	 reared	back,
rising	above	 us	as	if	 it	was	 planning	to	 attack.	I	 pushed	Liv	 to	 the	ground	and
tried	to	 shield	her	 body	with	  mine.	I	 covered	my	 neck,	 like	 I	was	 about	to	 be
devoured	by	a	grizzly	bear	instead	of	a	body-snatching	Demon.
     I	 thought	 about	my	 mom.	 Was	 this	how	 she	felt	  when	she	knew	 she	was
about	to	die?
     I	thought	about	Lena.
     The	scream	reached	a	crescendo,	and	I	heard	another	sound	rising	above	it,	a
familiar	 voice.	But	it	wasn't	my	 mother's,	or	Lena's.
     "Dark	 Demon	a	the	Devil,	bend	to	Our	 will	 and	leave	this	place!"	I	 looked	up
and	saw	them	standing	behind	us	under	the	lamplight.	  She	was	holding	a	string
of	beads	and	bone	in	front	 of	her	like	 a	crucifix,	 and	they	 were	gathered	around
her,	glowing	and	luminous,	with	 purpose	in	their	eyes.
     Amma	and	the	Greats.
     I	 can't	explain	 what	 it	 was	 like	 to	 see	Amma	 and	four	  generations	of	 the
spirits	of	 her	 ancestors	towering	 above	her,	 like	 the	faces	from	 old	 black	 and
white	 pictures.	 I	  recognized	 Ivy	  from	 the	 visions,	  her	 dark	 skin	 gleaming,
dressed	in	  a	  high-necked	 blouse	  and	 calico	  skirt.	  But	  she	  looked	 more
intimidating	 than	 she	had	in	 the	visions,	 and	 the	only	 one	who	 looked	 fiercer

161
stood	to	her	right,	her	hand	on	Ivy's	shoulder.	She	had	a	ring	on	every	finger,	and
she	was	wearing	 a	 long	 dress	that	looked	 like	  it	 had	been	 stitched	from	 silk
scarves,	with	a	tiny	 bird	embroidered	 on	the	shoulder.	I	 was	staring	at	Sulla	 the
Prophet,	and	 she	 made	Amma	  look	 about	 as	 harmless	 as	a	 Sunday	 school
teacher.
     There	were	two	other	women,	most	likely	 Aunt	 Delilah	 and	Sister,	and	an	old
man,	his	 face	 punished	 by	 the	 sun,	 standing	 in	 the	 back	 with	 a	 beard	 that
would've	put	 Moses	to	shame.	Uncle	 Abner.	I	 wished	I	 had	some	Wild	 Turkey
for	him.
     The	 Greats	tightened	 their	 circle	 around	 Amma,	  chanting	the	 same	verse
again	and	again,	in	Gullah,	 the	original	 language	of	her	family.	  Amma	repeated
the	same	verse	in	English,	shaking	the	beads	and	bone,	shouting	to	the	heavens.
     "Of	 Vengeance	and	Wrath,	Bind	the	Suspended,	Hasten	his	path."
     The	Vex	 rose	even	higher,	 the	fog	 and	shadow	 circling	 and	swirling	  above
Amma	and	the	 Greats.	Its	scream	was	deafening,	but	 Amma	didn't	 even	flinch.
She	closed	her	eyes	and	raised	her	voice	to	meet	the	demonic	cry.
     "Of	 Vengeance	and	Wrath,	Bind	the	Suspended,	Hasten	his	path."
     Sulla	raised	her	bracelet-laden	arm,	spinning	 a	long	stick	 with	dozens	of	tiny
charms	dangling	from	 it,	back	 and	forth	between	her	fingers.	 She	took	her	hand
from	 Ivy's	 shoulder	 and	 rested	 it	 on	 Amma's,	 her	 glowing,	  translucent	 skin
glimmering	 in	the	darkness.	The	second	her	hand	touched	Amma's	shoulder,	the
Vex	let	out	a	final	 gnarled	cry	and	was	sucked	into	the	void	of	the	night	sky.
     Amma	turned	to	the	Greats.	"I'm	 much	obliged."
     The	Greats	disappeared,	as	if	they	had	never	been	there	at	all.


It	probably	 would've	 been	better	if	  I	had	 disappeared	with	the	 Greats,	because
one	look	at	 Amma's	face	made	it	 clear	that	she	had	only	 saved	us	so	she	could
kill	 us	herself.	We	would've	had	better	odds	against	the	Vex.
     Amma	 was	seething,	her	eyes	narrow	and	focused	on	her	main	 targets,	Link
and	me.
     "V.	 E.	X.	A.	 T.	I.	 O.	N."	She	grabbed	us	by	our	collars	at	the	same	time,	as	if
she	could	have	thrown	us	up	the	Doorwell	 behind	 her	with	 a	single	toss.	"As	in,
trouble.	Worry.	 Agitation.	 Botheration.	Need	me	to	go	on?"
     We	shook	our	heads.
     "Ethan	Lawson	 Wate.	Wesley	Jefferson	Lincoln.	  I	don't	know	 what	business
the	two	a	you	think	 you	have	down	in	these	Tunnels."	She	was	shaking	her	bony
finger	as	she	pointed	at	us.	"You	 don't	have	a	lick	 a	sense	between	you,	but	you
think	you're	ready	to	be	battlin'	Dark	 forces."

162
     Link	 tried	 to	 explain.	 Big	 mistake.	"Amma,	  we	weren't	 tryin'	 to	 battle	 any
Dark	forces.	Honest.	We	were	just	--"
     Amma	 advanced,	that	finger	barely	an	inch	 from	Link's	 eyes.	"Don't	 you	tell
me.	When	I	get	through	with	 you,	you're	 gonna	wish	I'd	told	 your	mamma	about
what	you	were	doin'	 in	my	basement	when	you	were	nine	 years	old."	He	backed
up	until	 he	hit	 the	wall	 behind	him,	 next	 to	the	Doorwell.	  Amma	 matched	him
step	for	step.	"That	story's	as	sad	as	the	day	is	long."
     Amma	turned	to	 Liv.	 "And	you're	studyin'	 to	be	a	Keeper.	But	you	don't	have
any	more	sense	than	they	 do.	Knowin'	  what	you	 do	and	 still	 lettin'	 these	boys
drag	you	into	this	 dangerous	business.	You're	in	a	world	a	trouble	with	 Marian."
Liv	slunk	 down	a	few	inches.
     Amma	 whipped	 around	to	 face	me.	"And	  you."	 She	was	so	angry	 she	was
talking	with	 her	jaw	 clenched.	"You	 think	 I	 don't	know	 what	you're	up	 to?	You
think	because	I'm	an	old	 woman,	you	 can	fool	 me?	It'll	 take	you	three	lifetimes
before	you	can	sell	me	a	raft	that	doesn't	float.	Soon	as	Marian	told	 me	you	were
down	 here,	I	 found	 you	 straightaway."	  I	 didn't	 ask	 her	how	  she'd	found	 us.
Whether	it	 was	chicken	 bones	or	 tarot	 cards	or	the	 Greats,	she	had	her	 ways.
Amma	 was	the	 closest	thing	 I'd	 ever	 seen	to	 a	Supernatural	 without	 actually
being	one.
     I	didn't	 look	her	in	 the	eye.	It	was	like	 avoiding	a	dog	attack.	Don't	 make	eye
contact.	Keep	 your	 head	down	 and	your	 mouth	 shut.	Instead,	 I	 kept	walking,
with	 Link	  looking	 back	 at	 Amma	 every	 few	 steps.	Liv	  wandered	behind	 us,
confused.	I	 knew	 she	hadn't	counted	 on	a	 run-in	 with	 a	 Vex,	 but	Amma	 was
more	than	she	could	handle.
     Amma	 shuffled	 along	 behind	 us,	muttering	  to	herself	 or	 the	 Greats.	Who
knew?	"Think	 you're	 the	only	 one	who	 can	find	 somethin'?	Don't	 need	to	 be	a
Caster	to	see	what	you	fools	are	up	to."	I	could	hear	the	bones	rattling	against	the
beads.	"Why	do	you	think	they	call	 me	a	Seer?	Because	I	can	see	the	mess	you're
into	just	as	soon	as	you're	into	it."
     She	was	 still	 shaking	 her	head	as	 she	disappeared	up	the	 Doorwell,	  not	a
speck	of	mud	on	her	sleeves	or	a	rumple	in	her	dress.	What	had	felt	 like	a	rabbit
hole	on	the	way	down	was	a	broad	stairwell	 on	the	way	up,	as	if	it	 had	expanded
out	of	respect	for	Miss	Amma	 herself.
     "Takin'	 on	 a	Vex,	 as	if	 a	day	with	 this	 child	 wasn't	trouble	 enough	..."	 She
sniffed	with	 every	step.	It	went	on	like	 that	the	whole	way	back.	We	dropped	Liv
off	on	our	way	 through	the	Tunnels,	but	Link	 and	I	kept	walking.	 We	didn't	want
to	be	too	close	to	that	finger,	or	those	beads.

163
6.16	

164
                                               Revelations



By	 the	time	I	crawled	into	my	bed,	it	was	nearly	sunrise.	There	would	be	even
more	hell	to	pay	in	the	morning	when	Amma	saw	me,	but	I	had	a	feeling	Marian
wasn't	expecting	me	to	be	on	time	for	work.	 She	was	as	scared	of	Amma	as
anyone.	I	kicked	off	my	shoes	and	fell	asleep	before	I	hit	the	pillow.




Blinding	light.
    I	 was	overwhelmed	by	the	light.	Or	was	it	the	dark?
    I	 felt	my	eyes	ache,	as	if	I	had	been	staring	at	the	sun	too	long,	creating	spots
of	darkness.	All	I	 could	make	out	 was	a	silhouette,	blocking	out	the	light.	 I
wasn't	scared.	I	knew	this	particular	shadow	intimately,	the	 slight	waist,	the
delicate	hands	and	fingers.	Every	strand	of	hair,	twisting	in	the	Casting	Breeze.
    Lena	stepped	forward,	reaching	out	for	me.	I	watched,	frozen,	as	her	hands
moved	out	of	the	darkness	and	into	the	light	where	I	was	standing.	The	light
crept	up	her	arms,	until	it	hit	her	waist,	her	shoulders,	her	chest.
    Ethan.
    Her	 face	was	still	shrouded	in	shadow,	but	now	her	fingers	were	touching
me,	moving	along	my	shoulders,	my	neck,	and	finally	my	face.	I	held	her	hand
against	my	cheek,	and	it	burned	me,	though	not	with	heat	but	cold.
    I'm	here,	L.
    I	 loved	you,	Ethan.	But	I	have	to	go.
    I	 know.
    In	 the	darkness,	I	could	see	her	eyelids	lift	and	the	golden	glow	--	the	eyes	of
the	curse.	The	eyes	of	a	Dark	Caster.
    I	 loved	you,	too,	L.
    I	 reached	out	my	hand	and	gently	closed	her	eyes.	The	chill	 of	her	hand
disappeared	from	my	face.	I	looked	away	and	forced	myself	to	wake	up.




I	was	prepared	to	face	Amma's	wrath	when	I	got	downstairs.	My	dad	had	gone	to
the	Stop	&	Steal	to	get	a	newspaper,	and	it	was	just	the	two	of	us.	The	three	of

165
us	if	 you	 counted	 Lucille,	  who	 was	staring	 at	 the	 dry	 cat	food	 in	 her	 bowl,
something	she'd	probably	never	seen	before.	I	guess	Amma	was	mad	at	her,	too.
     Amma	 was	at	the	 stove,	pulling	 out	 a	pie.	 The	table	 was	set,	but	 breakfast
wasn't	cooking.	 There	were	 no	grits	 or	 eggs,	not	even	 a	piece	of	 toast.	It	 was
worse	than	I	thought.	 The	last	time	she	baked	in	 the	morning	instead	of	 making
breakfast	was	the	 day	after	 Lena's	birthday,	 and	 before	that,	 the	day	 after	my
mom	died.	 Amma	 kneaded	dough	like	  a	prizefighter.	 Her	 fury	 could	 generate
enough	cookies	to	 feed	the	Baptists	 and	the	Methodists	 combined.	I	 hoped	the
dough	had	taken	the	brunt	of	it	this	morning.
     "I'm	 sorry,	Amma.	I	 don't	know	what	that	thing	 wanted	with	us."
     She	slammed	 the	 oven	door	 shut,	 her	 back	to	 me.	 "Of	  course	you	 don't.
There's	a	lot	 you	 don't	 know,	 but	 that	didn't	 stop	 you	 from	 wanderin'	 around
where	you	 didn't	 have	any	 business.	Now	 did	 it?"	 She	 picked	 up	her	 mixing
bowl,	stirring	 the	contents	with	 the	One-Eyed	Menace,	as	if	she	hadn't	used	it	to
scare	Ridley	into	submission	the	day	before.
     "I	 went	 down	 there	looking	 for	 Lena.	 She's	been	hanging	out	 with	 Ridley,
and	I	think	she's	in	trouble."
     Amma	 spun	around.	 "You	 think	 she's	in	 trouble?	You	  have	any	idea	 what
that	thing	was?	The	one	that	was	about	to	 take	you	outta	this	world	 and	into	 the
next?"	She	stirred	madly.
     "Liv	 said	it	was	called	a	Vex,	and	it	 was	summoned	by	someone	powerful."
     "And	 Dark.	Someone	who	doesn't	want	you	and	your	friends	pokin'	 around	in
those	Tunnels."
     "Who	 would	  want	 to	keep	 us	out	 of	 the	 Tunnels?	 Sarafine	and	 Hunting?
Why?"
     Amma	 slammed	the	bowl	on	 the	counter.	"Why?	 Why	are	you	 always	askin'
so	many	questions	about	things	 that	are	none	 a	your	concern?	I	 reckon	 it's	my
fault.	I	 let	you	run	me	ragged	with	 those	questions	when	you	weren't	tall	enough
to	see	over	this	counter."	 She	shook	her	head.	"But	 this	 is	a	fool's	 game.	There
can't	be	a	winner."
     Great.	More	riddles.	"Amma,	 what	are	you	talking	 about?"
     She	pointed	her	finger	 at	me	again,	the	same	way	she	had	last	night.	"You've
got	no	business	in	the	Tunnels,	 you	hear	me?	Lena's	havin'	 a	hard	time	and	I'm
ten	kinds	a	 sorry,	but	 she's	got	to	figure	 all	 this	 out	for	 herself.	There's	nothin'
you	can	do.	So	you	stay	out	a	those	Tunnels.	There	are	worse	things	down	 there
than	Vexes."	 Amma	 turned	back	 to	her	 pie,	pouring	 the	 filling	  from	 the	bowl
into	a	pie	shell.	 The	conversation	was	over.	 "You	 go	on	to	work	 now,	 and	keep
your	feet	aboveground."
     "Yes,	ma'am."

166
I	didn't	like	lying	 to	Amma,	but	technically	I	wasn't.	At	least,	that's	what	I	told
myself.	I	was	going	to	 work.	Right	after	 I	stopped	by	Ravenwood.	After	last
night,	there	was	nothing	left	to	say,	and	everything.
    I	 needed	answers.	How	long	had	she	been	lying	to	me	and	sneaking	around
behind	my	back?	Since	the	funeral,	the	first	time	I	saw	them	together?	Or	the
day	she	took	the	picture	of	his	motorcycle	in	the	graveyard?	Were	we	talking
about	months	or	weeks	or	days?	To	a	guy,	those	distinctions	mattered.	Until	I
knew,	it	would	gnaw	away	at	me	and	what	little	pride	I	had	left.
    Because	here's	the	thing:	I	heard	her,	inside	and	out.	She'd	said	the	words,
and	I	saw	her	with	John.	I	don't	want	you	here,	Ethan.	It	was	over.	The	one	thing
I	never	thought	we'd	be.




I	pulled	up	in	front	of	Ravenwood's	twisted	iron	gates	and	turned	off	the	engine.
I	sat	in	the	car	with	the	windows	rolled	up,	even	though	it	was	already	sweltering
outside.	The	heat	would	be	suffocating	in	a	minute	or	two,	but	I	couldn't	move.	I
closed	my	eyes,	listening	to	the	cicadas.	If	I	didn't	get	out	of	the	car,	I	wouldn't
have	to	know.	I	didn't	have	to	drive	through	those	gates	at	all.	The	key	was	still
in	the	ignition.	I	could	turn	it	and	drive	back	to	the	library.
    Then	none	of	this	would	be	happening.
    I	 turned	the	key,	and	the	radio	came	on.	It	wasn't	on	when	I	turned	the	car
off.	The	 Volvo's	reception	wasn't	much	better	than	the	Beater's,	but	I	 heard
something	buried	in	the	static.


         Seventeen	moons,	seventeen	spheres,
         The	moon	before	her	time	appears,
         Hearts	will	go	and	stars	will	follow,
         One	is	broken,	One	is	hollow	...


The	engine	died,	and	the	music	with	it.	I	 didn't	understand	the	part	about	the
moon,	except	that	it	was	coming,	which	I	already	knew.	And	I	didn't	need	the
song	to	tell	me	which	one	of	us	was	gone.
    When	I	finally	 opened	the	car	door,	the	stifling	Carolina	heat	seemed	cool	by
comparison.	The	gates	creaked	as	I	slipped	inside.	The	closer	I	got	to	the	house,
the	sorrier	it	looked	now	that	Macon	was	gone.	It	was	worse	than	the	last	time	I
was	here.

167
     I	walked	 up	the	steps	of	the	veranda,	listening	 to	each	board	creak	under	my
feet.	The	 house	probably	  looked	 as	bad	 as	the	 garden,	but	 I	 couldn't	 see	 it.
Everywhere	I	 looked,	the	only	 thing	 I	saw	was	 Lena.	Trying	 to	convince	 me	to
go	home	the	 first	 night	 I	met	 Macon,	 sitting	 on	the	steps	in	 her	orange	prison
jumpsuit	the	week	before	her	birthday.	 Part	of	me	wanted	to	walk	 the	path	out	to
Greenbrier,	to	Genevieve's	grave,	so	I	could	 remember	Lena	huddled	up	next	 to
me	with	 an	old	 Latin	 dictionary	 while	  we	tried	 to	 make	sense	of	The	Book	 of
Moons.
     But	those	were	all	ghosts	now.
     I	 studied	 the	 carvings	 above	 the	 doorway	 and	 found	 the	 familiar	  Caster
moon.	I	fingered	the	splintery	 wood	on	the	lintel	 and	hesitated.	I	wasn't	sure	how
welcome	I	 would	 be,	but	I	 pressed	it	anyway.	 The	door	swung	 open,	and	Aunt
Del	smiled	 up	at	me.	"Ethan!	 I	was	hoping	 you	would	 come	by	before	 we	left."
She	pulled	me	in	for	a	quick	hug.
     Inside	 it	 was	dark.	 I	 noticed	 a	mountain	 of	 suitcases	by	 the	 stairs.	Sheets
covered	most	of	the	furniture,	and	the	shades	were	drawn.	It	was	true.	They	were
really	leaving.	Lena	hadn't	said	a	word	about	the	trip	 since	the	last	day	of	school,
and	with	  everything	 else	that	 had	happened,	 I'd	 almost	 forgotten.	 At	 least,	 I
wanted	to.	Lena	 hadn't	even	mentioned	they	 were	packing.	There	 were	a	lot	 of
things	she	didn't	tell	me	anymore.
     "That's	why	 you're	here,	isn't	it?"	Aunt	 Del	squinted,	confused.	"To	say	good-
bye?"	As	a	Palimpsest,	she	couldn't	separate	layers	of	time,	so	she	was	always	a
little	 lost.	 She	could	 see	everything	 that	 had	happened	or	 would	 happen	in	 a
room	the	minute	she	walked	in,	but	she	saw	it	all	at	once.	Sometimes	I	wondered
what	she	saw	when	I	walked	into	this	room.	Maybe	 I	didn't	want	to	 know.
     "Yeah,	I	 wanted	to	say	good-bye.	When	are	you	leaving?"
     Reece	was	sorting	through	books	in	 the	dining	room,	 but	I	 could	still	 see	her
scowl.	I	 looked	 away,	out	 of	habit.	 The	last	 thing	I	 needed	was	Reece	reading
everything	that	had	happened	last	night	in	 my	face.	"Not	 until	 Sunday,	but	Lena
hasn't	even	packed.	Don't	distract	her,"	Reece	called	out.
     Two	 days.	She	was	 leaving	in	 two	 days,	and	 I	 didn't	 know.	 Was	she	even
planning	to	say	good-bye?
     I	ducked	 my	head	and	stepped	into	the	parlor	 to	say	hi	 to	Gramma.	She	was
an	immovable	force	sitting	 in	 her	rocking	chair,	 with	 a	cup	of	tea	and	the	paper,
as	if	the	bustle	of	 the	morning	didn't	 apply	 to	her.	She	smiled,	folding	 the	paper
in	 half.	 I	 had	assumed	it	 was	 The	Stars	 and	 Stripes,	but	 it	 was	 written	 in	 a
language	I	didn't	recognize.
     "Ethan.	 I	wish	 you	 could	come	with	  us.	I	will	  miss	you,	 and	I'm	 sure	Lena
will	 be	counting	the	days	until	we	 get	back."	She	rose	from	the	chair	and	hugged

168
me.
     Lena	might	 be	 counting	 the	days,	but	 not	 for	 the	reason	Gramma	 thought.
Her	family	 had	no	 idea	what	was	 going	on	 with	 us	anymore,	or	with	 Lena,	 for
that	matter.	I	had	a	feeling	they	didn't	 know	she	was	hanging	out	in	underground
Caster	clubs	like	 Exile,	 or	 hitching	 rides	on	 the	back	of	 John's	Harley.	 Maybe
they	didn't	know	about	John	Breed	at	all.
     I	 remembered	when	I	 first	 met	Lena,	the	 long	list	 of	 the	places	she'd	lived,
the	friends	 she	had	never	 made,	the	schools	 she'd	never	been	able	 to	go	 to.	 I
wondered	if	she	was	going	back	to	a	life	like	 that.
     Gramma	was	staring	at	 me	curiously.	 She	put	her	hand	on	my	 cheek.	It	was
soft,	like	the	gloves	the	Sisters	wore	to	church.	"You've	 changed,	Ethan."
     "Ma'am?"
     "I	 can't	quite	put	my	finger	on	it,	 but	something's	different."
     I	looked	 away.	There	was	no	point	 in	pretending.	She	would	 sense	that	Lena
and	I	were	no	longer	 connected,	if	she	hadn't	already.	Gramma	was	like	 Amma.
She	was	usually	the	strongest	person	in	 the	room,	 by	sheer	force	 of	will	  alone.
"I'm	not	the	one	who	changed,	ma'am."
     She	sat	down	 again,	picking	  her	newspaper	back	up.	 "Nonsense.	Everyone
changes,	Ethan.	That's	life.	 Now	 go	tell	 my	 granddaughter	to	 get	packing.	 We
need	to	go	before	the	tides	change	and	we're	marooned	here	forever."	She	smiled
as	if	I	was	in	on	the	joke.	Only	 I	wasn't.


Lena's	door	  was	open	 just	 a	 crack.	 The	  walls,	 the	 ceiling,	  the	 furniture	 --
everything	was	black.	 Her	 walls	weren't	 covered	in	 Sharpie	anymore.	Now	 her
poetry	was	 scrawled	 in	 white	 chalk.	 Her	 closet	doors	 were	 covered	with	  the
same	 phrase	 over	  and	 over:	  runningtostandstillrunningtostandstillrunningto
standstill.	I	 stared	at	the	words,	 separating	them	the	way	 I	often	 had	to	when	it
came	to	Lena's	writing.	 Once	I	did,	 I	recognized	them	 from	an	old	 U2	song	and
realized	how	true	they	really	were.
     It's	what	Lena	had	been	doing	all	this	time,	 every	second	since	Macon	died.
     Her	 little	 cousin,	 Ryan,	was	 sitting	 on	 the	bed,	 holding	 Lena's	face	 in	her
hands.	Ryan	 was	 a	 Thaumaturge	  and	 only	 used	 her	 healing	 powers	  when
someone	was	in	great	pain.	Usually	it	was	me,	but	today	it	was	Lena.
     I	 barely	recognized	her.	She	looked	 like	 she	hadn't	slept	last	night.	 She	was
wearing	an	oversize,	faded	 black	T-shirt	 as	a	nightgown.	 Her	 hair	was	tangled,
her	eyes	red	and	swollen.
     "Ethan!"	 The	minute	 Ryan	saw	me,	she	was	a	regular	kid	again.	She	jumped
into	my	 arms,	and	I	 picked	 her	up,	 swinging	 her	legs	from	 side	to	 side.	"Why

169
aren't	you	coming	with	 us?	It's	going	 to	be	so	boring.	Reece	is	going	to	 boss	me
around	the	whole	summer,	and	Lena	isn't	any	fun	either."
     "I	 have	to	 stick	 around	here	and	 take	care	of	 Amma	 and	my	 dad,	Chicken
Little."	 I	put	Ryan	down	 gently.
     Lena	looked	annoyed.	She	sat	down	on	her	unmade	bed,	with	her	legs	folded
under	her,	and	waved	Ryan	out	of	the	room.	"Out	now.	Please."
     Ryan	made	a	face.	"If	 you	 two	 do	anything	disgusting	 and	you	need	me,	I'll
be	downstairs."	Ryan	 had	saved	my	life	 on	more	 than	one	occasion	when	Lena
and	I	had	gone	too	 far	and	the	electrical	 current	between	us	had	nearly	 stopped
my	heart.
     Lena	would	 never	have	that	 problem	with	 John	Breed.	 I	wondered	 if	 it	was
his	shirt	she	was	wearing.
     "What	 are	 you	 doing	 here,	 Ethan?"	 Lena	 stared	up	 at	 the	 ceiling,	 and	 I
followed	 her	eyes	to	 the	words	 on	the	 walls.	 I	couldn't	 look	 at	 her.	When	you
look	up	/	Do	you	see	the	blue	sky	of	what	might	be	/	Or	 the	darkness	of	what	will
never	be?	/	Do	you	see	me?
     "I	 want	to	talk	about	last	night."
     "You	 mean	about	why	you	 were	following	 me?"	Her	 voice	was	harsh,	which
pissed	me	off.
     "I	 wasn't	following	  you.	I	 was	looking	 for	 you	because	I	was	worried.	 But	 I
can	see	how	that	would	 be	inconvenient	 when	you	 were	busy	 hooking	up	 with
John."
     Lena's	jaw	 tightened,	and	she	stood	up,	the	T-shirt	 grazing	 her	knees.	"John
and	I	are	just	friends.	We	weren't	hooking	up."
     "Do	you	 hang	all	over	all	your	 friends	like	that?"
     Lena	stepped	closer	to	me,	the	ends	of	her	ratty	 curls	beginning	to	 lift	 gently
off	her	shoulders.	The	chandelier	hanging	from	 the	center	of	her	ceiling	began	to
sway.	"Do	you	try	 to	kiss	all	of	yours?"	 She	looked	me	right	in	the	eye.
     There	was	a	 flash	of	 light	 and	sparks,	then	 darkness.	The	lightbulbs	 on	 the
chandelier	exploded,	tiny	 shards	raining	 down	on	 her	bed.	I	 heard	the	patter	of
rain	on	the	roof.
     "What	are	you	--?"
     "Don't	 bother	 lying,	 Ethan.	I	 know	 what	you	 and	your	 library	 partner	 were
doing	outside	Exile."	 The	voice	in	my	head	was	sharp	and	bitter.
     I	heard	you.	You	were	Kelting.	 "Blue	eyes	and	blond	hair"?	 Sound	familiar?
     She	was	right.	I	was	Kelting,	 and	she'd	heard	every	word.
     Nothing	happened.
     The	chandelier	crashed	onto	her	bed,	missing	me	by	inches.	The	floor	seemed
to	drop	out	from	under	me.	She'd	heard	me.

170
     Nothing	happened?	Did	 you	think	 I	wouldn't	 know?	Did	 you	think	I	 wouldn't
feel	it?
     It	 was	worse	than	looking	 Reece	in	the	 eye.	Lena	could	 see	everything,	and
she	didn't	need	her	powers	to	do	it.
     "I	 lost	it	when	I	saw	you	with	 that	guy	John,	and	I	wasn't	thinking."
     "You	 can	tell	 yourself	that,	but	 everything	happens	for	a	reason.	You	 almost
kissed	her,	and	you	did	it	because	you	wanted	to."
     Maybe	I	just	wanted	to	piss	you	off,	because	I	saw	you	with	another	guy.
     Be	careful	what	you	wish	for.
     I	searched	her	face,	the	dark	circles	around	her	eyes,	the	sadness.
     The	green	eyes	I	loved	so	much	were	gone	--	changed	into	the	golden	eyes	of
a	Dark	Caster.
     What	are	you	doing	with	 me,	Ethan?
     I	don't	know	anymore.
     Lena's	face	fell	 for	 a	second,	but	 she	caught	herself.	"You've	 been	dying	 to
get	that	out,	haven't	you?	Now	 you	can	run	 off	with	 your	 little	 Mortal	 girlfriend
guilt-free."	 She	said	Mortal	 as	if	 she	could	 hardly	stand	to	 say	the	word.	 "I	 bet
you	can't	 wait	 to	 hang	 out	 at	the	 lake	 with	 her."	 Lena	 was	 seething.	Whole
sections	of	ceiling	were	beginning	to	cave,	where	the	chandelier	had	fallen.
     Whatever	pain	she	might	have	been	feeling	was	totally	 eclipsed	by	her	anger.
"You'll	 be	back	on	the	basketball	team	by	the	time	school	starts,	and	she	can	join
the	cheer	squad.	Emily	and	Savannah	will	love	her."
     I	 heard	 a	cracking	 sound,	 and	 another	stretch	 of	 drywall	  smashed	to	 the
ground	next	to	me.
     My	 chest	tightened.	Lena	was	wrong,	but	I	 couldn't	help	but	think	 about	how
easy	it	would	be	to	date	a	regular	girl,	a	Mortal	 girl.
     I	always	knew	that's	what	you	wanted.	Now	you	can	have	it.
     Another	 crash.	Now	  I	 was	covered	 with	 the	 fine	 white	 dust	 of	 her	 fallen
ceiling,	broken	chunks	scattered	on	the	floor	around	me.
     She	was	fighting	back	tears.
     That's	not	what	I	meant,	and	you	know	it.
     Do	I?	 All	I	 know	is	that	 it	shouldn't	be	so	hard.	 Loving	someone	shouldn't	be
so	hard.
     I	never	cared	about	that.
     I	felt	 her	fading	away,	pushing	me	out	of	 her	mind	and	out	of	 her	heart.	"You
belong	with	 someone	like	  you,	and	 I	 belong	with	  someone	like	 me,	someone
who	understands	what	I'm	 going	 through.	I'm	 not	 the	same	person	I	was	a	few
months	ago,	but	I	guess	we	both	know	that."
     Why	 can't	 you	 stop	 punishing	  yourself,	 Lena?	 It	  wasn't	 your	 fault.	  You

171
couldn't	have	saved	him.
     You	don't	know	what	you're	talking	 about.
     I	know	 you	think	it's	 your	fault	 your	uncle's	dead,	and	that	 torturing	 yourself
is	some	kind	of	penance.
     There's	no	penance	for	what	I	did.
     She	started	to	turn	away.
     Don't	run	 away.
     I'm	not	running.	 I'm	already	 gone.
     I	 could	 barely	 hear	her	voice	 in	 my	 head.	I	 moved	 closer	to	 her.	 It	 didn't
matter	what	she'd	done	or	 if	 things	between	us	were	 over.	I	 couldn't	 watch	her
destroy	herself.
     I	 pulled	 her	 to	 my	 chest	and	wrapped	 my	 arms	 around	her,	 like	 she	was
drowning	and	I	 just	wanted	to	get	her	out	of	the	water.	 I	could	feel	 every	inch	of
her	burning	cold	 against	me.	Her	 fingertips	 brushed	mine.	My	 chest	was	 numb
where	her	face	pressed	into	it.
     It	doesn't	matter	if	 we're	together	or	not.	You're	not	one	of	them,	L.
     I'm	not	one	of	you	either.
     Her	last	 words	were	a	whisper.	 I	 tangled	my	hands	into	 her	hair.	 There	was
no	part	of	me	that	could	let	go.	I	 think	she	was	crying,	but	 I	couldn't	tell	 for	sure.
As	I	watched	the	ceiling,	 the	last	bits	of	 plaster	around	the	hole	began	to	splinter
into	a	thousand	fissures,	as	if	the	rest	of	the	roof	might	fall	 in	on	us	any	minute.
     So	this	is	it?
     It	 was,	but	I	didn't	 want	her	to	 answer.	I	wanted	to	stay	in	 this	moment	 for	a
little	 while	 longer.	I	 wanted	to	hold	 on	to	 her	and	pretend	she	was	still	 mine	to
hold.
     "My	 family	  leaves	in	two	 days.	By	 the	time	 they	wake	up	 tomorrow,	 I'll	 be
gone."
     "L,	 you	can't	--"
     She	touched	my	mouth.	 "If	 you	ever	 loved	me,	and	I	 know	 you	did,	leave	 it
alone.	I'm	not	going	to	let	any	more	people	I	care	about	die	because	of	me."
     "Lena."
     "This	 is	my	curse.	It's	mine.	Let	me	have	it."
     "What	if	 I	say	no?"
     She	looked	at	me,	her	whole	face	darkening	into	 a	single	shadow.	"You	 don't
have	a	choice.	If	you	 come	by	Ravenwood	tomorrow,	 I	can	guarantee	you	won't
feel	like	talking.	 And	you	 won't	be	able	to	either."
     "Are	 you	saying	you're	 going	to	 put	a	Cast	on	me?"	It	 was	an	unspoken	line
between	us	she	had	never	crossed.
     She	smiled	 and	put	 her	finger	 over	 my	 lips.	 "Silentium.	 Latin	 for	 'silence,'

172
which	is	what	you'll	 hear	if	you	try	 to	tell	 anyone	I'm	leaving	before	I	go."
     "You	 wouldn't."
     "I	 just	did."
     Finally.	 Here	we	were.	The	 only	thing	 left	 between	us	was	the	unimaginable
power	she	had	 never	used	against	me.	 Her	eyes	flared	 gold	 and	bright.	  There
wasn't	a	trace	of	green.	I	knew	she	meant	every	word.
     "Swear	you	 won't	come	back	here."	 Lena	slipped	out	of	 my	arms	and	turned
away	from	 me.	 She	didn't	 want	to	 show	 me	her	eyes	anymore,	 and	I	 couldn't
stand	to	see	them.
     "I	 swear."
     She	didn't	 say	a	 word.	 She	nodded	and	 wiped	 the	tears	running	 down	 her
face.	By	the	time	I	walked	 away,	it	was	raining	plaster.




I	walked	 through	the	halls	 of	Ravenwood	 one	last	time.	The	 house	grew	darker
and	darker	the	farther	I	 went.	Lena	 was	going.	Macon	 was	gone.	Everyone	was
leaving,	 and	 the	 house	felt	  dead.	 I	 dragged	 my	 fingers	  along	 the	 polished
mahogany	banister.	I	wanted	 to	remember	the	 smell	of	 the	varnish,	the	 smooth
feel	 of	 the	 old	 wood,	 maybe	 the	 faintest	 smell	 of	 Macon's	 imported	 cigars,
Confederate	jasmine,	blood	oranges,	and	books.
     I	 stopped	in	 front	 of	 Macon's	 bedroom	door.	 Painted	a	 flat	 black,	it	 could
have	been	any	door	in	the	house.	But	it	wasn't	any	door,	and	Boo	was	sleeping	in
front	of	it,	 waiting	 for	a	master	who	was	never	coming	home.	He	didn't	 look	like
a	wolf	anymore,	just	 a	regular	dog.	Without	 Macon,	he	was	as	lost	as	Lena.	Boo
looked	up	at	me,	barely	moving	his	head.
     I	put	my	 hand	on	the	doorknob	and	pushed	the	door	open.	Macon's	room	was
exactly	as	I	remembered.	No	one	had	dared	to	put	a	sheet	over	anything	in	 here.
The	ebony	 four-poster	bed	 in	 the	center	of	 the	room	 shined,	 as	if	 it	 had	been
lacquered	a	thousand	times	 by	House	 or	Kitchen,	 Ravenwood's	 invisible	 staff.
Black	plantation	 shutters	kept	the	room	completely	 dark,	so	it	was	impossible	 to
tell	day	 from	 night.	 Tall	 candlesticks	held	 black	 candles,	and	a	black	 wrought
iron	 chandelier	hung	 from	 the	 ceiling.	 I	 recognized	the	 Caster	pattern	 burned
into	the	iron.	At	 first	I	 couldn't	place	it,	but	then	I	 remembered.
     I	 had	seen	it	 on	Ridley	 and	John	 Breed,	and	at	 Exile.	 The	mark	 of	 a	Dark
Caster.	The	tattoo	 they	all	 shared.	Each	one	looked	 different	 yet	 unmistakably
similar.	More	 like	a	brand	than	a	tattoo,	as	if	 it	had	been	burned	into	them	rather
than	inked.

173
     I	 shuddered	and	picked	up	a	small	 object	from	 the	top	 of	a	black	 dresser.	It
was	a	framed	photograph	 of	Macon	 and	a	woman.	 I	could	 see	Macon	standing
next	 to	 her,	 but	 it	 was	 dark	 and	 I	 could	 only	  make	out	  the	outline	  of	 her
silhouette,	a	shadow	caught	on	film.	I	wondered	if	 it	was	Jane.
     How	 many	secrets	had	Macon	 carried	to	 his	grave?	I	 tried	 to	put	the	 frame
back,	but	it	 was	 so	dark	I	 misjudged	 the	distance	and	 the	picture	 fell.	 When	 I
bent	to	 pick	 it	up,	 I	 noticed	 the	corner	of	 the	 rug	was	 flipped	 back.	It	 looked
exactly	like	the	rug	I	 had	seen	in	Macon's	room	in	the	Tunnels.
     I	 lifted	 up	the	rug,	 and	underneath	there	was	a	perfect	rectangle	cut	into	 the
floorboards,	 big	 enough	 for	 a	 man.	It	  was	 another	door	 into	  the	Tunnels.	 I
yanked	on	 the	floorboard,	  and	it	 came	loose.	 I	 could	 see	down	 into	 Macon's
study,	but	there	were	no	stairs,	and	the	 stone	floor	looked	 too	far	 down	to	jump
without	risking	 serious	head	trauma.
     I	remembered	the	cloaked	door	to	 the	Lunae	Libri.	 There	was	no	way	to	 find
out,	except	to	try.	 I	held	on	to	 the	edge	of	the	bed	and	stepped	down	carefully.	I
stumbled	for	a	second,	then	felt	something	solid	under	my	foot.	 A	step.	Though	I
couldn't	see	it,	 I	 could	 feel	the	 splintery	 wooden	stair	 under	my	 feet.	 Seconds
later,	I	was	standing	on	the	stone	floor	of	Macon's	study.
     He	 didn't	 spend	 all	 of	 his	 days	 sleeping.	 He	spent	 them	 in	 the	 Tunnels,
probably	with	 Marian.	 I	 could	 picture	 the	two	 of	them	 looking	 up	 obscure	old
Caster	legends,	 debating	antebellum	 garden	 formations,	 having	  tea.	She	 had
probably	spent	more	time	with	Macon	 than	anyone,	except	Lena.
     I	wondered	if	 Marian	 was	the	woman	in	 the	picture	and	her	name	was	really
Jane.	I	hadn't	considered	it	before,	but	 it	would	 explain	 a	lot	of	 things.	Why	 the
countless	brown	library	 packages	were	kept	neatly	piled	 in	Macon's	study.	 Why
a	Duke	professor	would	be	hiding	 out	as	a	librarian,	even	as	a	Keeper,	in	a	town
like	 Gatlin.	 Why	 Marian	 and	Macon	 were	inseparable	so	much	 of	the	 time,	 at
least	for	a	reclusive	Incubus	who	didn't	go	anywhere.
     Maybe	they	had	loved	each	other	all	these	years.
     I	 looked	around	 the	room	 until	 I	saw	 it,	the	 wooden	box	 that	held	 Macon's
thoughts	and	secrets.	It	was	on	the	shelf	where	Marian	had	left	it.
     I	closed	my	eyes	and	reached	for	it	--

    It	 was	the	thing	 Macon	wanted	least	and	 most	--	to	see	Jane	one	last	time.	It
    had	 been	weeks	since	he'd	 seen	her,	 unless	you	counted	 the	nights	 he	had
    followed	 her	home	from	the	library,	 watching	 her	from	a	 distance,	wishing	he
    could	 touch	her.
        Not	 now,	 not	 when	the	 Transformation	 was	 so	close.	But	 she	was	 here,
    even	though	he'd	told	 her	to	stay	away.	"Jane,	you	have	to	get	out	of	here.	It's

174
not	safe."
   She	walked	 slowly	across	the	 room	to	 where	he	was	standing.	"Don't	  you
understand?	I	can't	stay	away."
   "I	 know."	 He	drew	her	to	him	and	kissed	her,	one	last	time.
   Macon	 took	something	out	 of	a	small	 box	in	the	back	 of	his	closet.	He	 put
the	object	 in	 Jane's	hand,	 closing	her	 fingers	 around	 it.	 It	 was	 round	 and
smooth,	a	perfect	sphere.	He	closed	his	hand	around	hers,	his	voice	grave.	"I
can't	protect	you	 after	the	Transformation,	 not	 from	the	one	thing	 that	 poses
the	greatest	threat	 to	your	 safety.	Me."	 Macon	 looked	down	 at	their	 hands,
gently	cradling	 the	object	he	had	hidden	so	carefully.	 "If	 something	happens,
and	you're	in	danger	...	use	this."
   Jane	opened	her	hand.	 The	sphere	was	black	and	opalescent,	like	 a	pearl.
But	as	she	watched,	the	sphere	began	to	change	and	glow.	She	could	feel	the
buzz	of	tiny	vibrations	emanating	from	 it.	"What	is	it?"
   Macon	 stepped	back,	as	if	 he	didn't	want	 to	touch	 the	orb	now	 that	it	 had
come	to	life.	"It's	an	Arclight."
   "What	 is	it	for?"
   "If	  the	time	comes	when	I	 become	a	danger	 to	you,	 you'll	 be	defenseless.
There's	no	way	you	will	 be	able	 to	kill	 me	or	 hurt	me.	Only	 another	Incubus
can	do	that."
   Jane's	 eyes	clouded	over.	 Her	 voice	 was	a	 whisper.	"I	  could	 never	hurt
you."
   Macon	 reached	out	and	touched	her	face	tenderly.	"I	 know,	but	 even	if	you
wanted	to,	 it	 would	be	 impossible.	A	 Mortal	 cannot	 kill	 an	 Incubus.	 That's
why	you	need	the	Arclight.	  It's	the	 only	thing	 that	can	 contain	my	 kind.	The
only	way	you	would	be	able	to	stop	me	if	--"
   "What	 do	you	mean,	contain?"
   Macon	 turned	 away.	"It's	  like	a	 cage,	Jane.	The	only	 cage	that	 can	hold
us."
   Jane	looked	down	 at	the	dark	orb	 glowing	 in	her	palm.	Now	 that	she	knew
what	it	was,	it	 felt	 as	if	it	 was	burning	 a	hole	in	 her	hand	and	her	heart.	 She
dropped	it	 on	his	 desk,	and	it	 rolled	 across	 the	tabletop,	 its	glow	 fading	 to
black.	"You	think	I'm	 going	to	imprison	 you	in	that	thing,	like	 an	animal?"
   "I'll	  be	worse	than	an	animal."
   Tears	 ran	down	 Jane's	face	and	over	her	 lips.	 She	grabbed	Macon's	arm,
forcing	him	to	face	her.	"How	 long	would	 you	be	in	there?"
   "Most	 likely,	 forever."
   She	shook	her	head.	"I	won't	do	it.	 I	would	never	condemn	you	to	that."
   It	 looked	 as	if	 tears	 were	welling	  up	in	 Macon's	 eyes,	even	though	Jane

175
    knew	it	 was	impossible.	He	had	no	 tears	to	shed,	yet	she	swore	she	could	see
    them	 glistening.	 "If	 something	happened	to	you,	 if	I	 hurt	 you,	you	 would	be
    condemning	me	to	a	 fate,	an	eternity,	far	 worse	than	anything	 I	would	find	 in
    here."	 Macon	picked	up	the	Arclight	 and	held	it	 up	between	them.	"If	the	time
    comes	and	you	have	to	use	it,	you	have	to	promise	me	you	will."
        Jane	choked	back	her	tears,	her	voice	shaking.	"I	 don't	know	if	I	 --"
        Macon	 rested	his	 forehead	against	 hers.	"Promise	 me,	Janie.	 If	 you	love
    me,	promise	me."
        Jane	buried	 her	face	in	his	cool	neck.	She	took	a	deep	breath.	"I	promise."
        Macon	  raised	 his	head	 and	 looked	over	 her	 shoulder.	 "A	 promise	 is	 a
    promise,	 Ethan."




I	woke	 up	lying	 on	 a	bed.	There	was	light	 streaming	in	 a	window,	 so	I	 knew	 I
wasn't	in	Macon's	study	 anymore.	I	stared	at	the	ceiling,	 but	 there	was	no	crazy
black	chandelier,	so	I	wasn't	in	his	room	at	Ravenwood	either.
     I	 sat	 up,	groggy	  and	confused.	 I	 was	 in	 my	 own	 bed,	 in	 my	 room.	 The
window	was	open,	and	the	morning	light	 was	shining	 into	my	eyes.	How	 could	I
have	passed	out	there	and	 ended	up	 here,	hours	later?	 What	had	 happened	to
space	and	time	 and	all	 the	 physics	 in	 between?	What	 Caster	or	 Incubus	 was
powerful	enough	to	do	that?
     The	visions	had	never	affected	me	like	this	before.	Both	 Abraham	and	Macon
had	seen	me.	How	was	that	possible?	What	 was	Macon	 trying	 to	tell	 me?	Why
did	he	 want	me	 to	see	these	visions?	I	 couldn't	 put	 it	 together,	except	for	 one
thing.	Either	the	visions	were	changing,	or	I	 was.	Lena	had	made	sure	of	that.

176
6.17	

177
                                               Inheritance



I	 stayed	away	from	Ravenwood,	like	I	promised.	By	morning,	I	 didn't	know
where	Lena	was	or	where	she	was	headed.	I	wondered	if	John	and	Ridley	were
with	her.
    The	only	thing	I	knew	was	Lena	had	waited	all	her	life	to	take	charge	of	her
own	destiny	--	to	find	a	way	to	Claim	herself,	in	spite	of	the	curse.	I	wasn't	going
to	be	the	person	to	stand	in	her	way	now.	And,	as	she	pointed	out,	she	wasn't
going	to	let	me.
    Which	left	 me	with	my	own	immediate	destiny:	to	stay	in	bed	all	day	feeling
sorry	for	myself.	Me	and	some	comic	books,	anything	but	Aquaman.
    Gatlin	had	planned	otherwise.
    The	county	fair	meant	a	day	of	pageants	and	pies	and	a	night	of	hooking	up,
if	you	were	lucky.	All	Souls	meant	something	else	entirely.	It	was	a	tradition	in
Gatlin.	Instead	of	spending	the	day	in	shorts	and	flip-flops	at	the	fair,	everyone
in	town	spent	all	day	at	the	graveyard	in	their	Sunday	best,	paying	their	respects
to	their	dead	relatives	and	everyone	else's.	Forget	the	fact	that	All	Souls	Day	was
actually	a	Catholic	holiday	that	took	place	in	November.	In	Gatlin,	we	had	our
own	way	of	doing	things.	So	we	turned	it	 into	our	own	day	of	 remembrance,
guilt,	and	general	competition	over	who	could	pile	the	most	plastic	flowers	and
angels	on	our	ancestors'	graves.
    Everyone	turned	out	on	 All	 Souls:	the	Baptists,	the	Methodists,	even	the
Evangelicals	and	the	Pentecostals.	It	used	to	be	that	the	only	two	people	in	town
who	didn't	show	up	at	the	cemetery	were	Amma,	who	spent	All	Souls	at	her	own
family	plot	in	Wader's	Creek,	and	Macon	Ravenwood.	I	wondered	if	those	two
had	ever	spent	All	Souls	together,	in	the	swamp	with	the	Greats.	I	doubted	it.	I
couldn't	imagine	Macon	or	the	Greats	appreciating	plastic	flowers.
    I	 wondered	if	the	Casters	had	their	own	version	of	All	 Souls,	if	Lena	was
somewhere	feeling	the	same	way	I	was	feeling	now.	Like	she	wanted	to	crawl
back	into	bed	and	hide	until	the	day	was	over.	Last	year,	I	didn't	make	it	to	All
Souls.	It	was	too	soon.	The	years	before	that,	I	spent	the	day	standing	over	the
graves	of	Wates	I	never	knew	or	barely	remembered.
    But	 today	I	would	 be	standing	over	the	grave	of	someone	I	thought	about
every	day.	My	mother.

178
Amma	was	in	 the	kitchen	in	her	 good	white	blouse,	the	one	with	 the	lace	collar,
and	 her	  long	  blue	 skirt.	   She	 was	 clutching	   one	 of	  those	  tiny	  old-lady
pocketbooks.	"You	best	get	on	over	to	your	aunts'."	She	pulled	on	the	knot	of	 my
tie	to	straighten	it.	"You	 know	how	 they	get	all	worked	up	if	 you're	late."
     "Yes,	 ma'am."	 I	 grabbed	 the	keys	 to	 my	 dad's	car	 off	 the	 counter.	 I	 had
dropped	him	off	 at	the	gates	of	 His	Garden	of	 Perpetual	Peace	an	hour	ago.	He
wanted	to	spend	some	time	alone	with	my	mom.
     "Wait	 a	second."
     I	froze.	 I	didn't	 want	Amma	 to	look	 into	 my	eyes.	I	 couldn't	talk	 about	Lena
right	now,	and	I	didn't	 want	her	to	try	to	get	it	 out	of	me.
     Amma	 rifled	  through	 her	 bag,	 pulling	  out	 something	 I	 couldn't	 see.	She
opened	my	hand,	and	the	chain	dropped	into	my	palm.	It	was	thin	 and	gold,	with
a	tiny	 bird	 hanging	 from	 the	 center.	It	 was	much	 smaller	 than	the	 ones	from
Macon's	 funeral,	 but	  I	  recognized	 it	  right	 away.	  "It's	  a	 sparrow	 for	  your
mamma."	Amma's	 eyes	 were	shiny,	 like	 the	 road	 after	the	 rain.	 "To	 Casters,
sparrows	mean	freedom,	but	to	 a	Seer,	they	mean	a	safe	journey.	 Sparrows	are
clever.	They	can	travel	a	long	ways,	but	they	always	find	 their	way	back	home."
     The	knot	 was	building	 in	 my	throat.	 "I	 don't	think	 my	 mom	will	  be	making
any	more	journeys."
     Amma	wiped	 her	eyes	and	snapped	her	purse	shut.	"Well,	you're	mighty	sure
a	everythin',	aren't	you,	Ethan	Wate?"




When	I	 pulled	up	 the	Sisters'	gravel	driveway	 and	opened	the	car	door,	 Lucille
sat	on	the	passenger's	seat	instead	of	jumping	out.	She	knew	where	we	were,	and
she	knew	 she'd	been	exiled.	  I	 coaxed	her	 out	 of	 the	 car,	but	 she	sat	 on	 the
sidewalk	where	the	cement	and	the	grass	met.
     Thelma	opened	the	 door	before	 I	knocked.	 She	looked	 right	 past	me	to	 the
cat,	crossing	her	arms.	"Hey	there,	Lucille."
     Lucille	 licked	 her	 paw	lazily,	 then	 busied	herself	with	 sniffing	  her	tail.	 She
might	as	well	 have	flipped	 Thelma	off.	 "You	 comin'	by	 to	say	you	like	 Amma's
biscuits	better	 'n	mine?"	 Lucille	 was	 the	only	 cat	I	 knew	 who	 ate	biscuits	and
gravy	instead	of	cat	food.	 She	meowed,	as	if	she	had	a	few	choice	words	 on	the
subject.
     Thelma	turned	to	me.	"Hey	 there,	Sweet	Meat.	I	heard	ya	pull	up."	She	kissed
me	on	the	cheek,	which	 always	 left	 bright	 pink	lip	 prints	 no	amount	 of	sweaty
palm	could	wipe	off.	 "Ya	all	 right?"

179
     Everyone	knew	 today	wasn't	going	 to	be	easy	for	 me.	"Yeah,	 I'm	 okay.	Are
the	Sisters	ready?"
     Thelma	 put	 her	 hand	 on	 her	hip.	  "Have	 those	 girls	 ever	 been	ready	 for
anything	in	their	 lives?"	Thelma	always	called	 the	Sisters	girls,	even	though	they
were	older	than	her,	twice	over.
     A	 voice	called	 from	the	 living	 room.	"Ethan?	 Is	that	you?	 Come	on	in	 here.
We	need	ya	ta	take	a	look	at	somethin'."
     There	was	no	telling	 what	that	meant.	They	could	be	making	 casts	out	of	The
Stars	and	Stripes	for	 a	family	  of	raccoons	or	 planning	 Aunt	 Prue's	fourth	--	 or
was	it	  fifth?	  --	  wedding.	 Of	  course,	 there	was	 a	 third	  possibility	  I	  hadn't
considered,	and	it	involved	me.
     "Come	on	in."	 Aunt	 Grace	waved	me	in.	"Mercy,	 give	him	 some	a	them	blue
stickers."	She	was	fanning	herself	with	 an	old	church	 program,	most	likely	 from
one	of	 their	 respective	 husbands'	funerals.	Since	 the	Sisters	 never	let	 anyone
actually	keep	one	at	the	service,	they	had	plenty	of	them	lying	around	the	house.
     "I'd	 get	'em	for	 you	myself,	 but	I	 hafta	be	careful	 on	account	a	my	 accident.
I've	got	 complications."	 It	was	 the	only	 thing	she	talked	 about	since	the	county
fair.	Half	 the	town	 knew	she	had	fainted,	but	 to	hear	Aunt	 Grace	tell	it,	 she	had
suffered	a	near-fatal	complication	 that	would	keep	Thelma,	Aunt	 Prue,	and	Aunt
Mercy	scurrying	 to	do	her	bidding	until	 the	end	of	her	days.
     "No,	 no.	Ethan's	color's	red,	I	told	ya.	Give	 him	the	red	ones."	Aunt	 Prue	was
scribbling	madly	 on	a	yellow	legal	pad.
     Aunt	 Mercy	  handed	me	a	 sheet	of	 stickers	 with	 red	 dots	 on	them.	 "Now
Ethan,	go	'round	 the	livin'	  room	 and	put	one	 a	these	stickers	underneath	a	 the
things	you	want.	 Go	on	now."	 She	stared	at	me	expectantly,	 as	if	 she	would	be
offended	if	I	 didn't	slap	one	of	them	on	her	forehead.
     "What	are	you	talking	 about,	Aunt	Mercy?"
     Aunt	Grace	pulled	 a	framed	photo	of	an	old	guy	in	 a	Confederate	uniform	off
the	wall.	 "This	 here's	Gen'ral	Robert	 Charles	Tyler,	 last	Rebel	 gen'ral	killed	 in
the	War	Between	the	States.	Give	me	 one	a	them	stickers.	This	 here'll	be	worth
somethin'."
     I	 had	no	 idea	what	 they	were	 into	 and	was	afraid	 to	 ask.	"We	 have	to	 get
going.	Did	you	 forget	it	was	All	 Souls?"
     Aunt	 Prue	frowned.	 "	 'Course	we	didn't	 forget.	 That's	why	 we're	gettin'	 our
affairs	in	order."
     "That's	 what	 the	 stickers	 are	for.	  Everyone's	got	 a	 color.	 Thelma's	 yella,
you're	red,	your	daddy's	blue."	Aunt	 Mercy	 paused,	as	if	she	had	lost	her	train	of
thought.
     Aunt	 Prue	silenced	her	 with	 a	look.	 She	didn't	 like	 being	interrupted.	 "You

180
put	those	little	 stickers	on	the	bottom	 a	the	things	you	want.	 That	way	 when	we
die,	Thelma'll	know	 exactly	who	gets	what."
     "It	 was	on	account	 a	All	 Souls	that	 we	got	ta	 thinkin'	 about	it."	 Aunt	 Grace
smiled	proudly.
     "I	 don't	 want	anything,	 and	none	of	 you	 are	dying."	 I	 dropped	the	 sheet	of
stickers	on	the	table.
     "Ethan,	 Wade'll	 be	here	 next	month,	 and	 he's	jus'	 as	greedy	as	a	 fox	 in	 a
henhouse.	You	 need	ta	 do	your	 choosin'	 first."	  Wade	 was	my	 Uncle	 Landis'
illegitimate	 son,	another	person	in	my	family	  who	would	 never	make	it	onto	 the
Wate	Family	Tree.
     There	was	really	 no	point	in	 arguing	with	 the	Sisters	when	they	got	like	 this.
So	I	 spent	the	 next	half	 hour	 putting	 little	  red	stickers	 underneath	unmatched
dining	room	chairs	and	Civil	 War	 memorabilia,	but	I	 still	 had	time	to	kill	 while	 I
waited	for	 the	Sisters	to	pick	out	 their	hats	for	 All	 Souls.	Choosing	the	right	 hat
was	serious	business,	and	most	of	the	ladies	 in	town	 had	already	been	down	 to
Charleston	to	 do	their	 shopping	 weeks	ago.	 To	see	them	 walking	 up	 the	 hill,
wearing	everything	 from	  peacock	feathers	to	 freshly	 cut	roses	on	 their	 heads,
you	would	 think	 the	ladies	 of	Gatlin	 were	 going	to	 a	garden	party	instead	 of	a
graveyard.
     The	place	was	a	mess.	Aunt	 Prue	must	have	made	Thelma	drag	down	 every
box	from	the	attic,	 full	 of	old	clothes,	quilts,	 and	photo	albums.	I	flipped	 through
the	pages	of	the	 album	on	 top.	Old	 pictures	were	 taped	onto	the	 brown	pages:
Aunt	Prue	and	her	 husbands,	Aunt	Mercy	 standing	in	 front	of	 her	old	 house	on
Dove	Street,	my	 house,	Wate's	Landing,	 back	 when	my	 granddad	was	a	kid.	 I
turned	the	last	page,	and	another	house	stared	back	at	me.
     Ravenwood	Manor.
     But	not	 the	Ravenwood	I	 knew.	This	was	a	Ravenwood	 fit	 for	the	Historical
Society	Registry.	  Cypress	trees	lined	  the	walk	  leading	 up	to	 the	 crisp	 white
veranda.	Every	pillar,	 every	shutter	was	freshly	painted.	There	were	 no	traces	of
the	  strangling	  overgrowth,	   the	  crooked	   stairs	  of	   Macon's	  Ravenwood.
Underneath	the	 photo,	 there	 was	 an	 inscription,	  carefully	  added	in	  delicate
handwriting.


                                    Ravenwood	       Manor,	      1865


     I	was	staring	at	Abraham's	Ravenwood.
     "Whatcha	 got	there?"	 Aunt	 Mercy	 shuffled	 in	 wearing	 the	biggest,	 pinkest

181
flamingo	 of	 a	hat	I'd	 ever	 seen.	There	was	some	kind	 of	 weird	 netting	 on	the
front,	 like	 a	 veil,	 topped	with	  a	very	 unrealistic	  bird	 perched	in	 a	 pink	 nest.
When	she	moved	the	slightest	bit,	 the	whole	thing	 kind	of	 flapped,	as	if	 it	could
fly	 right	off	 her	head.	No,	 this	wouldn't	 give	Savannah	and	the	cheer	squad	any
ammo.
     I	tried	 not	to	look	 at	the	flapping	 bird.	"It's	 an	old	photo	album.	 It	was	sitting
on	the	top	of	this	box."	I	 handed	the	album	to	her.
     "Prudence	Jane,	bring	me	my	spectacles!"
     There	was	some	banging	 around	in	 the	hall,	 and	Aunt	 Prue	appeared	in	the
doorway	 in	 an	equally	  large	and	 disturbing	 hat.	 This	 one	 was	black,	 with	  a
wraparound	veil	 that	made	Aunt	Prue	look	 like	 the	mother	of	 a	mob	boss	at	his
funeral.	"If	 you	wore	them	'round	your	neck,	like	 I	told	 ya	..."
     Either	Aunt	 Mercy	had	her	hearing	aid	turned	down	or	she	was	ignoring	Aunt
Prue.	"Look	 what	Ethan	found."	 The	book	 was	still	 open	to	the	same	page.	The
Ravenwood	of	the	past	stared	back	at	us.
     "Lord	 'ave	mercy,	 look	 at	that.	The	 Devil's	 workshop	 if	 I	ever	 saw	it."	 The
Sisters,	 and	 most	  of	  the	  old	  folks	  in	  Gatlin,	  were	  convinced	  Abraham
Ravenwood	 made	 some	 kind	  of	  deal	 with	  the	 Devil	  to	  save	 Ravenwood
Plantation	from	 General	 Sherman's	burning	 campaign	of	 1865,	which	  had	left
every	other	 plantation	 along	 the	river	 in	 ashes.	If	 the	 Sisters	only	 knew	 how
close	it	was	to	the	truth.
     "Ain't	  the	 only	 evil	 Abraham	 Ravenwood	 done."	 Aunt	 Prue	 backed	away
from	the	book.
     "What	 do	you	mean?"	Ninety	 percent	of	 what	the	Sisters	said	was	nonsense,
but	the	other	ten	percent	was	worth	 hearing.	The	Sisters	were	the	ones	who	had
told	me	about	my	 mysterious	ancestor,	Ethan	Carter	Wate,	 who	died	 during	the
Civil	 War.	Maybe	they	knew	something	about	Abraham	 Ravenwood.
     Aunt	Prue	shook	her	head.	"No	good	can	come	from	talkin'	 'bout	him."
     But	 Aunt	 Mercy	 could	 never	resist	 an	opportunity	 to	 defy	 her	older	 sister.
"Our	granddaddy	used	ta	say	Abraham	 Ravenwood	played	 on	the	wrong	 side	a
right	 and	wrong	  --	 tempted	 fate.	He	 was	 in	 league	 with	 the	 Devil	 all	  right,
practicin'	witchcraft,	 communin'	with	 evil	 spirits."
     "Mercy!	 You	 stop	all	that	talk!"
     "Stop	what?	Speakin'	the	truth?"
     "Don't	 you	drag	the	truth	inta	this	house!"	Aunt	 Prue	was	flustered.
     Aunt	 Mercy	looked	me	straight	 in	the	eye.	"But	the	Devil	 turned	on	him	 after
Abraham	had	done	his	biddin',	and	when	the	Devil	 was	done	with	him,	 Abraham
wasn't	even	a	man	anymore.	He	was	somethin'	else."
     As	far	 as	the	Sisters	were	concerned,	every	evil	 deed,	deception,	or	criminal

182
act	was	 the	 work	 of	 the	 Devil,	  and	 I	 wasn't	 going	 to	 try	 to	 convince	 them
otherwise.	Because	after	what	I'd	 seen	Abraham	Ravenwood	do,	I	 knew	he	was
more	than	evil.	I	also	knew	it	 had	nothing	to	do	with	 the	Devil.
     "Now	 you're	 tellin'	 tales,	Mercy	 Lynne,	 and	 you	best	quit	 before	 the	Good
Lord	strikes	 you	down	 here	in	 this	house,	on	All	  Souls,	a	all	 days.	And	 I	don't
want	ta	get	hit	by	 a	stray	bolt."	 Aunt	Prue	whacked	Aunt	 Mercy's	 chair	with	 her
cane.
     "You	 don't	think	 this	boy	 knows	'bout	the	 strange	goin's	on	in	Gatlin?"	 Aunt
Grace	appeared	in	the	doorway	in	 her	own	nightmarishly	 lavender	 hat.	Before	I
was	born,	 someone	made	the	mistake	 of	 telling	 Aunt	 Grace	lavender	 was	her
color,	and	nearly	everything	 she	wore	had	been	disproving	it	ever	since.	"No	use
in	tryin'	 ta	put	the	milk	back	in	the	jug	 after	it's	spilt."
     Aunt	 Prue	banged	her	cane	on	the	floor.	 They	were	speaking	in	 riddles,	like
Amma,	which	 meant	they	knew	 something.	Maybe	 they	didn't	know	 there	were
Casters	wandering	 around	 in	 the	 Tunnels	 below	 their	 house,	 but	 they	 knew
something.
     "Some	messes	can	be	cleaned	up	easier	than	others.	I	 don't	want	 any	part	 a
this	one."	Aunt	 Prue	pushed	past	Aunt	 Grace	as	she	left	the	room.	 "This	 ain't	a
day	ta	be	speakin'	ill	a	the	dead."
     Aunt	 Grace	shuffled	over	 toward	us.	I	 took	 her	elbow	and	guided	 her	to	the
couch.	Aunt	Mercy	 waited	for	 the	tapping	of	 Aunt	Prue's	cane	to	echo	down	the
hall.	"Is	she	gone?	I	don't	have	my	hearin'	aid	turned	up."
     Aunt	Grace	nodded.	"I	 think	so."
     The	two	 of	them	leaned	in	as	if	 they	were	about	to	 give	me	launch	codes	for
nuclear	missiles.	 "If	  I	 tell	 ya	 somethin',	you	 promise	 not	 ta	 tell	 your	 daddy?
'Cause	if	you	do,	we're	bound	ta	end	up	in	the	Home	for	 sure."	She	was	referring
to	the	Summerville	 Assisted	Seniors	House	--	the	seventh	circle	of	hell,	 as	far	as
the	Sisters	were	concerned.
     Aunt	Grace	nodded	in	agreement.
     "What	is	 it?	I	won't	say	anything	to	 my	dad.	I	promise."
     "Prudence	 Jane's	wrong."	  Aunt	  Mercy	  dropped	 her	 voice	 to	 a	 whisper.
"Abraham	Ravenwood's	still	 around,	sure	as	I'm	sittin'	here	today."
     I	 wanted	to	say	 they	were	crazy.	 Two	 ancient,	senile	old	 ladies	claiming	 to
see	a	man,	 or	 what	 most	people	 thought	 was	a	 man,	 no	one	 had	seen	for	  a
hundred	years.	"What	do	you	mean,	still	around?"
     "I	 saw	him	 with	  my	own	 eyes,	last	 year.	Behind	 the	church,	 a	all	 places!"
Aunt	Mercy	 fanned	herself	with	 her	handkerchief,	 as	if	she	might	faint	 from	 the
thought	of	 it.	 "After	 church	 on	Tuesdays,	we	 wait	 for	 Thelma	out	 in	 front,	 on
account	a	 she	 has	 ta	 teach	 Bible	  study	 down	 the	 way	  at	 First	 Methodist.

183
Anyhow,	 I	let	 Harlon	James	out	from	 inside	my	 pocketbook	so	he	could	stretch
his	little	 legs	--	you	 know	Prudence	Jane	makes	me	carry	him.	But	 soon	as	I	set
him	down,	he	ran	'round	the	back	a	the	church."
     "You	 know	that	dog	can't	mind	ta	save	his	life."	 Aunt	Grace	shook	her	head.
     Aunt	Mercy	 glanced	at	the	door	before	continuing.	"Well,	  I	had	ta	follow	 him
because	you	know	how	 Prudence	Jane	is	'bout	that	 dog.	So	I	 went	'round	 back
and	jus'	when	I	 turned	the	corner	ta	 holler	for	 Harlon	 James,	I	saw	it.	 Abraham
Ravenwood's	ghost.	Out	in	the	cemet'ry	behind	the	church.	Those	progressives	at
the	Round	Church	 in	 Charleston	got	one	 thing	right."	  Folks	in	 Charleston	said
the	Round	Church	was	built	 that	way	so	the	Devil	 couldn't	 hide	in	 the	corners.	I
never	pointed	out	 the	obvious,	that	 the	Devil	 usually	 had	no	problem	 marching
right	 down	 the	middle	  aisle,	as	 far	 as	some	of	 our	 local	 congregations	 were
concerned.
     "I	 saw	him,	too,"	 Aunt	 Grace	whispered.	"And	 I	know	 it	 was	him,	'cause	his
picture's	on	the	 wall	 down	 at	the	Historical	 Society,	 where	I	 play	 rummy	 with
the	girls.	 Right	 up	there	in	 the	Founders	Circle,	 on	 account	a	the	Ravenwoods
bein'	the	first	ones	in	Gatlin.	Abraham	 Ravenwood,	plain	as	day."
     Aunt	 Mercy	 shushed	her	sister.	With	 Aunt	 Prue	out	of	 the	room,	 it	 was	her
turn	 to	 call	 the	 shots.	 "It	  was	 him,	 all	  right.	  He	 was	 out	 there	 with	 Silas
Ravenwood's	boy.	 Not	 Macon	 --	 the	other	 one,	 Phinehas."	I	 remembered	the
name	from	the	Ravenwood	Family	Tree.	Hunting	 Phinehas	Ravenwood.
     "You	 mean	Hunting?"
     "Nobody	 called	that	boy	by	his	given	 name.	They	all	called	him	Phinehas.	It's
from	the	Bible.	 You	 know	 what	it	 means?"	She	paused	dramatically.	"Serpent's
tongue."
     For	a	second,	I	held	my	breath.
     "There	was	no	 mistakin'	 that	man's	ghost.	As	the	 Good	Lord	 as	my	witness,
we	cleared	outta	there	faster	than	a	cat	 with	 its	tail	 on	fire.	 Now,	 Lord	 knows	I
couldn't	move	like	that	these	days.	Not	since	my	complications	 ..."
     The	Sisters	were	 crazy,	but	 their	 brand	was	usually	 based	in	 crazy	history.
There	was	no	way	of	 knowing	 what	version	of	 the	truth	they	 were	telling,	 but	it
was	usually	a	version.	Any	 version	of	this	 story	was	dangerous.	I	couldn't	figure
it	out,	 but	if	 I	 had	learned	 anything	this	 year,	it	 was	that	 sooner	or	later	 I	 was
going	to	have	to.
     Lucille	  meowed,	scratching	 at	the	 screen	door.	 Guess	she'd	heard	enough.
Harlon	James	growled	from	under	the	couch.	For	the	first	 time,	I	 wondered	what
the	two	of	them	had	seen,	hanging	around	this	house	for	so	long.
     But	 not	  every	 dog	 was	 Boo	 Radley.	 Sometimes	 a	 dog	 was	 just	 a	 dog.
Sometimes	a	cat	was	just	 a	cat.	Still,	 I	 opened	the	screen	door	and	 stuck	a	red

184
sticker	on	Lucille's	 head.

185
6.17	

186
                                                   Keeping



If	 there	was	one	reliable	source	of	information	around	here,	it	was	the	folks	in
Gatlin.	On	 a	day	 like	 today,	you	didn't	 have	to	 look	too	 hard	to	 see	most
everyone	from	the	town	in	the	same	half	mile.	The	cemetery	was	packed	by	the
time	we	got	there,	late	as	usual	thanks	to	the	Sisters.	Lucille	wouldn't	get	in	the
Cadillac,	then	we	had	to	stop	at	Gardens	of	Eden	because	Aunt	Prue	wanted	to
get	flowers	for	 all	 her	late	husbands,	only	none	of	the	flowers	 looked	good
enough,	and	when	we	were	finally	back	in	the	car,	Aunt	Mercy	wouldn't	let	me
drive	over	twenty	miles	an	hour.	I	had	been	dreading	today	for	months.	Now	it
was	here.
    I	  trudged	up	the	sloping	 gravel	path	of	 His	 Garden	of	 Perpetual	Peace,
pushing	Aunt	Mercy's	wheelchair.	Thelma	was	behind	me,	with	Aunt	Prue	on
one	arm	and	Aunt	Grace	on	the	other.	Lucille	was	trailing	after	them,	picking	her
way	through	the	pebbles,	careful	to	keep	her	distance.	Aunt	Mercy's	patent-
leather	purse	swung	on	the	handle	of	her	wheelchair,	jabbing	me	in	the	gut	every
second	step.	I	was	already	sweating,	thinking	 about	that	wheelchair	getting
caught	in	the	thick	 summer	grass.	There	was	a	strong	possibility	Link	and	I
would	be	doing	the	fireman's	carry.
    We	made	it	up	the	rise	in	time	to	see	Emily	preening	in	her	new	white	halter
dress.	Every	girl	got	a	new	dress	for	All	Souls.	There	were	no	flip-flops	or	tank
tops,	only	your	scrubbed	Sunday	best.	It	was	like	an	extended	family	reunion,
only	ten	times	over	because	pretty	much	the	whole	town,	and	for	the	most	part
the	whole	county,	was	in	one	way	or	another	related	to	you,	your	neighbor,	or
your	neighbor's	neighbor.
    Emily	 was	giggling	and	hanging	all	over	Emory.	"Did	you	bring	any	beer?"
    Emory	opened	his	jacket,	revealing	a	silver	flask.	"Better	than	that."
    Eden,	Charlotte,	and	Savannah	were	holding	court	near	the	Snow	family	plot,
which	enjoyed	a	prime	location	in	the	center	of	the	rows	of	headstones.	It	was
covered	with	bright	plastic	flowers	and	cherubs.	There	was	even	a	little	plastic
fawn	nibbling	grass	next	to	the	tallest	headstone.	Decorating	graves	was	another
one	of	Gatlin's	contests	--	a	way	to	prove	that	you	and	your	family	members,
even	the	dead	ones,	were	better	than	your	neighbors	and	theirs.	People	went	all
out.	Plastic	wreaths	wrapped	in	green	nylon	vines,	shiny	rabbits	and	squirrels,
even	birdbaths,	so	hot	from	the	sun	they	 could	burn	the	skin	 right	 off	 your

187
fingers.	There	was	no	overdoing	it.	The	tackier,	the	better.
     My	 mom	 used	to	laugh	about	her	 favorites.	"They're	 still	 lifes,	 works	 of	art
like	the	ones	painted	by	 the	Dutch	and	Flemish	 masters,	only	these	are	made	of
plastic.	The	sentiment's	the	same."	My	 mom	could	laugh	 at	the	worst	of	Gatlin's
traditions	and	 respect	the	best	of	 them.	Maybe	 that's	how	 she	survived	 around
here.
     She	was	 particularly	  partial	 to	 the	 glow-in-the-dark	  crosses	that	 lit	 up	 at
night.	 Some	 summer	 evenings,	 the	 two	 of	 us	 would	  lie	 on	  the	 hill	  in	 the
cemetery	and	watch	them	light	up	at	dusk,	as	if	they	were	stars.	Once	I	asked	her
why	she	liked	to	lie	 out	there.	"This	is	history,	 Ethan.	The	history	of	families,	 the
people	they	loved,	 the	ones	they	lost.	 Those	crosses,	those	silly	 plastic	flowers
and	animals,	they	were	put	there	to	remind	us	of	someone	who	is	missed.	Which
is	a	beautiful	thing	 to	see,	and	it's	our	job	to	see	it."	We	 never	told	my	dad	about
those	nights	in	the	cemetery.	It	was	one	of	those	things	we	did	alone.
     I	would	 have	to	walk	past	most	of	Jackson	High	and	step	over	a	plastic	rabbit
or	two	 to	get	to	the	Wate	 family	 plot	 on	the	outskirts	 of	the	lawn.	 That	was	the
other	thing	about	All	  Souls.	There	wasn't	actually	 much	remembering	involved.
In	another	hour,	 everyone	over	twenty-one	 would	be	standing	 around	gossiping
about	the	living,	 right	after	they	 finished	gossiping	about	the	dead,	and	everyone
under	thirty	 would	be	getting	 wasted	behind	the	mausoleums.	Everyone	but	me.
I'd	be	too	busy	remembering.
     "Hey,	  man."	  Link	  jogged	  up	 alongside	 me	  and	 smiled	  at	 the	 Sisters.
"Afternoon,	 ma'ams."
     "How	 are	you	 today,	Wesley?	 You're	growin'	 like	 a	 weed,	aren't	ya?"	Aunt
Prue	was	huffing	and	sweating.
     "Yes,	 ma'am."	Rosalie	 Watkins	 was	standing	 behind	Link,	  waving	 at	Aunt
Prue.
     "Ethan,	why	 don't	 you	go	 on	with	 Wesley?	I	 see	Rosalie,	and	I	 need	to	ask
her	what	kinda	flour	 she	uses	in	her	hummingbird	cake."	Aunt	Prue	dug	her	cane
into	the	grass,	and	Thelma	helped	Aunt	Mercy	out	of	her	wheelchair.
     "You	 sure	you'll	be	all	right?"
     Aunt	 Prue	scowled	 at	 me.	"	 'Course	we'll	  be	all	 right.	 We've	 been	lookin'
after	ourselves	since	before	you	were	born."
     "Since	before	your	daddy	was	born,"	 Aunt	Grace	corrected.
     "I	 almost	 forgot."	 Aunt	 Prue	 opened	her	pocketbook	 and	fished	 something
out.	"Found	 that	darned	cat's	tag."	 She	looked	 down	at	 Lucille	 disapprovingly.
"Not	 that	it	 helped	us	any.	Not	 like	 some	people	care	about	years	a	loyalty	 and
all	those	walks	on	your	very	own	 clothesline.	I	reckon	it	 doesn't	buy	you	a	drop	a
gratitude,	when	 it	 comes	ta	some	people."	 The	 cat	wandered	away	 without	 so

188
much	as	a	look	back.
     I	looked	 at	the	metal	 tag	with	 Lucille's	 name	etched	into	it,	 and	slipped	it	 in
my	pocket.	"The	ring	 is	missing."
     "Best	put	it	 in	your	 wallet,	 in	case	you	have	ta	prove	she	doesn't	have	rabies.
She's	a	biter.	Thelma'll	see	'bout	fetchin'	another	one."
     "Thanks."
     The	Sisters	linked	 arms,	and	those	three	gargantuan	hats	knocked	up	against
each	other	as	they	shuffled	toward	their	friends.	Even	the	Sisters	had	friends.	My
life	sucked.
     "Shawn	 and	 Earl	 brought	  some	beer	 and	 Jim	 Beam.	 Everyone's	 meetin'
behind	the	Honeycutt	crypt."	 At	least	I	had	Link.
     We	 both	knew	 I	 wouldn't	 be	 getting	 drunk	 anywhere.	In	 a	 few	 minutes,	I
would	be	 standing	over	my	 dead	mother's	grave.	I'd	 be	thinking	 about	 the	way
she	always	laughed	 when	I	 told	 her	about	 Mr.	 Lee	and	 his	twisted	 version	 of
U.S.	History,	 or	U.S.	 Hysteria,	as	she	called	it.	 How	 she	and	my	dad	danced	to
James	Taylor	 in	our	 kitchen	 in	 bare	feet.	 How	 she	knew	 exactly	 what	 to	 say
when	everything	 was	going	wrong,	 like	 when	my	 ex-girlfriend	  would	rather	 be
with	some	kind	of	 mutant	Supernatural	than	with	me.
     Link	 put	his	hand	on	my	shoulder.	"You	 okay?"
     "Yeah,	 I'm	 fine.	  Let's	 walk	 around."	 I	 would	  be	standing	 over	 her	 grave
today,	but	I	wasn't	ready.	Not	yet.
     L,	where	are	--
     I	 caught	myself	 and	 tried	 to	pull	  my	mind	 away.	 I	 don't	 know	 why	 I	 still
reached	for	her.	Habit,	 I	guess.	But	instead	of	 Lena's	voice,	I	 heard	Savannah's.
She	stood	in	 front	  of	 me,	wearing	 way	 too	 much	 makeup	but	 somehow	 still
managing	to	look	 pretty.	She	was	all	glossy	 hair	and	gloppy	 eyelashes	and	tied-
up	little	straps	on	her	sundress	that	were	probably	only	there	to	make	a	guy	think
about	untying	 them.	I	 mean,	if	 you	didn't	 know	 what	a	bitch	 she	was,	or	didn't
care.
     "I'm	   real	  sorry	  about	 your	   mamma,	  Ethan."	  She	 cleared	  her	  throat
awkwardly.	  Her	 mother	  probably	 made	 her	 come	  over	 here,	 pillar	  of	  the
community	that	Mrs.	 Snow	was.	Tonight,	 though	it	 was	barely	over	a	year	since
my	mom	died,	I'd	 find	more	than	one	casserole	on	our	doorstep,	just	like	the	day
after	her	funeral.	 Time	 passed	slowly	in	 Gatlin,	 kind	 of	like	 dog	 years,	only	 in
reverse.	And	like	the	day	after	the	funeral,	Amma	 would	leave	every	one	of	them
out	there	for	the	possums.
     Seems	possums	never	get	tired	of	ham	'n'	apple	casserole.
     It	 was	still	 the	nicest	thing	 Savannah	had	said	to	me	since	September.	Even
though	I	 didn't	care	what	 she	thought	of	 me,	today	it	 was	nice	to	 have	one	less

189
thing	to	feel	like	 crap	about.	"Thanks."
     Savannah	smiled	 her	fake	 smile	 and	walked	 off,	 her	 high	 heels	jerking	 as
they	got	 stuck	in	 the	grass.	Link	  loosened	his	tie,	 which	 was	crooked	 and	too
short.	I	 recognized	it	 from	 sixth-grade	graduation.	Underneath	 it,	he	 had	snuck
out	of	the	house	wearing	a	T-shirt	that	said	I'M	WITH	STUPID,	with	arrows	pointing
in	all	 different	 directions.	 It	 pretty	 much	summed	up	 how	I	 was	feeling	 today,
too.	Surrounded	by	stupid.
     The	hits	 kept	 on	coming.	 Maybe	 folks	 were	feeling	 guilty	  because	I	had	a
crazy	 father	 and	 a	 dead	mother.	  More	 likely,	  they	  were	 scared	of	  Amma.
Anyway,	 I	 must	have	 surpassed	Loretta	West,	 a	three-time	 widow	 whose	 last
husband	died	after	a	gator	bit	 a	hole	in	his	 stomach,	as	the	most	pathetic	person
at	All	 Souls.	If	they	 gave	out	prizes,	I	would've	 won	the	blue	ribbon.	 I	could	 tell
by	the	way	 folks	shook	 their	heads	when	I	walked	 by.	What	 a	pity,	Ethan	 Wate
doesn't	have	a	mamma	anymore.
     It	 was	the	same	way	 Mrs.	 Lincoln	 was	 shaking	her	 head	right	 now,	as	she
headed	my	way,	with	 You	Poor	 Misguided	 Motherless	Boy	written	 on	 her	face.
Link	 ducked	out	before	she	hit	her	target.	"Ethan,	 I	wanted	to	say	how	 much	we
all	miss	your	 mamma."	I	 wasn't	sure	who	she	was	talking	about	--	 her	friends	in
the	DAR,	who	couldn't	 stand	my	mom,	or	the	women	who	sat	around	the	Snip	'n'
Curl	 talking	 about	 how	 my	 mother	read	 too	 many	books	 and	 no	good	 could
come	from	that.	Mrs.	Lincoln	 blotted	 a	nonexistent	tear	from	her	eye.	"She	was	a
good	woman.	 You	know,	 I	 remember	how	 much	 she	loved	to	 garden.	Always
outside	tendin'	her	roses	with	her	tender	heart."
     "Yes,	ma'am."
     The	 closest	 my	  mom	 ever	 came	 to	 gardening	 was	 when	  she	sprinkled
cayenne	pepper	all	over	the	tomatoes	so	my	dad	wouldn't	kill	 the	rabbit	that	kept
eating	 them.	 The	 roses	were	 Amma's.	  Everyone	 knew	 that.	  I	 wished	 Mrs.
Lincoln	 would	 try	that	 "tender	heart"	comment	 to	Amma's	 face.	"I	 like	 to	think
she's	right	up	there	with	 the	angels,	tendin'	 that	old,	sweet	Garden	a	 Eden	now.
Prunin'	and	trimmin'	 the	Tree	a	Knowledge,	with	the	cherubs	and	the	--"
     Snakes?
     "I've	 gotta	 go	 find	 my	 dad,	 ma'am."	I	 had	 to	 get	away	 from	 Link's	  mom
before	lightning	struck	 her	--	or	me,	for	wanting	 it	to.
     Her	voice	trailed	 after	me.	"Tell	 your	daddy	I'm	 gonna	drop	him	off	 one	a	my
famous	ham	'n'	 apple	casseroles!"	That	 sealed	the	deal.	 I	was	 getting	 the	blue
ribbon	for	 sure.	I	couldn't	get	away	from	 her	fast	enough.	But	at	All	  Souls,	there
was	no	escape.	As	 soon	as	you	 made	it	 past	 one	creepy	relative	 or	 neighbor,
there	was	another	one	right	around	the	corner.	Or,	in	Link's	 case,	another	creepy
parent.

190
     Link's	 dad	slung	his	arm	around	Tom	Watkins'	neck.	"Earl	 was	the	best	of	us.
He	had	the	best	uniform,	the	best	battle	formations	 --"	 Link's	dad	choked	back	a
drunken	sob.	"And	 he	 made	the	best	ammunition."	 Coincidently,	  Big	 Earl	was
killed	 making	 some	of	 that	 ammo,	 and	Mr.	  Lincoln	 had	 replaced	him	 as	 the
leader	of	the	Cavalry,	 in	 the	Reenactment	of	the	Battle	 of	Honey	 Hill.	 Some	of
that	guilt	was	here	today	in	the	form	of	 whiskey.
     "I	 wanted	to	bring	my	 gun	and	give	Earl	a	proper	salute,	but	Dammit	 Doreen
hid	it	 from	 me."	Ronnie	 Weeks'	wife	 was	generally	 known	as	Dammit	 Doreen,
sometimes	shortened	to	DD,	on	account	of	that's	all	 he	ever	said	to	her.	He	took
another	swig	of	whiskey.
     "To	 Earl!"	 They	 grabbed	each	other	around	the	neck,	 raising	their	 cans	and
bottles	over	Earl's	grave.	 Beer	and	Wild	 Turkey	 sloshed	all	over	 the	headstone,
Gatlin's	tribute	to	the	fallen.
     "Jeez,	I	 hope	we	 don't	 end	up	 like	 that	 one	day."	 Link	  slunk	 away,	and	 I
followed.	 His	parents	never	failed	 to	 embarrass	him.	"Why	 couldn't	 my	parents
be	like	yours?"
     "You	 mean	mental?	Or	 gone?	No	offense,	but	 I	think	 you've	 got	the	mental
part	covered."
     "Your	 dad's	not	 mental	anymore,	at	least	 not	more	than	 anyone	else	around
here.	No	one	cares	if	you	walk	around	in	your	 pajamas	when	your	wife	just	 died.
My	folks	 don't	have	an	excuse.	They're	a	few	pistons	short	of	an	engine."
     "We	 won't	 end	up	 like	 that.	 Because	you'll	 be	a	 famous	drummer	 in	 New
York,	 and	 I'll	   be	 doing	 --	 I	  don't	 know,	  something	 that	 doesn't	 involve	  a
Confederate	uniform	and	Wild	 Turkey."	 I	 tried	to	 sound	convincing,	but	 I	didn't
know	 which	 was	 more	unlikely	  --	 Link	  becoming	 a	 famous	musician	 or	 me
getting	out	of	Gatlin.
     I	 still	 had	 the	map	 on	my	 bedroom	 wall,	 the	 one	with	 the	 thin	 green	line
connecting	all	 the	places	I'd	read	about,	the	places	I	 wanted	to	go.	 I'd	spent	my
whole	life	 thinking	 about	 roads	leading	anywhere	but	 Gatlin.	 Then	I	 met	Lena,
and	it	was	like	 the	map	never	existed.	 I	think	 I	 would've	 been	able	to	deal	with
getting	stuck	anywhere,	even	here,	as	long	 as	we	were	together.	Funny	how	 the
map	seemed	to	have	lost	its	appeal	when	I	needed	it	the	most.
     "I'd	 better	get	over	to	see	my	mom."	I	said	it	like	 I	was	going	by	 the	library	to
see	her	in	the	archive.	"You	know	what	I	 mean."
     Link	 tapped	his	knuckles	 against	mine.	"I'll	  catch	you	 later.	I'm	 gonna	walk
around	for	 a	 while."	  Walk	 around?	Link	  didn't	 walk	  around.	He	 tried	 to	 get
drunk	and	hit	on	girls	who	 wouldn't	hook	 up	with	him.
     "What's	 up?	You're	 not	 going	 looking	  for	 the	next	 Mrs.	 Wesley	 Jefferson
Lincoln,	are	you?"

191
    Link	 ran	his	hand	over	his	spiky	blond	hair.	"I	wish.	I	know	I'm	an	idiot,	but
there's	only	one	girl	in	my	head	right	now."	The	one	girl	who	shouldn't	be.	What
could	I	say?	I	knew	how	it	felt	to	be	in	love	with	a	girl	who	didn't	want	anything
to	do	with	you.
    "Sorry,	man.	I	guess	Ridley's	not	that	easy	to	forget."
    "Yeah,	and	seein'	her	last	night	didn't	help."	He	shook	his	head,	frustrated.	"I
know	she's	supposed	to	be	Dark	and	all,	but	I	can't	shake	the	feelin'	what	we	had
was	more	than	just	an	act."
    "I	 know	what	you	mean."
    We	 were	a	 couple	of	 pathetic	losers.	Though	I	 didn't	 think	 Ridley	 was
capable	of	anything	real,	I	 didn't	want	to	 make	him	feel	 worse.	Link	 wasn't
looking	for	an	answer,	anyway.
    "You	 know	all	that	stuff	you	told	me	about	Casters	and	Mortals	not	bein'	able
to	be	together	'cause	it'll	kill	the	Mortal?"
    I	 nodded.	It	was	only	about	eighty	percent	of	what	I	thought	about.	"What
about	it?"
    "We	 came	close	more	than	once."	He	kicked	the	grass,	making	a	brown	spot
on	the	perfectly	manicured	lawn.
    "Too	much	information."
    "I'm	 makin'	a	point	here.	I	wasn't	the	one	who	put	on	the	brakes.	It	was	Rid.	I
figured	she	was	slummin'	with	me,	like	I	was	good	enough	to	mess	around	with,
and	that's	it."	Link	was	pacing.	"But	now,	when	I	think	back	on	it,	maybe	I	was
wrong.	Maybe	she	didn't	want	to	hurt	me."	Link	had	clearly	put	a	lot	of	thought
into	this.
    "I	 don't	know.	She's	still	a	Dark	Caster."
    Link	 shrugged.	"Yeah,	I	know,	but	a	guy's	gotta	have	a	dream."
    I	 wanted	to	tell	Link	what	was	going	on,	that	Ridley	and	Lena	might	already
have	taken	off.	I	opened	my	mouth,	then	shut	it	without	making	a	single	sound.
If	Lena	had	put	a	Cast	on	me,	I	didn't	want	to	know.




I	had	only	visited	my	mom's	grave	once	since	the	funeral,	but	it	wasn't	on	All
Souls.	I	couldn't	face	it	that	soon.	I	didn't	feel	like	she	was	actually	here,	hanging
around	the	graveyard	like	Genevieve	or	the	Greats.	The	only	place	I	sensed	her
was	in	the	archive	or	the	study	at	our	house.	Those	were	the	places	she	loved,	the
places	I	could	imagine	her	spending	her	days	wherever	she	was	now.
    But	not	here,	not	under	the	ground,	where	my	dad	was	kneeling	with	his	face

192
in	his	hands.	He'd	been	here	for	hours	and	it	showed.
    I	 cleared	my	throat	so	my	dad	would	 know	I	 was	there.	It	felt	 like	I	 was
eavesdropping	on	a	private	moment	between	them.	He	wiped	his	face	and	stood
up.	"How	are	you	holding	up?"
    "I'm	 okay,	I	guess."	I	didn't	know	what	I	was	feeling,	but	it	wasn't	okay.
    He	shoved	his	hands	in	his	pockets,	staring	down	at	the	headstone.	A	delicate
white	flower	lay	on	the	grass	beneath	it.	Confederate	jasmine.	I	read	the	curving
letters	carved	into	the	stone.


                                           LILA	 EVERS	WATE
                                 BELOVED	WIFE	AND	 MOTHER
                                           SCIENTIAE	CUSTOS


    I	 repeated	the	last	line.	I'd	noticed	it	the	last	time	I	was	here,	in	the	middle	of
July,	a	few	weeks	before	my	birthday.	But	I	had	come	alone,	and	by	the	time	I
got	home	I	was	so	numb	from	 staring	at	my	mother's	grave,	I'd	forgotten	all
about	it.	"Scientiae	Custos."
    "It's	 Latin.	It	means	'Keeper	of	Knowledge.'	Marian	suggested	it.	It's	fitting,
don't	you	think?"	If	he	only	knew.
    I	 forced	a	smile.	"Yeah.	It	sounds	like	her."
    My	 dad	put	his	arm	around	my	shoulder	and	gave	it	a	squeeze,	the	way	he
used	to	after	my	Little	League	team	lost	a	game.	"I	really	miss	her.	I	still	can't
believe	she's	gone."
    I	 couldn't	say	anything.	My	breath	was	caught	in	my	throat,	my	chest	so	tight
I	thought	I	 was	going	to	pass	out.	My	mom	was	dead.	I	would	never	see	her
again,	no	matter	how	many	pages	she	flipped	open	in	her	books	or	how	many
messages	she	sent	me.
    "I	 know	this	has	been	really	hard	for	you,	Ethan.	I	wanted	to	say	I'm	sorry	I
wasn't	there	for	you	this	year	the	way	I	should've	been.	I	just	--"
    "Dad."	I	 could	feel	my	eyes	watering,	but	I	didn't	want	to	cry.	I	wouldn't	give
the	town	casserole	factory	that	kind	of	satisfaction.	So	I	cut	him	off.	"It's	okay."
    He	 gave	my	shoulder	one	last	squeeze.	"I'll	give	you	some	time	alone	with
her.	I'm	going	to	take	a	walk."
    I	 kept	staring	at	the	headstone,	with	the	tiny	Celtic	symbol	of	Awen	etched
into	the	stone.	It	was	a	symbol	I	knew,	one	my	mother	had	always	loved.	Three
lines	representing	rays	of	light,	converging	at	the	top.
    I	 heard	Marian's	voice	 behind	me.	"Awen.	It's	a	 Gaelic	word	that	 means

193
'poetic	inspiration'	or	 'spiritual	illumination.'	  Two	 things	your	mother	respected."
I	 thought	about	 the	symbols	 in	 the	 lintel	 at	 Ravenwood,	the	 symbols	 on	The
Book	of	Moons,	and	the	one	on	the	door	 of	Exile.	 Symbols	meant	something.	In
some	cases,	more	than	words.	My	mom	had	known	that.	I	wondered	if	 it	was	the
reason	she	became	a	Keeper,	or	if	 she	learned	 it	from	 the	 Keepers	before	her.
There	was	so	much	about	her	I	would	never	know.
     "Ethan,	I'm	 sorry.	Would	you	 like	to	be	alone?"
     I	let	 Marian	hug	me.	"No.	 I	don't	 really	feel	like	 she's	here.	You	know	what	 I
mean?"
     "I	 do."	She	kissed	my	forehead	and	smiled,	pulling	 a	green	tomato	out	of	 her
pocket.	She	balanced	it	on	the	top	of	the	tombstone.
     I	 leaned	back	and	smiled.	 "Now	 if	 you	 were	a	 real	friend,	 you	 would	 have
fried	it."
     Marian	 put	her	arm	around	me.	She	was	in	her	best	dress,	like	everyone	else,
but	her	 best	dress	 was	somehow	 better.	It	  was	soft	 and	 yellow,	 the	 color	 of
butter,	with	 a	loose	 bow	near	the	 neck.	The	 skirt	folded	 into	 about	a	 thousand
crinkly	  pleats,	 like	   a	 dress	 from	  an	 old-fashioned	  movie.	  It	  looked	  like
something	Lena	would	have	worn.
     "Lila	  knows	I	 would	 do	 no	such	thing."	  She	squeezed	me	tighter.	"I	  really
only	came	out	here	to	see	you."
     "Thanks,	Aunt	 Marian.	It's	been	a	rough	couple	of	days."
     "Olivia	 told	 me.	A	 Caster	bar,	an	Incubus,	 and	a	Vex,	all	 in	 the	same	night.
I'm	 afraid	 Amma	 will	  never	 let	 you	 visit	 me	 again."	 She	didn't	 mention	  the
trouble	I	imagined	Liv	 was	in	today.
     "There's	something	else."	Lena.	I	couldn't	bring	 myself	to	say	her	name.
     Marian	pushed	my	hair	 out	of	my	 eyes.	"I	heard,	and	I'm	sorry.	But	 I	brought
you	something."	 She	opened	her	bag	and	 took	out	 a	small	 wooden	box	 with	 a
worn	design	carved	into	its	 surface.	"As	I	said,	I	 really	came	here	to	see	you	and
give	you	 this."	 She	 held	out	 the	box.	 "It	  was	your	 mother's,	 one	of	 her	most
valuable	possessions.	It's	older	than	the	rest	of	 her	collection.	 I	think	 she	would
want	you	to	have	it."
     I	took	it.	 The	box	was	heavier	than	it	looked.
     "Be	careful.	 It's	delicate."
     I	lifted	 the	lid	 gently,	 expecting	to	find	 another	one	of	my	 mother's	treasured
Civil	 War	relics	 --	a	scrap	of	a	flag,	 a	bullet,	 a	piece	of	lace.	Something	marked
by	history	 and	time.	But	 when	I	 opened	the	box,	it	 was	something	else,	marked
by	a	different	kind	 of	history	and	time.	I	 knew	what	it	 was,	the	second	I	saw	it.
     The	Arclight,	 from	 the	visions.
     The	Arclight	 Macon	Ravenwood	gave	to	the	girl	 he	loved.

194
    Lila	 Jane	Evers.
    I	 had	seen	it	stitched	on	an	old	pillow	once	that	belonged	to	my	mom	when
she	was	little.	Jane.	My	Aunt	Caroline	said	only	my	grandmother	called	her	that,
but	my	grandmother	died	before	I	was	born,	so	I'd	never	heard	it	myself.	Aunt
Caroline	was	wrong.	My	grandmother	wasn't	the	only	one	who	had	called	her
Jane.
    Which	meant	--
    My	 mom	was	the	girl	in	the	visions.
    And	Macon	Ravenwood	was	the	love	of	my	mother's	life.

195
6.17	

196
                                              The	  Arclight



My	 mom	and	Macon	Ravenwood.	I	dropped	the	Arclight	as	if	it	had	stung	me.
The	box	fell,	and	the	ball	rolled	harmlessly	across	the	grass,	like	a	child's	toy
instead	of	some	kind	of	supernatural	prison.
    "Ethan?	What	is	 it?"	It	 was	obvious	Marian	had	no	idea	I	 recognized	the
Arclight.	I	 had	never	mentioned	it	when	I	told	her	about	the	visions.	I	 hadn't
thought	much	about	it.	It	was	another	little	detail	about	the	Caster	world	I	didn't
understand.
    But	this	one	little	detail	mattered.
    If	 this	was	the	Arclight	from	the	vision,	then	my	mother	had	loved	Macon	the
way	I	loved	Lena.	The	way	my	father	had	loved	her.
    I	 needed	to	know	if	Marian	knew	where	my	mother	had	gotten	it,	or	who	had
given	it	to	her.	"Did	you	know?"
    She	bent	down	and	picked	up	the	sphere,	its	dark	surface	gleaming	in	the
sunlight.	She	slid	it	 back	into	the	box.	 "Did	 I	know	 what?	Ethan,	you	aren't
making	any	sense."
    The	questions	were	coming	faster	than	my	mind	could	process	them.	How
did	my	mother	meet	Macon	Ravenwood?	How	long	were	they	together?	Who
else	knew?	And	the	biggest	one	...
    What	about	my	dad?
    "Did	 you	know	my	mom	was	in	love	with	Macon	Ravenwood?"
    Marian's	face	crumbled,	which	told	me	everything.	She	had	only	meant	to
give	away	a	gift	from	my	mom,	not	my	mother's	deepest	secret.	"Who	told	you
that?"
    "You	 did.	 When	you	 handed	me	the	Arclight	Macon	 gave	to	the	girl	 he
loved.	My	mother."
    Marian's	eyes	filled	with	tears,	but	they	didn't	fall.	"The	visions.	They	were
about	Macon	and	your	mother."	She	was	figuring	it	out,	piecing	it	together.
    I	 remembered	the	night	when	I	first	met	Macon.	Lila	Evers,	he	had	said.	Lila
Evers	Wate,	I	had	corrected.
    Macon	had	mentioned	my	mother's	work,	but	claimed	he	didn't	know	her.
Another	lie.	My	head	was	spinning.
    "So	you	knew."	It	wasn't	a	question.	I	shook	my	head,	wishing	I	could	shake
everything	I'd	just	learned	back	out	again.	"Does	my	dad	know?"

197
     "No.	 And	you	 can't	tell	 him,	Ethan.	He	 wouldn't	understand."	Her	 voice	was
desperate.
     "He	 wouldn't	  understand?	 I	 don't	 understand!"	  More	 than	 a	 few	  people
stopped	gossiping	and	looked	over	at	us.
     "I'm	 so	sorry.	I	 never	thought	it	 would	be	a	story	 I	would	 have	to	tell.	 It	was
your	mother's	story,	not	mine."
     "In	 case	 you	 haven't	 noticed,	 my	 mom	 is	 dead.	She's	 not	 exactly	 taking
questions."	My	voice	 was	harsh	and	unforgiving,	which	 pretty	much	 summed	up
how	I	felt.
     Marian	 looked	 down	at	 my	mother's	 headstone.	"You're	 right.	 You	need	to
know."
     "I	 want	the	truth."
     "That's	 what	 I	 intend	 to	give	 you."	  Her	voice	 was	 shaking.	"If	  you	 know
about	the	Arclight,	I	 assume	you	know	why	Macon	gave	it	to	your	 mother."
     "So	she	could	protect	herself	from	 him."	I'd	 felt	sorry	 for	Macon	before.	Now
I	felt	 sick.	My	 mom	 was	Juliet	in	 some	kind	 of	twisted	 play	where	 Romeo	was
an	Incubus,	even	if	it	was	Macon.
     "That's	 right.	 Macon	 and	 Lila	 struggled	 with	 the	 same	reality	  as	you	 and
Lena.	It	 has	been	 hard	to	 watch	 you	 these	past	few	 months	 without	 drawing
certain	...	comparisons.	I	can't	think	how	difficult	  it	must	have	been	for	Macon."
     "Please.	Stop."
     "Ethan,	  I	 understand	 this	  is	 hard	 for	  you,	  but	 it	  doesn't	 change	 what
happened.	I'm	 a	Keeper,	 and	these	are	 the	facts.	 Your	 mother	 was	 a	Mortal.
Macon	was	an	Incubus.	They	couldn't	 be	together,	not	after	Macon	 changed	and
became	the	Dark	creature	he	was	born	to	be.	Macon	didn't	trust	 himself.	He	was
afraid	he	might	hurt	your	 mother,	so	he	gave	her	the	Arclight."
     "Facts.	Lies.	Whatever."	 I	was	so	tired	of	it	all.
     "Fact.	 He	 loved	her	 more	 than	his	 own	 life."	  Why	 was	Marian	  defending
him?
     "Fact.	 Not	 killing	  the	 love	 of	 your	  life	 doesn't	 make	you	 a	 hero."	 I	 was
furious.
     "It	 nearly	killed	 him,	Ethan."
     "Yeah?	Well,	 look	 around.	My	 mom's	dead.	They	both	are.	So	Macon's	 plan
didn't	really	help	much,	did	 it?"
     Marian	 took	a	deep	breath.	I	 knew	 the	look,	 and	a	lecture	was	 coming.	She
pulled	 me	by	 the	 arm,	and	 we	 walked	 away	 from	 the	graveyard,	 away	 from
everyone	above	 and	below	 the	 ground.	 "They	 met	 at	 Duke.	 They	 were	both
studying	American	history.	 They	fell	 in	love,	like	 any	two	people."
     "You	 mean,	like	any	 unsuspecting	undergraduate	and	an	evolving	Demon.	If

198
we're	sticking	to	the	facts."
     "'In	 Light	 there	is	Dark,	and	in	 Dark	there	is	Light.'	 Your	 mother	used	to	say
that."
     I	wasn't	interested	in	philosophical	 ideas	about	the	nature	of	the	Caster	world.
"When	did	he	give	her	the	Arclight?"
     "Eventually,	 Macon	told	 Lila	 what	he	was	and	what	he	would	 become	--	that
a	future	 between	the	 two	 of	 them	was	 impossible."	 Marian	 spoke	slowly	  and
carefully.	I	 wondered	if	it	 was	as	hard	to	say	as	it	was	to	hear,	and	I	felt	sorry	for
both	of	us.
     "It	 broke	her	 heart,	and	his.	He	 gave	her	the	Arclight,	  which	 thankfully	 she
never	had	to	use.	He	left	the	university	and	came	back	home	to	Gatlin."
     She	waited	for	me	to	say	something	cruel.	 I	tried	to	 come	up	with	something,
but	in	 spite	 of	 everything,	 I	 was	curious.	 "What	 happened	after	 Macon	 came
back?	Did	they	see	each	other	again?"
     "Sadly,	no."
     I	gave	her	an	incredulous	look.	"Sadly?"
     Marian	 shook	her	head	at	me.	"It	 was	sad,	Ethan.	It	 was	the	saddest	I'd	ever
seen	your	mother.	I	was	so	worried,	 and	I	didn't	 know	 what	to	do.	I	 thought	she
was	going	to	die	from	a	broken	heart,	from	how	 broken	every	part	of	her	was."
     We	 had	been	walking	 the	 loop	that	 circled	 Perpetual	Peace.	Now	 we	were
surrounded	by	trees	and	out	of	sight	from	most	of	Gatlin.
     "But."	 I	had	to	know	 the	end,	even	if	it	hurt	to	hear.
     "But	  your	 mother	  followed	  Macon	 to	 Gatlin,	  through	  the	 Tunnels.	 She
couldn't	bear	to	 be	away	from	 him,	 and	she	swore	to	 find	 a	way	they	 could	be
together.	A	 way	Casters	and	Mortals	 could	 spend	their	lives	 together.	She	was
obsessed	with	the	idea."
     I	understood.	I	didn't	 like	it,	 but	I	understood.
     "The	answer	to	that	 question	did	not	lie	 in	the	Mortal	 world	 but	in	 the	Caster
world.	So	your	 mother	found	 a	way	to	become	part	of	 it,	even	if	 she	couldn't	be
with	Macon."
     We	started	walking	again.	"You're	 talking	 about	her	job	as	a	Keeper,	right?"
     Marian	 nodded.	"Lila	  found	 a	calling	  that	allowed	 her	 to	 study	the	 Caster
world	and	its	laws,	its	Light	 and	its	Darkness.	A	way	to	 look	for	the	answer."
     "How	 did	 she	get	the	job?"	 I	 didn't	 think	 there	was	a	Caster	Yellow	  Pages,
but	since	Carlton	Eaton	delivered	our	 Yellow	 Pages	aboveground	and	the	Caster
mail	below,	who	 knew?
     "At	 the	time,	there	was	no	Keeper	in	 Gatlin."	 Marian	paused,	uncomfortable.
"But	a	powerful	 Caster	requested	one,	since	the	Lunae	Libri	 resides	here	and,	at
one	time,	The	Book	of	Moons."

199
     Now	it	 all	made	sense.
     "Macon.	He	 asked	for	her,	didn't	he?	He	couldn't	stay	away,	after	all	that."
     Marian	 wiped	 her	 face	 with	 a	 handkerchief.	 "No.	 It	 was	 Arelia	 Valentin,
Macon's	mother."
     "Why	 would	 Macon's	mother	want	my	 mom	to	be	a	Keeper?	Even	if	 she	felt
sorry	for	her	son,	she	knew	they	couldn't	be	together."
     "Arelia	 is	a	powerful	 Diviner,	 capable	of	seeing	fragments	of	the	future."
     "Like	 a	Caster	version	of	Amma?"
     Marian	 wiped	  her	 face.	 "I	 guess	you	  could	 think	  of	 it	 that	 way.	  Arelia
recognized	something	in	your	 mother,	her	ability	 to	 find	 the	truth	--	 to	see	what
is	hidden.	 I	 think	 she	was	hoping	 your	 mother	 would	 find	 the	 answer,	a	way
Casters	and	Mortals	could	be	together.	Light	 Casters	have	always	hoped	for	that
possibility.	 Genevieve	 wasn't	 the	 first	 Caster	 to	 fall	 in	 love	  with	 a	 Mortal."
Marian	 looked	off	 into	 the	 distance,	where	families	 were	 beginning	 to	lay	 out
their	picnics	on	the	sloping	grass.	"Or	maybe	she	did	it	for	 her	son."
     Marian	 stopped	walking.	 We	 had	made	another	circle	 and	were	 standing	at
Macon's	grave.	 I	could	 see	the	 angel	weeping	 in	the	 distance.	Only	 the	 grave
looked	nothing	 like	 it	 had	at	his	 funeral.	 Where	there	had	 only	 been	dirt,	 now
there	was	a	 wild	 garden	 shaded	by	 two	 impossibly	 tall	 lemon	 trees,	flanking
either	side	of	the	headstone.	In	the	shade,	a	bed	of	spreading	jasmine	and	tangles
of	rosemary	grew	over	 his	grave.	I	wondered	if	 anyone	had	visited	 him	today	to
notice.
     I	 pressed	 my	 hands	 against	 my	 temples,	 trying	  to	 keep	 my	  head	from
exploding.	Marian	 laid	her	hand	gently	 on	my	back.	 "I	know	 it's	a	lot	 to	take	in,
but	it	doesn't	change	anything.	Your	mother	loved	you."
     I	shrugged	Marian's	hand	away.	"Yeah,	she	just	didn't	love	 my	dad."
     Marian	jerked	 my	arm,	forcing	 me	to	face	her.	My	mother	may	have	been	my
mom,	but	she	was	also	Marian's	best	friend,	and	I	 wasn't	going	to	get	away	 with
questioning	her	integrity	  in	front	 of	 Marian.	 Not	today,	 or	any	 day.	"Don't	 you
say	that,	EW.	Your	mother	loved	your	 father."
     "But	 she	didn't	move	to	Gatlin	for	 my	dad.	She	moved	here	for	Macon."
     "Your	 parents	met	at	Duke	when	we	were	working	on	our	dissertation.	As	 the
Keeper,	your	  mother	 was	living	  in	  the	Tunnels	 underneath	 Gatlin,	 traveling
between	the	Lunae	Libri	and	the	university	 to	work	with	 me.	She	wasn't	living	 in
the	town,	in	 the	world	of	 the	DAR	 and	Mrs.	Lincoln.	  So	she	did	move	to	Gatlin
for	your	father.	She	moved	out	of	the	darkness	and	into	the	light,	and	believe	me,
it	was	a	big	move	 for	your	 mom.	Your	 father	saved	her	from	 herself	when	none
of	us	could.	Not	me.	Not	Macon."
     I	 stared	at	 the	 lemon	 trees	shading	Macon's	 grave,	 and	past	 them,	 to	my

200
mom's	gravesite.	I	 thought	 about	my	 dad	 kneeling	 there.	I	 thought	 of	Macon,
braving	the	 Garden	of	 Perpetual	Peace,	if	 only	 so	he	 could	 rest	one	tree	 over
from	my	mom.
     "She	 moved	into	  a	town	 where	 no	 one	accepted	her,	 because	your	 father
wouldn't	leave,	and	she	loved	him."	Marian	 held	my	chin	between	her	thumb	and
her	fingers.	"She	just	didn't	love	him	 first."
     I	took	 a	deep	breath.	At	 least	my	whole	 life	 wasn't	a	total	 lie.	She	loved	 my
dad,	even	if	she	loved	Macon	Ravenwood,	too.	I	took	 the	Arclight	 from	Marian's
hand.	I	wanted	to	hold	 it,	to	 have	a	piece	of	both	of	 them.	"She	never	found	 the
answer,	the	way	Mortals	and	Casters	can	be	together."
     "I	 don't	know	 if	there	is	a	way."	 Marian	 put	her	arm	around	me,	and	I	leaned
my	head	on	her	shoulder.	 "You're	 the	one	who	might	 be	a	Wayward,	 EW.	 You
tell	me."
     For	the	first	 time	 since	I	 saw	Lena	standing	in	 the	rain,	almost	 a	year	ago,	I
didn't	know.	 Like	  my	 mom,	I	 hadn't	 found	any	 answers.	All	  I	 had	found	 was
trouble.	Was	that	what	she	found,	too?
     I	looked	 at	the	box	in	 Marian's	hands.	"Is	 that	why	my	 mom	died?	Trying	 to
find	the	answer?"
     Marian	 took	  my	 hand	 and	pressed	the	 box	 into	  it,	 wrapping	  my	 fingers
around	it	with	 hers.	"I've	told	 you	what	I	 know.	Draw	 your	own	conclusions,	but
I	can't	interfere.	Those	are	the	rules.	In	 the	great	Order	of	Things,	 I	don't	matter.
Keepers	never	do."
     "That's	 not	 true."	 Marian	 mattered	 to	 me,	but	 I	 couldn't	 say	 it.	 My	  mom
mattered.	That	part	I	didn't	have	to	say.
     Marian	 smiled	 as	 she	lifted	  her	 hand,	leaving	  the	box	 in	  mine.	 "I'm	 not
complaining.	I	 chose	this	path,	Ethan.	Not	everyone	gets	to	choose	their	place	in
the	Order	of	Things."
     "You	 mean	not	Lena?	Or	not	me?"
     "You	  matter,	whether	 you	 like	  it	 or	 not,	 and	 so	does	 Lena.	That's	 not	 a
choice."	She	pushed	the	 hair	out	 of	 my	 eyes,	the	way	 my	 mom	used	to.	 "The
truth	is	the	truth.	'Rarely	pure	and	never	simple,'	as	Oscar	Wilde	would	 say."
     "I	 don't	understand."
     "'All	  truths	are	easy	to	 understand	once	they	are	 discovered;	the	point	 is	 to
discover	them.'	"
     "More	 Oscar	Wilde?"
     "Galileo,	  the	father	 of	 modern	 astronomy.	 Another	 man	 who	 rejected	 his
place	in	 the	Order	of	 Things	 --	 the	idea	that	 the	sun	didn't	 revolve	 around	the
Earth.	He	knew,	perhaps	better	than	anyone,	that	we	 don't	get	to	choose	what	is
true.	We	only	get	to	choose	what	we	do	about	it."

201
    I	 took	the	box,	because	deep	down	I	knew	what	she	was	saying,	even	if	I
didn't	know	anything	about	Galileo	and	knew	even	less	about	Oscar	Wilde.	I	was
part	of	all	this,	whether	I	wanted	to	be	or	not.	I	couldn't	run	from	it,	any	more
than	I	could	stop	the	visions.
    Now	I	 had	to	decide	what	to	do	about	it.

202
6.17	

203
                                                      Jump



When	 I	crawled	into	bed	that	night,	I	was	dreading	my	dreams.	They	say	you
dream	about	the	last	thing	you	were	thinking	about	before	you	fell	asleep,	but
the	more	I	tried	to	not	think	about	Macon	and	my	mom,	the	more	I	thought	about
them.	Exhausted	from	all	that	thinking	about	not	thinking,	it	was	only	a	matter	of
time	before	I	sunk	through	the	mattress	into	the	blackness,	and	my	bed	became	a
boat....


The	willows	were	waving	over	my	head.
    I	 could	 feel	myself	rocking	 back	and	forth.	The	 sky	was	blue,	cloudless,
surreal.	I	turned	my	 head	and	looked	to	the	side.	Splintery	 wood,	painted	a
peeling	shade	of	blue	that	looked	a	lot	like	the	ceiling	in	my	bedroom.	I	was	in	a
dinghy	or	a	rowboat,	floating	along	the	river.
    I	 sat	up	and	the	boat	rocked.	A	small	white	hand	fell	to	the	side,	dragging	a
slender	finger	through	the	water.	I	stared	at	the	ripples	disturbing	the	reflection
of	the	perfect	sky,	otherwise	cool	and	calm	as	glass.
    Lena	was	lying	across	from	me	at	the	end	of	the	boat.	She	wore	a	white	dress,
the	kind	you	saw	in	old	 movies,	where	everything	is	shot	in	black	and	white.
Lace	and	ribbon	and	tiny	pearl	buttons.	She	was	holding	a	black	parasol,	and	her
hair,	her	nails,	even	her	lips,	were	black.	She	lay	curled	on	her	side,	slumped
against	the	dinghy,	her	hand	dragging	along	behind	us	as	we	floated.
    "Lena?"
    She	didn't	open	her	eyes,	but	she	smiled.	"I'm	cold,	Ethan."
    I	 looked	 at	her	hand,	which	 was	now	up	 to	 her	wrist	 in	the	 water.	"It's
summer.	The	water's	warm."	I	tried	to	crawl	over	to	her,	but	the	boat	rocked,	and
she	slumped	farther	over	the	edge,	exposing	the	black	Chucks	beneath	her	dress.
    I	 couldn't	move.
    Now	 the	 water	was	up	 to	 her	arm,	and	 I	 could	see	strands	of	her	 hair
beginning	to	float	on	the	surface.
    "Sit	 up,	L!	You're	going	to	fall	in!"
    She	laughed	and	dropped	the	parasol.	It	floated,	spinning,	in	the	ripples	of
water	behind	us.	I	lurched	toward	her,	and	the	boat	rocked	violently.
    "Didn't	 they	tell	you?	I've	already	fallen."

204
    I	 lunged	for	her.	This	couldn't	be	happening,	but	it	was.	I	knew	because	I	was
waiting	for	the	sound	of	the	splash.
    When	I	 hit	the	edge	of	the	boat,	I	opened	my	eyes.	The	world	was	rocking,
and	she	was	gone.	I	looked	down,	and	all	I	could	see	was	the	murky	greenish-
brown	water	of	the	Santee	and	her	dark	hair.	I	reached	into	the	water.	I	couldn't
think.
    Jump	or	stay	in	the	boat.
    The	 hair	floated	downward,	unruly,	quiet,	breathtaking,	like	some	kind	of
mythical	sea	creature.	There	was	a	white	face,	blurred	by	the	depths	of	the	river.
Trapped	beneath	the	glass.
    "Mom?"




I	 sat	up	in	 bed,	drenched	and	coughing.	Moonlight	 was	streaming	into	my
window.	It	was	open	again.	I	walked	to	the	bathroom	and	drank	water	out	of	my
hand	until	the	coughing	subsided.	I	stared	into	the	mirror.	It	 was	dark,	and	I
could	barely	make	out	my	features.	I	tried	to	find	my	eyes	within	the	shadows.
But	instead	I	saw	something	else	...	a	light	in	the	distance.
    I	 couldn't	see	the	mirror	anymore,	or	the	shadows	of	my	face.	Just	the	light,
and	bits	of	images	as	they	flashed	by.
    I	 tried	 to	focus	and	make	sense	of	what	I	was	seeing,	but	everything	was
coming	too	fast,	rushing	by	me,	jerking	up	and	down,	like	I	was	on	a	ride.	I	saw
the	street	--	wet,	shiny,	and	dark.	It	was	only	inches	away	from	me,	which	made
it	seem	as	if	I	 was	crawling	on	 the	ground.	But	that	was	impossible	because
everything	was	moving	so	fast.	Tall,	straight	corners	jutting	out	into	my	field	of
vision,	the	street	rising	up	to	meet	me.
    All	 I	could	see	was	the	light	and	the	street	that	was	so	awkwardly	close.	I	felt
the	cold	porcelain	as	I	gripped	the	sides	of	the	sink,	trying	 not	to	fall.	 I	 was
dizzy,	and	the	flashes	kept	coming	at	 me,	the	light	 getting	closer.	My	 view
shifted	sharply,	as	if	I	had	turned	the	corner	in	a	maze,	and	everything	started	to
slow.
    Two	 people	were	leaning	against	the	side	of	a	dirty	brick	building,	under	a
streetlight.	It	was	the	light	 that	had	been	jerking	 in	and	out	 of	 focus.	I	was
looking	up	at	them	from	below,	like	I	was	lying	on	the	ground.	I	stared	up	at	the
silhouettes	in	front	of	me.
    "I	 should've	left	a	note.	My	 gramma	will	be	worried."	It	 was	Lena's	voice.
She	was	right	in	front	of	 me.	This	wasn't	a	vision,	not	like	the	ones	from	the

205
locket	or	Macon's	journal.
     "Lena!"	 I	called	out	her	name,	but	she	didn't	move.
     The	other	person	stepped	closer.	I	knew	it	was	John	before	I	 saw	his	face.	"If
you	had	left	 a	note,	they	could've	 used	it	to	find	 us	with	 a	simple	 Locator	Cast.
Especially	 your	 grandma.	 She	 has	 crazy	 power."	 He	  touched	her	 shoulder.
"Guess	it	runs	in	the	family."
     "I	 don't	feel	powerful.	 I	don't	know	what	 I	feel."
     "You	 aren't	having	second	thoughts,	are	you?"	John	reached	out	and	took	her
hand,	holding	it	 open	so	he	could	 see	her	palm.	He	reached	into	his	 pocket	and
pulled	out	a	marker,	and	started	writing	on	her	hand	absentmindedly.
     Lena	 shook	 her	 head,	 watching	 as	 he	 wrote.	 "No.	  I	  don't	 belong	 there
anymore.	I	would've	ended	up	hurting	them.	I	 hurt	everyone	who	loves	me."
     "Lena	--"	 It	was	pointless.	She	couldn't	hear	me.
     "It	 won't	 be	like	 that	when	 we	get	to	 the	Great	 Barrier.	There's	no	 Light	 or
Dark,	no	Naturals	 or	Cataclysts,	only	magic	 in	its	 purest	form.	Which	 means	no
labels	or	judgments."
     They	 were	staring	at	 her	hand	as	John	moved	 the	marker	 around	her	wrist.
The	way	 their	 heads	were	 bent,	they	 were	 almost	touching.	  Lena	rotated	 her
wrist	slowly	 in	his	hand.	"I'm	 scared."
     "I	 would	 never	let	anything	 happen	to	you."	 He	tucked	a	strand	of	 hair	back
behind	her	ear,	the	way	I	used	to.	I	wondered	if	she	remembered.
     "It's	 hard	to	imagine	a	place	like	 that	really	 exists.	People	have	been	judging
me	my	whole	life."	 Lena	laughed,	but	I	could	hear	the	edge	in	her	voice.
     "That's	 why	  we're	 going.	 So	 you	 can	 finally	  be	 yourself."	  His	 shoulder
twitched	 awkwardly,	 and	he	 grabbed	it,	 wincing.	 He	 shook	it	 off	 before	 Lena
noticed.	But	not	before	I	did.
     "Myself?	 I	 don't	even	 know	who	 that	is."	 Lena	stepped	away	 from	the	 wall
and	looked	out	into	the	night.	 The	streetlight	outlined	her	profile,	 and	I	could	 see
her	necklace	shining.
     "I'd	 like	to	 know,"	 John	leaned	into	Lena.	He	was	speaking	so	softly,	 I	could
barely	hear	the	words.
     Lena	looked	tired,	but	 I	recognized	her	crooked	half-smile.	"I'll	  introduce	you
if	I	ever	meet	her."
     "You	 cats	 ready	to	 go?"	 Ridley	 walked	 out	 of	 the	 building,	 sucking	 on	 a
cherry-red	lollipop.
     Lena	turned	around,	and	as	she	did,	the	light	 caught	her	hand	--	the	one	John
had	been	writing	 on.	 But	 there	were	 no	words.	 It	 was	inked	 in	 black	designs.
They	were	the	 same	designs	I	had	seen	on	her	 hands	at	the	fair,	 and	along	 the
edges	of	 her	 notebook.	 Before	 I	 could	 see	anything	  else,	my	 point	 of	  view

206
shifted	away	from	 them,	and	all	I	 could	 see	was	a	wide	street	and	the	wet
cobblestones	in	front	of	me.	Then	nothing.


I	don't	know	how	long	I	stood	there,	holding	on	to	the	sink.	It	felt	like	I	would
pass	out	if	I	let	go.	My	 hands	were	shaking,	my	legs	buckling	underneath	me.
What	just	happened?	It	wasn't	a	vision.	They	were	so	close,	I	could've	reached
out	and	touched	her.	Why	couldn't	she	hear	me?
    It	 didn't	 matter.	She	had	really	done	it	--	run	 away,	just	like	she	said	she
would.	I	didn't	know	 where	she	was,	but	I	had	seen	enough	of	the	Tunnels	to
recognize	them.
    She	was	gone,	headed	for	the	Great	Barrier,	wherever	it	was.	It	didn't	have
anything	to	do	with	me	anymore.	I	didn't	want	to	dream	it	or	see	it	or	hear	about
it.
    Forget	about	it.	Go	back	to	sleep.	That's	what	I	needed	to	do.
    Jump	or	stay	in	the	boat.
    What	a	screwed-up	dream.	As	if	it	was	up	to	me.	This	boat	was	sinking,	with
or	without	me.
    I	 let	go	of	the	sink	long	enough	to	heave	into	the	toilet	and	stumble	back	to
my	room.	I	walked	over	to	the	stacks	of	shoe	boxes	along	the	wall,	the	boxes
that	held	everything	important	to	me,	or	anything	I	wanted	to	hide.	For	a	second,
I	stood	there.	I	knew	what	I	was	looking	for,	but	I	didn't	know	which	box	it	was
in.
    Water	like	glass.	I	thought	of	it	when	I	remembered	the	dream.
    I	 tried	to	remember	where	to	find	it.	Which	was	ridiculous,	because	I	knew
what	was	in	every	single	one	of	those	boxes.	At	least,	I	knew	yesterday.	I	tried	to
think,	but	all	I	 could	see	were	the	seventy	or	eighty	boxes	stacked	around	me.
Black	Adidas,	green	New	Balance	...	I	couldn't	remember.
    I	 had	opened	about	twelve	boxes	before	I	found	the	black	Converse	one.	The
carved	wooden	box	was	still	inside.	I	lifted	the	smooth,	delicate	sphere	from	its
velvet	lining.	 The	impression	of	the	sphere	remained	in	the	velvet,	dark	and
crushed,	as	if	it	had	been	there	a	thousand	years.
    The	Arclight.
    It	 had	been	my	mother's	most	valuable	possession,	and	Marian	had	given	it	to
me.	Why	now?
    In	 my	hand,	the	pale	orb	began	to	reflect	the	room	around	me	until	the	curved
surface	was	alive	and	swirling	with	colors.	It	was	glowing,	a	pale	green.	I	could
see	Lena	again	in	my	mind,	and	hear	her.	I	hurt	everyone	I	love.
    The	glow	began	to	fade,	and	once	again	the	Arclight	was	black	and	opaque,

207
cold	and	lifeless	in	 my	hand.	But	I	 could	still	 feel	Lena.	I	 could	sense	where	she
was,	as	if	 the	 Arclight	  was	some	kind	  of	 compass	leading	me	 to	her.	 Maybe
there	was	something	to	this	Wayward	thing,	after	all.
     Which	 made	no	 sense,	because	the	last	place	I	wanted	 to	be	 was	wherever
Lena	and	John	were.	So	why	was	I	seeing	them?
     My	 mind	 was	racing.	The	Great	 Barrier?	 A	 place	where	there	was	no	Light
and	no	Dark?	Was	that	possible?
     There	was	no	point	trying	 to	sleep	now.
     I	pulled	 on	a	crumpled	Atari	T-shirt.	 I	knew	 what	I	had	to	do.
     Together	or	 not,	this	 was	bigger	than	 Lena	and	me.	Maybe	 it	 was	as	big	 as
the	Order	of	 Things,	 or	Galileo	 realizing	 the	 Earth	revolved	 around	the	sun.	 It
didn't	matter	if	 I	 didn't	want	 to	see	it.	There	were	 no	coincidences.	I	was	seeing
Lena	and	John	and	Ridley	for	a	reason.
     But	I	 had	no	idea	what	it	was.
     Which	 is	why	I	had	to	go	talk	 to	Galileo	herself.




As	I	 stepped	out	 into	 the	darkness,	I	 could	 hear	 Mr.	 Mackey's	 fancy	 roosters
starting	to	crow.	 It	 was	4:45,	 and	the	sun	wasn't	close	to	 coming	 up,	but	I	 was
walking	 around	town	 like	 it	 was	the	 middle	 of	 the	afternoon.	 I	listened	 to	 the
sound	of	my	feet	as	I	walked	across	the	cracked	sidewalk	and	the	sticky	asphalt.
     Where	were	they	going?	Why	was	I	 seeing	them?	Why	did	it	matter?
     I	heard	a	noise.	When	I	 turned	around,	Lucille	 cocked	her	head	and	sat	down
on	the	pavement	behind	me.	I	 shook	my	 head	and	kept	walking.	 That	crazy	 cat
was	going	 to	 follow	  me,	but	 I	 didn't	 mind.	 We	 were	 probably	 the	only	 ones
awake	in	the	whole	town.
     But	we	weren't.	 Gatlin's	very	own	 Galileo	was	awake,	too.	When	I	 turned	the
corner	onto	Marian's	 street,	I	could	 see	the	light	on	 in	her	 spare	room.	As	I	 got
closer,	I	saw	a	second	light	flicker	from	 the	front	porch.
     "Liv."	  I	jogged	up	the	steps	and	heard	a	clatter	in	the	darkness.
     "Bloody	 hell!"	  The	 lens	of	 an	enormous	telescope	swung	 toward	my	 head,
and	I	ducked.	Liv	 grabbed	the	end	of	the	lens,	her	messy	braids	swinging	behind
her.	"Don't	 sneak	up	 on	 me	like	 that!"	  She	twisted	 a	knob,	 and	the	 telescope
locked	back	into	place	on	the	tall	aluminum	 tripod.
     "It's	 not	exactly	 sneaking	 when	you	 walk	 up	the	 front	 steps."	I	 tried	not	 to
stare	at	her	pajamas	--	some	kind	of	girly	boxers	under	a	T-shirt	with	 a	picture	of
Pluto	and	the	caption	DWARF	PLANET	SAYS:	PICK	ON	SOMEONE	YOUR	OWN	SIZE.

208
     "I	 didn't	 see	you."	 Liv	  adjusted	the	eyepiece	and	 stared	into	 the	telescope.
"What	are	you	doing	up,	anyway?	Are	you	 mental?"
     "That's	what	I'm	 trying	to	 figure	out."
     "Let	 me	save	you	some	time.	The	answer	is	yes."
     "I'm	 not	joking."
     She	studied	me,	then	picked	up	her	red	 notebook	and	started	scribbling.	"I'm
listening.	I	just	have	to	write	 down	a	few	things."
     I	looked	over	 her	shoulder.	"What	are	you	looking	at?"
     "The	 sky."	She	looked	 back	into	 the	scope	and	then	at	her	selenometer.	She
wrote	another	set	of	numbers.
     "I	 know	that."
     "Here."	 She	stepped	aside,	motioning	 me	 closer.	I	 looked	through	 the	lens.
The	 sky	 exploded	 into	 light	  and	 stars	and	 the	 dust	 of	 a	 galaxy	 that	  didn't
remotely	resemble	the	Gatlin	sky.	"What	 do	you	see?"
     "The	sky.	Stars.	The	moon.	It's	pretty	amazing."
     "Now	 look."	 She	pulled	 me	away	from	 the	lens,	and	I	 looked	 up	at	the	sky.
Though	it	 was	 still	 dark,	 I	 couldn't	 make	out	 nearly	 half	 the	stars	 I	had	 seen
through	the	telescope.
     "The	 lights	aren't	as	bright."	 I	 looked	 back	to	the	telescope.	Once	again,	the
sky	burst	into	sparkling	 stars.	I	pulled	 back	from	 the	lens	and	stared	out	into	the
night.	The	real	 sky	was	darker,	 dimmer,	like	 lost,	lonely	 space.	"It's	 weird.	The
stars	look	so	different	through	your	telescope."
     "That's	because	they're	not	all	there."
     "What	are	you	talking	 about?	The	sky's	the	sky."
     Liv	 looked	up	at	the	moon.	"Except	when	it's	not."
     "What	does	that	mean?"
     "Nobody	 really	 knows.	There	are	Caster	constellations,	and	there	are	Mortal
constellations.	They	 aren't	the	 same.	At	 least,	they	 don't	 look	 the	same	to	 the
Mortal	eye.	Which	 unfortunately	 is	all	you	and	I	 have."	She	smiled	and	switched
one	of	the	settings.	"And	I've	 been	told	the	Mortal	constellations	 can't	be	seen	by
Casters."
     "How	 is	that	possible?"
     "How	 is	anything	possible?"
     "Is	 our	sky	 real?	Or	 does	it	 only	 look	 real?"	 I	felt	 like	  a	carpenter	bee	the
moment	he	found	out	 he'd	been	tricked	into	 thinking	 a	coat	of	blue	 paint	on	the
ceiling	was	the	sky.
     "Is	 there	a	difference?"	 She	pointed	 up	at	the	 dark	sky.	 "See	that?	The	Big
Dipper.	You	know	 that	one,	right?"	I	 nodded.
     "If	 you	 look	 straight	 down,	 two	 stars	from	 the	 handle,	you	 see	that	bright

209
star?"
     "It's	the	North	 Star."	Any	 former	Boy	Scout	in	 Gatlin	could	tell	 you	that.
     "Exactly.	  Polaris.	Now	  see	where	the	 bottom	 of	 the	 cup	ends,	 the	lowest
point?	Do	you	see	anything	there?"	I	shook	my	head.
     She	looked	into	 her	scope,	turning	first	 one	dial,	then	 a	second.	"Now	look."
She	stepped	back.
     Through	 the	 lens,	I	 could	 see	the	 Big	 Dipper,	 exactly	 as	 it	 looked	 in	 the
regular	sky,	only	shining	 more	brightly.	 "It's	the	same.	Mostly."
     "Now	 look	at	the	bottom	of	 the	cup.	Same	place.	What	do	you	see?"
     I	looked.	"Nothing."
     Liv	 sounded	annoyed.	"Look	again."
     "Why?	 There's	nothing	there."
     "What	 do	you	mean?"	Liv	 leaned	down	 and	looked	through	 the	lens.	"That's
not	possible.	 There's	supposed	to	be	 a	seven-pointed	star,	what	 Mortals	 call	 a
faery	star."
     A	seven-pointed	star.	Lena	had	one	on	her	necklace.
     "It's	 the	Caster	equivalent	 of	 the	North	 Star.	It	 marks	 due	south,	not	 north,
which	has	a	mystical	 importance	 in	the	 Caster	world.	They	 call	 it	the	 Southern
Star.	Hold	 on.	 I'll	 find	  it	 for	 you."	 She	bent	 over	the	 scope	again.	 "But	 keep
talking.	I'm	 sure	you	aren't	here	for	a	lecture	on	faery	stars.	What's	going	on?"
     There	was	 no	point	 in	 putting	 it	off	  any	longer.	 "Lena	ran	 away	with	 John
and	Ridley.	They're	down	in	 the	Tunnels	somewhere."
     Now	I	 had	her	attention.	"What?	How	do	you	 know?"
     "It's	hard	to	explain.	 I	saw	them	in	this	weird	 vision	that	wasn't	a	vision."
     "Like	 when	you	touched	the	journal	in	 Macon's	study?"
     I	 shook	my	 head.	"I	 didn't	 touch	anything.	 One	minute	 I	 was	staring	at	 my
reflection	 in	the	mirror,	  and	a	second	later	all	 I	 could	see	was	stuff	 flying	  past
me	like	I	was	running.	 When	I	stopped,	they	were	standing	in	 an	alley	a	few	feet
away,	but	they	couldn't	see	or	hear	me."	I	was	rambling.
     "What	were	they	doing?"	 Liv	 asked.
     "Talking	 about	some	place	called	the	Great	Barrier.	Where	everything	will	  be
perfect	and	they	 can	live	 happily	 ever	 after,	according	 to	 John."	I	 tried	 not	 to
sound	bitter.
     "They	actually	 said	they	were	going	to	the	Great	Barrier?	Are	you	sure?"
     "Yeah.	Why?"	 I	could	feel	 the	Arclight,	 suddenly	warm	in	my	 pocket.
     "The	 Great	 Barrier	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 ancient	 Caster	myths.	 A	  place	of
powerful	old	 magic,	long	before	there	was	Light	 or	Dark	--	 a	sort	of	Nirvana.	No
logical	person	believes	it	really	exists."
     "John	Breed	does."

210
     Liv	  looked	 up	 at	 the	sky.	 "Or	  so	 he	says.	 It's	 rubbish,	 but	 it's	 powerful
rubbish.	Like	 thinking	  the	Earth	is	 flat.	 Or	 that	the	sun	 orbits	the	 Earth."	Like
Galileo.	Of	course.
     I	had	come	here	looking	 for	 a	reason	to	go	back	to	bed,	back	to	 Jackson	and
my	life.	 An	 explanation	 for	 why	 I	 could	see	Lena	in	 my	 bathroom	mirror	  that
didn't	mean	I	was	crazy.	An	answer	that	didn't	lead	back	to	Lena.	But	 I	found	the
opposite.
     Liv	 kept	 talking,	 oblivious	 to	the	 sinking	 stone	in	my	 stomach,	and	the	one
burning	in	 my	 pocket.	"The	 legends	say	if	 you	follow	  the	Southern	Star,	you'll
eventually	find	 the	Great	Barrier."
     "What	 if	 the	star	 isn't	there?"	 With	 that	 one	thought,	another	 began	to	stir,
and	then	another,	all	coming	loose	in	my	mind.
     Liv	 didn't	 answer	because	she	was	frantically	adjusting	her	telescope.	"It	 has
to	be	there.	There	must	be	something	wrong	with	my	telescope."
     "What	if	 it's	gone?	The	galaxy	changes	all	the	time,	right?"
     "Of	  course.	By	 the	 year	 three	 thousand,	Polaris	 won't	  be	the	 North	 Star
anymore,	Alrai	will	  be.	It	means	'the	shepherd'	in	Arabic,	since	you	asked."
     "By	 the	year	three	thousand?"
     "Exactly.	 In	 a	thousand	years.	A	star	can't	suddenly	disappear,	not	without	 a
serious	cosmic	bang.	It's	not	a	subtle	thing."
     "	 'This	 is	 the	 way	 the	 world	  ends,	not	 with	  a	bang	 but	 a	 whimper.'	 "	  I
remembered	the	line	 from	 a	 T.	S.	 Eliot	 poem.	 Lena	couldn't	 get	it	 out	 of	 her
head,	before	her	birthday.
     "Yes,	well,	 I	love	the	poem,	but	the	science	is	a	bit	off."
     Not	with	 a	bang	but	 a	whimper.	 Or	was	it	 not	with	 a	whimper	 but	a	bang?	I
couldn't	remember	the	 exact	words,	but	 Lena	had	written	 it	 into	a	 poem	on	the
wall	of	her	bedroom	when	Macon	 died.
     Had	she	known	 where	 this	was	going	 all	 along?	I	 had	a	sick	 feeling	 in	 my
stomach.	The	Arclight	was	so	hot,	it	was	singeing	my	 skin.
     "There's	nothing	wrong	 with	your	 telescope."
     Liv	  studied	her	 selenometer.	"I'm	 afraid	 something	 is	 off.	 It's	 not	 just	 the
scope.	Even	the	numbers	don't	follow."
     "Hearts	will	  go	and	Stars	will	 follow."	  I	said	it	 without	 thinking,	 as	if	 it	was
any	old	song	stuck	in	my	head.
     "What?"
     "Seventeen	Moons.	It's	nothing,	 just	a	song	I	 keep	hearing.	It	 has	something
to	do	with	Lena's	Claiming."
     "A	 Shadowing	Song?"	She	looked	at	me	in	disbelief.
     "Is	that	what	it	 is?"	I	should've	known	 it	would	 have	a	name.

211
     "It	 foreshadows	what's	 to	 come.	You've	 had	a	Shadowing	 Song	this	 whole
time?	Why	didn't	 you	tell	me?"
     I	 shrugged.	Because	I	was	an	idiot.	 Because	I	didn't	 like	 to	 talk	about	 Lena
with	Liv.	 Because	horrible	things	came	out	of	that	song.	Take	your	pick.
     "Tell	 me	the	whole	verse."
     "There's	something	about	spheres,	and	a	moon	before	her	time	appears.	Then
it	says	the	part	about	the	stars	following	 where	the	hearts	go....	I	can't	remember
the	rest."
     Liv	  sank	down	 onto	 the	 top	step	 of	 the	 porch.	"A	  moon	 before	 her	time
appears.	Is	that	exactly	what	the	song	said?"
     I	nodded.	"First	 the	moon.	Then	the	star	follows.	I'm	 sure."
     The	sky	was	now	 streaked	with	light.	 "Calling	 a	Claiming	 Moon	 out	of	time.
That	would	explain	it."
     "What?	The	missing	star?"
     Liv	 closed	her	eyes.	"It's	more	than	the	star.	Calling	a	moon	out	of	time	 could
change	the	whole	Order	 of	Things,	 from	 every	magnetic	field	 to	 every	magical
one.	It	would	 explain	any	shift	 in	the	Caster	sky.	The	 natural	order	in	the	Caster
world	is	as	delicately	balanced	as	our	own."
     "What	could	 do	that?"
     "You	 mean	who."	Liv	 hugged	her	knees.
     She	could	only	be	talking	 about	one	person.	"Sarafine?"
     "There	are	no	records	of	 a	Caster	powerful	enough	to	 call	out	the	 moon.	But
if	someone	is	pulling	 a	moon	out	of	 time,	there's	no	way	 to	know	when	 the	next
Claiming	will	  come.	Or	where."	A	Claiming.	 Which	 meant	Lena.
     I	remembered	what	Marian	said	in	 the	archive.	We	don't	get	to	choose	what	is
true.	We	only	get	to	choose	what	we	do	about	it.
     "If	 we're	talking	 about	a	Claiming	Moon,	 this	is	about	Lena.	We	should	wake
up	Marian.	She	can	help	us."	But	even	as	I	said	it,	I	knew	 the	truth.	She	might	be
able	to	help	 us,	but	 that	didn't	 mean	she	would.	 As	 a	Keeper,	she	couldn't	 get
involved.
     Liv	 was	thinking	 the	 same	thing.	"Do	 you	really	 think	 Professor	Ashcroft	 is
going	to	let	us	chase	after	Lena	in	the	Tunnels,	after	what	happened	the	last	time
we	were	down	 there?	She'll	 have	us	locked	 up	in	 the	rare-books	collection	 for
the	rest	of	the	summer."
     Worse,	she'd	call	 Amma,	and	I	 would	 be	carting	 the	Sisters	to	church	 every
day	in	Aunt	Grace's	ancient	Cadillac.
     Jump	or	stay	in	the	boat.
     It	 wasn't	really	 a	decision,	not	anymore.	I'd	 made	it	 a	long	time	 ago,	when	I
first	got	out	of	 my	car	on	Route	9,	one	night	in	the	rain.	 I	had	jumped.	There	was

212
no	staying	in	 the	 boat,	not	for	 me,	 whether	Lena	 and	I	were	 together	or	 not.	I
wasn't	going	to	let	John	Breed	or	Sarafine	or	 a	missing	star	or	the	wrong	kind	 of
moon	or	some	crazy	 Caster	skies	stop	me	now.	I	 owed	the	girl	 on	 Route	9	that
much.
     "Liv,	 I	 can	find	 Lena.	I	 don't	know	 how,	 but	I	 can.	You	can	track	 the	moon
with	your	selenometer,	right?"
     "I	 can	 measure	variances	in	 the	magnetic	 pull	 of	 the	 moon,	 if	 that's	 what
you're	asking."
     "So	you	can	find	 the	Claiming	Moon?"
     "If	 my	 calculations	are	correct,	if	 the	weather	holds,	if	 the	typical	 corollaries
between	the	Caster	and	Mortal	constellations	stay	true	..."
     "It	 was	more	of	a	yes	or	no	question."
     Liv	 tugged	on	one	of	her	braids,	thinking.	"Yes."
     "If	 we're	going	to	do	this,	we	have	to	go	before	Amma	 and	Marian	wake	up."
     Liv	 hesitated.	As	a	Keeper-in-Training,	  she	wasn't	supposed	to	get	involved.
But	every	time	 we	were	 together,	we	found	 our	way	 to	trouble.	"Lena	 could	 be
in	a	lot	of	danger."
     "Liv,	 if	 you	don't	want	to	come	--"
     "Of	 course	I	want	 to	come.	I've	been	studying	 the	stars	and	the	Caster	world
since	I	was	five.	 All	 I've	 ever	wanted	was	to	be	part	of	 it.	Up	 until	 a	few	weeks
ago,	the	only	thing	I'd	 done	was	read	about	it	and	watch	it	through	my	 telescope.
I'm	tired	of	 watching.	But	Professor	Ashcroft	 ..."
     I	had	been	wrong	about	Liv.	 She	wasn't	like	 Marian.	She	wouldn't	 be	content
shelving	Caster	Scrolls.	She	wanted	to	prove	the	world	wasn't	flat.
     "Jump	or	stay	in	 the	boat,	Keeper.	Are	you	coming?"	 The	sun	was	rising,	and
we	were	running	out	of	time.
     "Are	 you	 sure	you	want	 me	to?"	 She	didn't	look	 at	me,	 and	I	 didn't	look	 at
her.	The	memory	of	the	kiss	that	never	happened	hung	between	us.
     "You	  know	 anyone	 else	with	  a	 spare	selenometer	 and	 a	mental	 map	 of
missing	Caster	stars?"
     I	 wasn't	sure	her	variances	or	 corollaries	 or	calculations	 were	going	 to	help
me.	But	I	 knew	the	 song	was	never	wrong,	and	the	 things	I	 saw	tonight	proved
it.	I	 needed	help,	 and	so	did	 Lena,	even	 if	 what	we	 had	was	 over.	I	 needed	a
Keeper,	 even	 a	  runaway	 Keeper	  with	  a	 crazy	  watch,	 looking	   for	  action
everywhere	but	inside	a	book.
     "Jump,"	 Liv	  said	 softly.	 "I	  don't	 want	 to	 stay	in	 the	 boat	 anymore."	 She
turned	the	handle	on	the	screen	door	quietly,	without	 making	so	much	as	a	click.
Which	meant	she	was	going	inside	 to	get	her	stuff.	 Which	 meant	she	was	going
with	me.

213
    "You	 sure?"	I	didn't	want	to	be	the	reason	she	was	going,	at	least	not	the	only
reason.	That's	what	I	told	myself,	but	I	was	full	of	crap.
    "You	 know	anyone	else	dumb	enough	to	search	for	a	mythical	place	where	a
rogue	Supernatural	is	trying	to	call	a	Claiming	Moon?"	She	smiled,	opening	the
door.
    "As	 a	matter	of	fact,	I	do."

214
6.18	

215
                                                  Outer	     Doors



SUMMER	SCHOOL:	NEVER	STOP	LEARNIN'	IF	YOU	WANT	TO	START	EARNIN'.
     That's	what	the	letter	 board	said,	where	it	usually	 read	GO	WILDCATZ.	Liv	and
I	stared	up	at	it,	from	the	bushes	lining	the	front	 steps	of	Jackson	High.
     "I'm	 reasonably	sure	there	are	G's	in	learning	and	earning."
     "They	 probably	  ran	 out	 of	 G's.	 You	 know,	  graduation,	 GED,	 Get	 Outta
Gatlin."	 This	was	going	 to	be	tricky.	 Summer	or	not,	 Miss	Hester	would	 still	 be
sitting	in	 the	attendance	office,	keeping	 watch	on	the	 front	door.	 If	 you	failed	 a
class,	you	 had	to	 enroll	 in	 summer	school.	 But	 that	 didn't	 mean	you	 couldn't
ditch	--	if	 you	could	 get	by	Miss	 Hester.	Even	though	Mr.	 Lee	never	made	good
on	his	threat	 to	fail	 us	 for	 not	showing	 up	at	 the	Reenactment	of	the	 Battle	 of
Honey	Hill,	  Link	  had	failed	 biology,	 which	 meant	 I	 had	to	 find	 a	way	 to	 get
inside.
     "Are	 we	 going	  to	 hang	out	 in	 the	 bushes	all	 morning?"	  Liv	  was	getting
cranky.
     "Give	 me	 a	second.	I've	 spent	all	 my	 time	 thinking	 up	 ways	 to	get	 out	of
Jackson.	I	never	put	much	thought	into	how	 to	get	in.	But	 we	can't	leave	without
Link."
     Liv	  smiled	 at	 me.	"Never	  underestimate	the	 power	 of	 the	 British	 accent.
Watch	and	learn."


Miss	Hester	looked	over	her	glasses	at	Liv,	who	had	twisted	her	blond	hair	 into	a
bun.	It	was	summer,	which	meant	Miss	Hester	was	wearing	one	of	her	sleeveless
blouses	and	knee-length	 polyester	 shorts,	 with	 her	 white	 slip-on	 Keds.	 From
where	I	 was	 hiding	 under	 the	counter	 next	to	 Liv,	  I	 had	a	 clear	view	  of	 the
bottom	of	Miss	Hester's	green	shorts	and	her	buniony	feet.
     "I'm	 sorry.	Who	did	 you	say	you	were	with?"
     "The	BEC."	 Liv	 kicked	me,	and	I	edged	toward	the	hall.
     "Of	 course.	And	that	would	be?"
     Liv	 sighed	impatiently.	 "The	 British	 Educational	 Consulate.	As	I	 said,	we're
looking	 for	 high-functioning	  schools	in	 the	United	 States	to	use	as	models	 for
educational	reform."
     "High	 functionin'?"	  Miss	 Hester	sounded	confused.	I	 made	my	 way	around

216
the	corner	on	my	hands	and	knees.
     "I	 can't	 believe	 no	one	 informed	 you	 of	 my	 visit.	 May	 I	 speak	 with	 your
headmaster,	please?"
     "Headmaster?"	By	the	time	 Miss	Hester	figured	out	 what	a	headmaster	was,	I
was	halfway	up	the	 stairs.	Beyond	the	blond,	even	beyond	the	brains,	 Liv	 was	a
girl	with	 a	lot	of	hidden	talents.


"All	 right,	 enough	a	the	Charlotte's	 Web	jokes.	Grab	your	specimen	firmly	  with
one	hand,	 and	make	 your	 incision	 down	 the	 belly,	 top	 to	 bottom,	 with	  your
scissors."	I	could	hear	Mrs.	 Wilson	through	 the	door.	I	 knew	what	was	going	 on
in	biology	 today,	from	the	smell	alone.	Not	to	 mention	the	commotion.
     "I	 think	I'm	 going	to	pass	out	--"
     "Wilbur,	 no!"
     "Ewww!"
     I	 looked	through	 the	window	 in	 the	door.	Pink	 fetal	 pigs	were	lined	 up	in	 a
row	 on	the	 lab	tables.	 They	 were	small,	 pinned	 to	black,	 waxy	 boards	 inside
metal	trays.	Except	Link's.
     Link's	 pig	was	massive.	He	raised	his	hand.	"Um,	 Mrs.	 Wilson?	I	 can't	crack
the	sternum	with	scissors.	Tank's	too	big	for	that."
     "Tank?"
     "Tank,	my	 pig."
     "You	 can	use	the	garden	shears	in	the	back	a	the	room."
     I	knocked	 on	the	window.	 Link	 walked	right	 by,	but	 he	didn't	hear	me.	Eden
was	sitting	at	 the	long	black	 lab	table	next	 to	Link's,	 holding	 her	nose	with	 one
hand	and	poking	around	inside	her	pig	with	 tweezers.	I	was	surprised	she	was	in
there	with	 the	rest	 of	 the	flunkies	 --	 not	because	she	was	a	 rocket	scientist	 or
anything,	but	because	I	would've	expected	her	mom	and	the	DAR	mafia	to	 find	a
way	to	get	her	out	of	it.
     Eden	pulled	a	long	yellow	 rope	out	of	her	pig.	 "What	is	all	 this	yellow	 stuff?"
She	looked	like	she	was	going	to	hurl.
     Mrs.	  Wilson	 smiled.	  This	 was	 her	  favorite	 moment	  of	 the	 year.	 "Miss
Westerly,	how	 many	times	 did	 you	go	 to	the	Dar-ee	 Keen	this	week?	 Did	 you
have	a	shake	with	your	fries	and	your	burger?	Onion	rings?	A	side	a	pie?"
     "What?"
     "It's	fat.	 Now	let's	look	 for	the	bladder."
     I	knocked	 again,	as	Link	 walked	by	 with	 a	pair	of	 enormous	shears.	He	saw
me	and	opened	the	door.	"Mrs.	Wilson,	I	gotta	use	the	bathroom."
     We	took	 off	 down	the	hall,	 shears	and	all.	When	we	banged	our	way	 around

217
the	corner	in	front	of	 the	attendance	office,	Liv	 smiled	at	Miss	 Hester	and	closed
her	notebook.	"Thanks	ever	so	much.	I'll	be	in	touch."
     She	disappeared	out	the	front	door	behind	us,	her	blond	hair	falling	 out	of	her
bun.	You	would	 have	to	 be	brain-damaged	to	not	realize	 Liv	 was	a	teenager,	in
her	ripped	jeans.
     Miss	Hester	watched	in	bewilderment,	 shaking	her	head.	"Redcoats."




The	thing	 about	Link	 was,	he	 never	asked	for	details.	 He	just	 went	with	 it.	 He
went	with	it	 when	we	tried	to	 cut	a	real	tire	to	make	a	tire	swing.	He	 went	with	it
when	I	 made	him	help	 me	build	 a	gator	trap	 in	my	 backyard,	 and	every	time	 I
stole	the	Beater	to	chase	a	girl	the	rest	of	the	school	thought	was	a	freak.	It	was	a
great	quality	in	 a	best	friend,	and	sometimes	I	 wondered	if	 I	would	 do	the	same
for	him	if	 things	were	reversed.	Because	I	was	always	the	one	who	asked,	and	he
was	always	the	one	who	was	game.
     Within	 five	 minutes,	we	were	rolling	 down	Jackson	Street.	We	made	it	all	the
way	to	 Dove	 Street,	when	 we	 pulled	 over	at	 the	 Dar-ee	Keen.	 I	 checked	my
watch.	Amma	would	 know	I	 was	gone	by	now.	Marian	 would	be	waiting	 for	Liv
at	the	library,	 if	 she	hadn't	missed	her	 at	breakfast.	And	 Mrs.	 Wilson	 would've
sent	someone	to	drag	Link	out	of	the	bathroom.	We	were	running	out	of	 time.
     The	actual	plan	 didn't	come	 together	until	 we	sat	down	 with	 greasy	food	on
greasy	yellow	trays	at	our	greasy	red	table.
     "Can't	believe	she	ran	off	with	 Vampire	 Boy."
     "How	 many	times	do	I	have	to	tell	you?	He's	an	Incubus,"	Liv	 corrected.
     "Whatever.	  If	  he's	  a	 Blood	  Incubus,	  he	 can	  suck	 your	  blood.	  Same
difference."	 Link	 shoved	 a	biscuit	 into	 his	mouth	 while	 he	 rolled	 another	one
around	in	the	pool	of	gravy	on	his	plate.
     "A	 Blood	Incubus	is	a	Demon.	A	 vampire	is	something	in	a	movie."
     I	 didn't	want	 to	do	it,	 but	 there	was	something	I	 had	to	get	out	 on	the	table.
"Ridley's	with	 them,	too."
     Link	 sighed	and	crumpled	up	the	biscuit	 paper.	His	expression	didn't	change,
but	I	 knew	he	 was	feeling	 the	same	knot	 in	his	 stomach	I	 had	in	mine.	 "Well,
that	blows."	 He	tossed	the	paper	at	the	trash	can.	It	hit	 the	rim	 and	fell	 onto	the
floor.	"You're	 sure	they're	in	the	Tunnels?"
     "That's	what	it	 looked	like."	 On	the	way	to	the	Dar-ee	Keen,	I	told	 Link	 about
the	vision,	 but	 I	 left	 out	 the	part	 about	how	 I	 saw	it	  in	my	 bathroom	 mirror.
"They're	headed	for	some	place	called	the	Great	Barrier."

218
    "A	 place	that	doesn't	exist."	Liv	was	shaking	her	head,	checking	the	rotating
dials	on	her	wrist.
    Link	  pushed	away	his	plate,	still	 covered	with	food.	 "So	let	 me	get	this
straight.	We're	gonna	go	down	into	the	Tunnels	and	find	this	moon	outta	time
with	Liv's	fancy	watch?"
    "Selenometer."	Liv	didn't	look	up	from	copying	numbers	from	the	dials	into
her	red	notebook.
    "Whatever.	Why	don't	we	tell	Lena's	family	what's	goin'	on?	Maybe	they	can
make	us	invisible	or	lend	us	some	crazy	Caster	weapons."
    A	 weapon.	Like	the	one	I	had	with	me	right	now.
    I	 could	feel	 the	curve	of	the	Arclight	 in	 my	pocket.	I	 had	no	idea	how	it
worked,	but	maybe	Liv	did.	She	knew	how	to	read	the	Caster	sky.
    "It	 won't	make	us	invisible,	but	I	have	this."	I	held	the	sphere	above	the	shiny
plastic	table.
    "Dude.	A	ball?	Seriously?"	Link	wasn't	impressed.
    Liv	  was	stunned.	She	reached	out	tentatively,	her	hand	hovering.	"Is	that
what	I	think	it	is?"
    "It's	 an	Arclight.	Marian	gave	it	to	me	on	All	Souls.	It	belonged	to	my	mom."
    Liv	 tried	 to	hide	her	irritation.	"Professor	Ashcroft	had	an	Arclight	all	 this
time,	and	she	never	showed	it	to	me?"
    "Here	 you	go.	Knock	yourself	out."	I	 dropped	the	sphere	into	Liv's	hands.
She	held	it	carefully,	as	if	it	was	an	egg.
    "Careful!	 Do	you	have	any	idea	how	rare	these	are?"	Liv	couldn't	take	her
eyes	away	from	its	glossy	surface.
    Link	 sucked	down	the	rest	of	his	Coke	until	he	hit	ice.	"Anyone	gonna	clue
me	in	here?	What's	it	do?"
    Liv	  was	mesmerized.	"This	is	one	of	 the	 most	powerful	weapons	in	the
Caster	world.	It's	a	metaphysical	prison	for	an	Incubus,	if	you	know	how	to	use
it."	I	looked	at	her	hopefully.	"Which,	unfortunately,	I	don't."
    Link	 poked	at	the	Arclight.	"Like	Incubus	kryptonite?"
    Liv	 nodded.	"Something	like	that."
    There	was	no	doubt	the	Arclight	was	powerful,	but	it	wasn't	going	to	help	us
with	the	problem	at	hand.	I	was	out	of	ideas.	"If	this	thing	can't	help	us,	how	do
we	get	into	the	Tunnels?"
    "It's	 not	a	holiday."	Liv	handed	me	the	Arclight	reluctantly.	"If	we're	going	to
get	into	the	Caster	Tunnels,	it	has	to	be	through	one	of	the	Outer	Doors.	We	can't
go	through	the	Lunae	Libri."
    "So	there	are	other	ways	in?	Through	these	Outer	Door	things?"	Link	asked.
    Liv	  nodded.	"Yes.	 But	 only	 Casters	and	a	 few	 Mortals,	like	  Professor

219
Ashcroft,	 know	 where	they	 are.	And	 she's	not	 going	 to	 tell	 us.	I'm	 sure	she's
packing	my	things	right	 now."
     I	had	expected	Liv	 to	have	the	answer,	but	 it	was	Link	 who	 came	up	with	 it.
"You	 know	what	 that	means?"	He	grinned	and	put	 his	arm	around	 Liv.	 "You're
finally	 gonna	get	your	chance.	Time	for	the	Tunnel	of	Love."




Fairgrounds	after	the	fair	were	just	grounds.	I	kicked	 a	clump	of	dirt	 and	weeds.
     "Look,	 you	 can	still	 see	the	indentations	where	the	rides	were."	 Liv	 pointed,
Lucille	 trailing	behind	 her.
     "Yeah,	 but	how	 do	 you	know	 which	 rides	 the	marks	 are	from?"	 It	 seemed
like	a	good	idea	at	the	Dar-ee	Keen,	but	now	we	were	standing	in	an	empty	field.
     Link	 shouted	and	 waved	from	 a	few	 yards	away.	 "I	 think	 this	 is	where	the
Ferris	Wheel	was.	I	 can	tell	by	 all	the	cigarette	butts.	 That	old	carny	 was	chain-
smoking	all	day."
     We	caught	 up	with	 him.	 Liv	 pointed	 to	a	 black	patch	in	 the	distance.	 "Isn't
that	where	Lena	saw	us?"
     "What?"	 I	stumbled	over	the	word	us.
     "I	 mean,	saw	me."	 She	blushed.	 "I	 think	 that's	where	the	 popcorn	machine
blew	up	when	 she	walked	by.	Before	 she	popped	the	clown's	balloon	 and	made
the	little	children	 cry."	How	 could	I	forget?
     It	 was	hard	to	find	 the	impressions	in	 the	ground	 under	the	tall	 grass.	I	bent
down	and	pushed	the	 weeds	out	of	 the	way,	 but	there	 was	nothing.	 Just	a	few
paper	snow	cone	cups	and	tickets.	As	I	stood	up,	I	felt	 the	Arclight	 heating	up	in
my	pocket	 again,	 and	a	 dull	 buzzing.	 I	 took	 it	 out	 of	 my	 pocket,	and	 it	 was
glowing	a	clear	blue.
     I	waved	Liv	 over.	"What	 do	you	think	 this	means?"
     She	studied	 the	sphere,	watching	 the	 color	 intensify.	 "I	  have	no	 idea.	I've
never	read	about	them	changing	color."
     "What's	up,	kids?"	 Link	 wiped	the	sweat	off	 his	forehead	with	his	ratty	 Black
Sabbath	T-shirt.	"Whoa.	When	did	it	 start	with	the	mood	ring	 action?"
     "A	 second	ago."	I	don't	 know	 why,	but	 I	started	walking	 slowly,	 a	few	 steps
at	a	time.	As	I	walked,	the	glow	 of	the	Arclight	 grew	stronger.
     "Ethan,	what	are	you	doing?"	Liv	 was	right	 behind	me.
     "I'm	 not	sure."	I	switched	 directions,	and	the	color	began	to	fade.	Why	 was	it
changing?
     I	turned	around	and	headed	back	the	other	way.	Sure	enough,	with	every	step

220
the	Arclight	 grew	warmer	 in	my	 hand,	the	vibrations	stronger.	"Look."	  I	opened
my	hand	so	Liv	could	see	the	deep	blue	color	radiating	from	it.
     "What's	happening?"
     I	shrugged.	"It's	like	 the	closer	we	get,	the	crazier	it	goes."
     "You	 don't	think	 ..."	 She	stared	down	at	her	dusty	silver	 high-tops,	 thinking.
We	were	thinking	the	same	thing.
     I	turned	it	 over	in	my	hand.	"Could	 it	be	some	kind	of	compass?"
     Liv	 watched	as	the	sphere	glowed	so	brightly	 that	 Lucille	 was	leaping	along
beside	us,	like	she	was	trying	to	catch	fireflies.
     When	we	reached	a	bleached	patch	of	grass,	Liv	stopped.
     The	Arclight	 was	swirling	 a	dark,	inky	 blue.	I	 looked	at	the	ground	carefully.
"There's	nothing	here."
     Liv	 bent	down,	pushing	the	grass	aside.	"I'm	 not	so	sure	about	that."	A	shape
emerged	as	Liv	brushed	away	the	dirt.
     "Look	 at	the	lines.	It's	 a	door."	Link	 was	right.	 It	was	like	 the	trapdoor	under
the	rug	in	Macon's	room.
     I	 knelt	next	 to	them	 and	ran	my	 hand	along	 the	edges	of	the	door,	 clearing
away	the	remaining	dirt.	I	 looked	at	Liv.	 "How	did	 you	know?"
     "You	 mean,	 aside	from	 the	 fact	 the	Arclight	  is	 going	 crazy?"	 She	looked
smug.	"The	 Outer	 Doors	aren't	 that	 difficult	  to	 find	 if	 you	 know	 what	 you're
looking	for."
     "I	 hope	they	aren't	too	difficult	  to	 open	either."	Link	 pointed	 at	the	center	of
the	door.	There	was	a	keyhole.
     Liv	 sighed.	"It's	locked.	We	 need	a	Caster	key.	We	can't	get	in	without	one."
     Link	 pulled	 the	 massive	garden	shears	he	stole	from	 the	 bio	 lab	out	 of	 his
belt.	Far	be	it	 from	 Link	 to	put	 anything	 back	in	its	 rightful	 place.	"Caster	 key,
my	ass."
     "It's	 not	going	to	 work."	 Liv	 squatted	next	to	Link	 in	 the	grass.	"It's	a	Caster
lock,	not	something	on	your	locker	 door."
     Link	 huffed	 as	he	 worked	the	 gardening	shears	into	 the	crack.	 "You're	 not
from	around	 here.	Isn't	a	door	 in	this	 whole	 county	that	can't	 be	opened	with	 a
set	of	pliers	or	a	sharp	toothbrush."
     I	looked	at	Liv.	 "You	 realize	he	makes	this	stuff	up."
     "Yeah?"	 Link	 grinned	up	at	us	as	the	door	opened	with	 a	resentful	creak.	He
held	up	his	fist	to	me.	"Pound	it."
     Liv	 was	shocked.	"Well,	that's	not	in	the	books."
     Link	 leaned	over	 and	looked	inside.	 "It's	 dark,	and	 there're	no	stairs.	Looks
like	a	pretty	big	drop."
     "Take	a	step."	I	knew	what	 was	coming.

221
     "Are	 you	nuts?"
     "Trust	me."
     Link	 felt	 around	with	 his	foot,	 and	a	second	later	he	was	standing	in	 the	air.
"Man,	 where	 do	Casters	 get	this	 stuff?	 Are	 there,	 like,	 Caster	 carpenters?	A
supernatural	construction	union?"	He	disappeared	out	of	sight.	A	second	later	his
voice	 echoed	up	 from	 the	 hole.	 "It's	 not	 that	 far	 down.	 You	 two	 comin',	  or
what?"
     Lucille	 stared	into	 the	darkness	and	leaped	into	the	hole.	That	cat	 must	have
picked	up	more	than	a	little	 crazy,	living	  with	 my	aunts	all	these	years.	I	looked
over	the	edge,	and	I	could	 see	the	flickering	 light	 of	 a	torch.	Link	 was	standing
below	us,	Lucille	 sitting	at	his	feet.	"Ladies	first."
     "Why	 is	it	men	only	 say	that	when	it's	something	horrible	 or	dangerous?"	Liv
put	one	foot	into	the	hole,	uncertain.	"No	 offense."
     I	smiled	at	her.	"None	 taken."
     Her	 silver	 sneakers	dangled	for	 a	 minute	 and	she	 wobbled,	 off	 balance.	I
grabbed	her	hand.	"You	know,	if	 we	find	Lena,	she	may	be	completely	--"
     "I	 know."	 I	 looked	into	 Liv's	 calm	blue	 eyes,	which	would	 never	be	gold	 or
green.	The	sun	lit	 her	hair,	as	blond	as	honey.	She	smiled	 at	me,	and	I	let	 go	of
her	hand.
     I	realized	she	was	the	one	steadying	me.
     As	I	 disappeared	into	the	darkness	behind	her,	the	door	banged	shut	after	me,
blocking	out	the	sky.




The	entrance	to	the	 tunnel	was	dank	 and	mossy,	like	 the	one	that	 led	from	 the
Lunae	Libri	  to	Ravenwood.	 The	ceiling	 over	 the	stairs	was	low,	 and	 the	stone
walls	were	 old	and	weathered	like	 some	kind	 of	 dungeon.	Every	drop	 of	 water
and	every	sound	echoed	off	the	walls.
     At	  the	 bottom	 of	 the	 stairs,	 we	 found	  ourselves	at	 a	 crossroads.	 Not	 a
proverbial	one	but	a	real	one.
     "So	 which	 way	 do	we	 go?"	 Link	 looked	 down	 two	 very	 different	 tunnels.
This	trip	 was	more	complicated	 than	the	one	 to	Exile.	 That	had	 been	a	straight
shot,	but	this	time	it	was	different,	 and	there	were	choices	to	be	made.
     Choices	I	had	to	make.
     The	 tunnel	 to	 the	 left	  looked	 more	 like	 a	 meadow	 than	 a	 tunnel.	 As	 it
widened,	there	were	weeping	willows	  hanging	over	a	dusty	footpath,	 framed	by
tangles	of	wildflowers	  and	tall	 grass.	Rolling	 hills	 spread	out	under	a	cloudless

222
blue	 sky.	 You	 could	  almost	 imagine	 the	 birds	 chirping	  and	see	 the	 rabbits
nibbling	grass,	if	it	 wasn't	a	Caster	tunnel,	where	nothing	was	ever	as	it	seemed.
     The	 tunnel	 to	  the	 right	 wasn't	 a	 tunnel	  at	 all	 but	  a	curving	  city	  street
underneath	its	own	Caster	sky.	The	dark	street	was	a	sharp	contrast	to	the	sunny
countryside	scene	of	 the	 first	 tunnel.	 Liv	  was	scribbling	  notes	in	 her	book.	 I
looked	over	her	shoulder.	Asynchronous	time	zones	in	adjacent	tunnels.
     The	only	 light	 came	from	 a	blinking	 motel	sign	 at	the	end	of	 the	street.	Tall
apartment	buildings	with	 small	iron	balconies	and	fire	escape	ladders	lined	either
side.	Long	 wires	 crisscrossed	the	street	from	 building	  to	building,	  forming	 an
intricate	web	 with	 a	few	 pieces	of	 clothing	 caught	in	 it.	 An	 abandoned	trolley
track	was	embedded	in	the	asphalt.
     "Which	 way	do	 we	go?"	Link	 was	anxious.	Wandering	 around	creepy	Caster
Tunnels	wasn't	agreeing	with	him.	 "I	vote	for	 the	Wizard	of	Oz	path."	 He	headed
for	the	sunshine.
     "I	 don't	 think	 we'll	 need	to	vote."	 I	 took	 the	Arclight	  out	of	 my	 pocket,	 its
heat	warming	 my	 hand	before	 I	 noticed	 the	light.	  Its	 ebony	surface	 began	to
glow	a	pale	green.
     Liv's	 eyes	were	wide.	"Amazing."
     I	took	a	few	 steps	down	the	dark	street,	and	the	light	intensified.
     Link	 came	up	behind	 us.	"Hello?	 I	was	walkin'	 away	 over	there?	You're	not
gonna	stop	me?"
     "Watch	  this."	 I	 held	  the	 Arclight	  high	 enough	 for	  him	 to	 see	 and	kept
walking.
     "Killer	  flashlight."
     Liv	 checked	her	selenometer.	"You	were	right.	It's	 guiding	us	like	 a	compass.
My	 readings	confirm	 it.	 The	moon's	magnetic	 pull	 is	stronger	in	 this	 direction,
which	is	completely	 wrong	for	this	 time	of	year."
     Link	 shook	 his	head.	"I	 should've	 known	 we'd	have	to	 go	down	 the	creepy
street.	We're	probably	gonna	get	killed	by	another	one	a	those	Vexes."
     Every	 time	I	 took	 a	step	closer	to	 the	street,	the	Arclight	  glowed	 a	brighter
and	deeper	shade	of	green.	"We're	going	this	way."
     "Of	 course	we	are."


After	 Link	 convinced	himself	 we	 were	headed	for	certain	 death,	the	dark	street
was	nothing	but	 a	dark	street.	The	 short	walk	 to	where	 the	motel	sign	 was	still
blinking	  was	 uneventful.	 The	 street	 was	 a	dead	 end,	 leading	 right	  up	 to	 a
doorway	under	 the	sign.	 There	was	 another	street	running	 perpendicular	 to	 it,
lined	with	 unlit	  doorways.	Between	 the	motel	 sign	and	the	 building	 next	 to	it,

223
there	was	a	steep	set	of	stone	stairs.	Another	Doorwell.
     "Should	we	go	left	 or	right?"	 Liv	 asked,	stepping	back	onto	the	street.
     I	 looked	 at	the	Arclight's	  incandescent	light,	 now	 emerald	 green.	"Neither.
We're	going	up."
     I	 pushed	open	the	heavy	door	 at	the	top	 of	 the	stairs.	We	 stepped	out	from
behind	an	enormous	stone	arch,	stumbling	into	sunlight	 that	reached	through	the
branches	of	 a	 gargantuan	 oak.	 A	 woman	  with	 white	  shorts	 and	 white	 hair
pedaled	a	white	bike	with	a	white	 poodle	riding	 in	her	white	bike	 basket.	A	giant
golden	retriever	 chased	the	bike.	The	 dog	was	pulling	 a	 man	holding	 its	leash.
Lucille	 took	one	look	at	the	retriever	and	took	off	 into	the	bushes.
     "Lucille!"	  I	 bent	down	 between	the	bushes,	but	she	was	gone.	"Great.	 I	lost
my	aunt's	cat	again."
     "Technically,	 she's	your	cat.	She	lives	with	 you."	Link	 thrashed	around	in	the
azaleas.	"Don't	worry.	She'll	come	back.	Cats	have	a	good	sense	a	direction."
     "How	 would	you	 know	that?"	Liv	 looked	amused.
     "Cat	Week.	Like	 Shark	Week,	but	with	 cats."	I	shot	him	a	look.
     Link	 turned	red.	"What?	My	 mom	watches	a	lot	a	weird	stuff	on	TV."
     "Come	on."
     As	we	stepped	out	from	 behind	the	trees,	a	girl	 with	purple	 hair	bumped	into
Link,	 almost	dropping	 her	 giant	sketch	pad.	 We	were	 surrounded	by	dogs	 and
people	and	bikes	and	skaters,	in	a	 park	lined	 with	 azalea	bushes	and	shaded	by
huge	oaks.	There	was	an	ornate	stone	fountain	in	 the	center,	with	 carved	naked
mermen	spitting	water	on	each	other.	Walking	paths	radiated	in	every	direction.
     "What	 happened	to	the	 Tunnels?	Where	are	 we?"	Link	  was	more	confused
than	usual.
     "We're	in	 some	sort	of	park,"	Liv	 said.
     I	knew	 exactly	 where	we	were,	and	I	 smiled.	"Not	 some	park.	Forsyth	 Park.
We're	in	Savannah."
     "What?"	 Liv	 was	digging	through	her	bag.
     "Savannah,	Georgia.	I've	been	coming	here	with	my	mom	 since	I	was	little."
     Liv	  unfolded	 a	map	 of	 what	 looked	 like	 the	 Caster	sky.	 I	 recognized	 the
Southern	Star,	the	seven-pointed	one	that	was	missing	from	 the	real	Caster	sky.
"It	doesn't	make	sense.	If	the	Great	Barrier	exists,	which	I'm	 not	saying	I	believe,
it's	definitely	 not	in	the	middle	of	 a	Mortal	city."
     I	shrugged.	"This	is	where	it	 led	us.	What	can	I	say?"
     "We	 walked,	like,	 five	miles.	 How	 can	we	be	in	Savannah?"	Link	 still	 hadn't
grasped	the	idea	that	things	were	different	in	the	Tunnels.
     Liv	 clicked	 open	her	pen,	muttering	to	herself.	"Place	and	time	 not	subject	to
Mortal	physics."

224
    Two	 little	  old	 ladies	were	pushing	two	 tiny	 dogs	in	 strollers.	We	 were
definitely	in	Savannah.	Liv	closed	her	red	book.	"Time,	space,	distance	--	they're
all	different	down	here.	The	Tunnels	are	part	of	the	Caster	world,	not	the	Mortal
one."
    As	 if	 on	cue,	the	glow	of	the	Arclight	 faded	to	a	glossy	black.	I	slipped	it
back	into	my	pocket.
    "What	the	--	?	How	do	we	know	where	to	go	from	here?"	Link	panicked,	but
I	didn't.
    "We	don't	need	it.	I	think	I	know	where	we're	supposed	to	go."
    Liv	 crinkled	her	brow.	"How?"
    "There's	only	one	person	I	know	in	Savannah."

225
6.18	

226
                              Through	      the	  Looking	     Glass



My	 Aunt	 Caroline	lived	on	East	Liberty	Street	near	the	Cathedral	of	St.	John
the	Baptist.	I	hadn't	been	to	her	house	in	a	few	years,	but	I	knew	to	keep	heading
up	Bull	Street,	because	her	house	was	on	the	Historic	Savannah	Trolley	Tour,
which	ran	up	and	down	Bull.	Besides,	the	streets	ran	from	the	park	to	the	river,
and	there	was	a	public	square	about	every	other	block	to	mark	your	way.	It	was
hard	to	get	lost	in	Savannah,	whether	you	were	a	Wayward	or	not.
    Between	Savannah	and	Charleston,	you	could	find	a	historic	tour	for	 just
about	anything.	Plantation	tours,	 Southern	cooking	tours,	Daughters	of	 the
Confederacy	tours,	ghost	tours	(my	personal	favorite),	and	the	classic	--	historic-
home	tours.	Aunt	Caroline's	house	had	been	part	of	that	one	for	as	long	as	I
could	remember.	Her	attention	to	detail	was	legendary,	not	only	in	our	family
but	in	all	of	 Savannah.	She	was	the	curator	of	the	Savannah	History	Museum,
and	she	knew	as	much	 about	the	history	 of	 every	building,	 landmark,	and
scandal	in	the	City	of	Oaks	as	my	mom	had	known	about	the	Civil	War.	It	was
no	small	feat,	considering	scandals	were	as	common	as	tours	around	here.
    "Are	 you	sure	you	know	where	you're	goin',	man?	I	think	we	should	take	a
break	and	get	somethin'	to	eat.	I'd	kill	for	a	burger."	Link	had	more	faith	in	the
Arclight's	ability	to	navigate	than	mine.	Lucille,	who	had	reappeared,	sat	down
at	his	feet	and	cocked	her	head	to	the	side.	She	wasn't	so	sure	either.
    "Keep	 heading	up	toward	the	river.	We'll	 hit	East	Liberty	 sooner	or	later.
Look."	I	 pointed	to	the	steeple	of	the	cathedral	a	few	blocks	away.	"That's	St.
John's	Cathedral.	We're	almost	there."
    Twenty	minutes	later,	we	were	still	wandering	in	circles	near	the	cathedral.
Link	and	Liv	were	losing	their	patience,	and	I	didn't	blame	them.	I	looked	down
East	Liberty	for	something	familiar.	"It's	a	yellow	house."
    "Yellow	 must	be	a	popular	color.	Every	other	house	on	this	street	is	yellow."
Even	Liv	was	annoyed	with	me.	I'd	taken	us	around	the	same	block	three	times
now.
    "I	 thought	it	was	off	Lafayette	Square."
    "I	 think	we	should	find	a	phone	book	and	look	up	her	number."	Liv	wiped	the
sweat	from	her	forehead.
    I	 squinted	at	a	figure	in	the	distance.	"We	don't	need	a	phone	book.	That's	the
house	at	the	end	of	the	block."

227
     Liv	 rolled	her	eyes.	"How	 do	you	know?"
     "Because	Aunt	Del	is	standing	out	front."
     There	was	nothing	 weirder	than	ending	 up	in	 Savannah	after	walking	 only	a
few	hours	in	 the	Caster	Tunnels,	in	 some	sort	of	altered	 time.	Except	getting	 to
Aunt	Caroline's	 and	finding	 Lena's	Aunt	 Del	standing	 by	the	curb,	waving.	 She
was	expecting	us.
     "Ethan!	 I'm	 so	 glad	 I	 finally	  found	 you.	 I've	 been	everywhere	 --	 Athens,
Dublin,	Cairo."
     "You	 were	looking	 for	us	in	 Egypt	and	Ireland?"	 Liv	 looked	as	confused	as	I
felt,	but	this	was	something	I	could	 clear	up	for	her.
     "Georgia.	 Athens,	 Dublin,	  and	 Cairo	 are	cities	 in	  Georgia."	 Liv	  blushed.
Sometimes	I	forgot	 she	was	as	far	away	from	Gatlin	 as	Lena,	only	in	 a	different
way.
     Aunt	 Del	 took	my	 hand	and	patted	 it	affectionately.	  "Arelia	 tried	 to	Divine
your	 location,	 but	 Georgia	 was	 all	  she	could	 come	 up	 with.	  Unfortunately,
Divination	 is	more	of	an	art	than	a	science.	Thank	the	stars	I've	found	you."
     "What	are	you	doing	 here,	Aunt	Del?"
     "Lena's	missing.	 We	 were	hoping	 she	was	with	 you."	 She	sighed,	realizing
she	was	wrong.
     "She's	not,	but	I	think	 I	can	find	her."
     Aunt	Del	 smoothed	her	rumpled	skirt.	"Then	I	 can	help	you."
     Link	  scratched	 his	 head.	He	  had	 met	 Aunt	 Del,	  but	 he'd	 never	 seen	 a
demonstration	of	 her	gifts	 as	a	 Palimpsest.	It	 was	clear	 he	couldn't	 see	how	a
scattered	old	woman	was	going	to	 help	us.	After	 spending	a	dark	night	 with	 her
at	Genevieve	Duchannes'	grave,	I	knew	better.
     I	 struck	the	heavy	 iron	 knocker	against	the	 door.	Aunt	 Caroline	 opened	the
door,	wiping	 her	hands	on	her	 G.R.I.T.S.	apron.	 Girls	Raised	in	 the	South.	She
smiled,	her	eyes	crinkling	at	the	corners.
     "Ethan,	 whateva	are	you	 doin'	 here?	I	didn't	 know	 you	 were	goin'	 to	 be	in
Savannah."
     I	 hadn't	thought	 far	 enough	ahead	to	come	 up	with	 a	 good	lie,	 so	I	 had	to
settle	for	a	bad	one.	"I'm	in	town	visiting	 ...	a	friend."
     "Where's	Lena?"
     "She	couldn't	 make	it."	 I	 stepped	away	from	the	door	 so	I	 could	distract	 her
with	introductions.	 "You	 know	 Link,	 and	this	is	Liv	 and	Lena's	Aunt	 Delphine."
I	was	sure	the	first	 thing	Aunt	 Caroline	 would	do	 after	I	left	 was	call	 my	dad	to
say	how	 nice	it	 had	 been	to	see	me.	 So	much	 for	 keeping	my	 whereabouts	a
secret	from	Amma	and	living	 to	see	my	seventeenth	birthday.
     "Nice	 to	see	you	again,	 ma'am."	I	 could	always	 count	on	Link	  to	be	a	good

228
old	boy	 when	I	 needed	him	to	 be.	I	 tried	to	 think	 of	someone	in	 Savannah	my
aunt	wouldn't	 know,	 as	if	 that	was	 possible.	Savannah	was	bigger	than	 Gatlin,
but	all	Southern	towns	are	the	same.	Everyone	knows	each	other.
     Aunt	 Caroline	ushered	us	all	 inside.	In	 a	matter	of	 seconds,	she	disappeared
and	reappeared	with	sweet	tea	and	a	plate	of	 Benne	Babies,	maple	cookies	 that
were	even	sweeter	than	the	tea.	"Today	has	been	the	strangest	day."
     "What	do	you	 mean?"	I	reached	for	a	cookie.
     "This	 mornin'	when	 I	was	at	the	museum,	someone	broke	into	the	house,	but
that's	not	even	 the	oddest	part.	 They	 didn't	 take	a	thing.	 Ransacked	the	 entire
attic	and	didn't	even	touch	the	rest	of	the	house."
     I	 glanced	at	 Liv.	  There	were	 no	 coincidences.	Aunt	 Del	 might	 have	 been
thinking	 the	 same	thing,	 too,	but	 it	 was	 hard	to	 tell.	 She	was	 looking	 a	 little
woozy,	like	 she	was	having	 trouble	 sorting	through	 all	 the	different	 things	that
had	happened	in	this	room	since	the	house	was	built	 in	1820.	 She	was	probably
flashing	through	two	 hundred	years	all	at	once	while	 we	sat	here	eating	cookies.
I	 remembered	what	 she	 said	 about	her	 gift	  the	 night	 in	 the	 graveyard	 with
Genevieve.	Palimpsestry	was	a	great	honor	and	an	even	greater	burden.
     I	wondered	 what	Aunt	 Caroline	could	 possibly	have	that	was	worth	 stealing.
"What's	in	the	attic?"
     "Nothing,	  really.	  Christmas	 ornaments,	 some	 architectural	  plans	 for	  the
house,	some	of	your	 mother's	old	 papers."	Liv	  nudged	my	foot	 underneath	the
table.	I	was	thinking	the	same	thing.	Why	 weren't	they	in	the	archive?
     "What	sort	of	 papers?"
     Aunt	 Caroline	put	 out	some	more	cookies.	Link	  was	eating	them	faster	than
she	could	serve	them.	"I'm	 not	really	 sure.	A	 month	or	so	before	 she	died,	your
mother	asked	me	if	 she	could	 store	a	 few	 boxes	here.	You	 know	 your	 mother
with	her	files."
     "Do	 you	mind	 if	 I	 take	a	look?	 I'm	working	  at	the	library	 this	 summer	with
Aunt	 Marian,	 and	 she	may	 be	interested	 in	 some	of	  them."	 I	 tried	 to	 sound
casual.
     "Be	 my	 guest,	but	it's	 a	mess	up	 there."	She	picked	 up	 the	empty	 plate.	"I
have	a	few	calls	to	make,	and	I	still	 have	to	finish	 filin'	  the	police	report.	But	 I'll
be	down	here	if	you	need	me."


Aunt	Caroline	 was	right;	 the	attic	 was	a	mess.	Clothes	and	 papers	were	strewn
everywhere.	Someone	must	have	dumped	the	contents	of	every	box	up	there	into
one	gigantic	pile.	Liv	 picked	up	a	few	stray	papers.
     "How	 the	--"	 Link	 looked	 at	Aunt	 Del,	 embarrassed.	"I	mean,	how	the	heck

229
are	we	gonna	find	 anything	in	 here?	What	are	we	 even	lookin'	 for?"	 He	kicked
an	empty	box	across	the	floor.
     "Anything	   that	  could've	  been	  my	  mom's.	  Someone	 was	  looking	   for
something	up	here."	Everyone	dove	into	a	different	part	of	 the	pile.
     Aunt	 Del	 found	 a	 hatbox	full	  of	 Civil	  War	 shell	 casings	and	round	 balls.
"There	used	to	be	a	lovely	hat	in	here."
     I	 picked	 up	my	 mom's	 old	 high	 school	 yearbook	and	 a	field	  guide	to	 the
battlefield	 at	Gettysburg.	I	 noticed	 how	worn	 the	field	 guide	 was,	compared	to
her	yearbook.	That	was	my	mom.
     Liv	 knelt	over	 a	stack	of	papers.	"I	think	 I	found	 something.	I	mean,	it	seems
these	belonged	to	 your	 mother,	 but	 they're	 nothing,	 really	 --	 old	 sketches	of
Ravenwood	Manor	and	some	notes	on	Gatlin's	history."
     Anything	 that	had	to	do	with	 Ravenwood	was	something.	She	handed	me	the
notes	and	 I	 flipped	 through	 the	 pages.	Gatlin	  Civil	  War	 registries,	 yellowed
sketches	of	Ravenwood	Manor	 and	the	older	buildings	 in	 town	--	 the	Historical
Society,	 the	old	  firehouse,	 even	our	  house,	Wate's	 Landing.	 But	  none	of	  it
seemed	to	amount	to	anything.
     "Here,	kitty	 kitty.	 Hey,	 I	found	 a	friend	for	 ..."	 Link	 lifted	 up	a	cat	preserved
by	the	 Southern	 art	of	 taxidermy,	  then	dropped	 it	 when	 he	realized	 it	 was	 a
stuffed	dead	cat	with	mangy	black	fur.	 "Lucille."
     "There	has	to	be	something	 else.	Whoever	was	here	wasn't	looking	 for	 Civil
War	registries."
     "Maybe	they	 found	what	they	came	for."	Liv	 shrugged.
     I	looked	at	Aunt	 Del.	"There's	only	 one	way	to	find	out."


A	few	 minutes	later,	we	 were	all	 sitting	cross-legged	on	the	 floor,	 like	we	 were
in	a	campfire	circle.	Or	 a	seance.	"I'm	really	not	sure	this	is	a	good	idea."
     "It's	the	only	 way	to	find	 out	who	broke	in	here,	and	why."
     Aunt	 Del	 nodded,	barely	convinced.	 "All	 right.	 Remember,	if	 you	 feel	sick,
put	your	head	between	your	knees.	Now	join	hands."
     Link	 looked	at	me.	"What's	she	talkin'	about?	Why	would	 we	feel	sick?"
     I	 grabbed	Liv's	 hand,	completing	 the	 circle.	 It	was	 soft	and	 warm	in	 mine.
But	 before	I	  could	 think	 about	 the	fact	 that	 we	 were	 holding	 hands,	images
started	to	flash	before	my	eyes	--
     One	after	the	next,	opening	and	closing	like	 doors.	Each	image	cued	the	next,
like	dominoes,	or	one	of	those	flip-books	 I	read	as	a	kid.

    Lena,	Ridley,	 and	John	dumping	out	boxes	in	the	attic	...

230
        "It	 has	to	be	here.	Keep	looking."	John	tosses	old	books	onto	the	floor.
        "How	  can	you	 be	so	 sure?"	 Lena	reaches	 inside	another	 box,	 her	 hand
    covered	in	 black	designs.
        "She	knew	how	to	find	 it,	without	the	star."
        Another	 door	opened.	Aunt	Caroline,	 dragging	boxes	across	the	attic	floor.
    She	kneels	in	front	 of	a	box,	holding	 an	old	photo	of	my	mother,	and	 runs	her
    hand	over	 the	picture,	sobbing.
        And	 another.	My	mother,	her	 hair	hanging	 over	her	shoulder,	held	back	by
    her	 red	reading	glasses.	I	could	see	her	as	clearly	as	if	she	was	standing	right
    in	 front	 of	me.	She	scribbles	madly	 in	a	weathered	leather	 journal,	 then	rips
    out	 the	page,	folds	 it,	 and	slides	it	 into	 an	envelope.	She	scrawls	something
    across	the	front	 of	the	envelope	and	slips	it	 into	the	back	of	the	journal.	 Then
    she	 pushes	an	old	 trunk	 away	from	 the	wall.	  Behind	the	 trunk,	 she	pulls	 a
    loose	 board	 free	 from	 the	wainscoting.	 She	looks	 around,	 as	if	 she	senses
    someone	might	be	watching,	and	slides	the	journal	 into	the	narrow	 opening.

     Aunt	Del	 let	go	of	my	 hand.
     "Holy	 crap!"	 Link	  was	way	 beyond	remembering	 his	manners	in	 front	 of	 a
lady.	He	was	 green,	and	stuck	his	head	between	his	knees	immediately,	 like	 he
was	coming	in	for	 a	crash	landing.	I	 hadn't	seen	him	like	that	since	the	day	after
Savannah	Snow	dared	him	to	drink	an	old	bottle	of	peppermint	schnapps.
     "I'm	 so	sorry.	 I	know	 it's	difficult	  to	 acclimate	after	a	 trip."	 Aunt	 Del	patted
Link's	back.	"You're	 doing	fine	 for	your	first	 time."
     I	 didn't	 have	time	 to	 think	 about	everything	 I'd	 seen.	So	 I	 focused	on	one
thing:	She	knew	how	to	find	it,	without	 the	star.	John	was	talking	 about	the	Great
Barrier.	He	thought	 my	mom	knew	 something	about	it,	something	she	may	have
written	in	 her	journal.	Liv	 and	I	must	have	been	thinking	the	same	thing,	because
we	touched	the	old	trunk	at	the	same	time.
     "It's	 heavy.	Be	 careful."	 I	 started	to	 pull	 it	 away	from	  the	wall.	 It	 felt	 like
someone	had	filled	it	with	 bricks.
     Liv	 reached	for	the	wall,	working	 the	board	free.	But	 she	didn't	reach	into	the
opening.	I	 put	my	 hand	inside	 and	immediately	 touched	 the	battered	leather.	I
pulled	out	the	journal,	 feeling	 the	weight	 of	it	 in	my	 hand.	It	 was	a	piece	of	my
mother.	I	 flipped	 to	 the	back.	My	 mother's	 delicate	handwriting	  stared	back	at
me	from	the	front	of	 the	envelope.
     Macon
     I	ripped	it	 open,	unfolding	the	single	sheet.

231
    If	 you're	reading	this,	it	means	I	wasn't	able	to	get	to	you	in	time	to	tell	you
    myself.	Things	are	much	worse	than	any	of	us	could	have	imagined.	It	may
    already	be	too	late.	But	if	there	is	a	chance,	you	are	the	only	one	who	will
    know	how	to	prevent	our	worst	fears	from	becoming	reality.
         Abraham	is	alive.	He's	been	in	hiding.	And	he's	not	alone.	Sarafine	is	with
    him,	as	devoted	a	disciple	as	your	father.
         You	have	to	stop	them	before	we	all	run	out	of	time.

    -	LJ


    My	  eyes	dragged	across	the	bottom	of	the	page.	LJ.	Lila	Jane.	I	noticed
something	else	--	the	date.	I	felt	like	I'd	been	kicked	in	the	stomach.	March	21st.
A	month	before	my	mother's	accident.	Before	she	was	murdered.
    Liv	 stepped	away,	sensing	she	was	witnessing	something	private	and	painful.
I	 flipped	through	the	 pages	of	the	 journal,	looking	 for	 answers.	There	was
another	copy	of	the	Ravenwood	Family	Tree.	I'd	seen	it	before	in	the	archive,
but	this	one	looked	different.	Some	of	the	names	were	crossed	out.

232
     As	 I	turned	 the	pages,	a	loose	 paper	slipped	 out	and	floated	 to	 the	floor.	 I
picked	 it	  up,	 unfolding	  the	 fragile	  sheet.	 It	 was	 vellum,	  thin	  and	 slightly
transparent,	like	 tracing	paper.	There	 were	strange	shapes	penned	on	one	side.
Misshapen	ovals,	with	dips	 and	rises,	as	if	a	child	were	drawing	 clouds.	I	 turned
to	Liv,	 holding	the	vellum	 open	so	she	could	see	the	shapes.	She	shook	her	head
without	a	word.	Neither	 one	of	us	knew	what	it	meant.
     I	 folded	the	 delicate	paper	and	replaced	 it	in	 the	 journal,	skipping	 ahead	to
the	end.	I	turned	to	the	last	page.	There	was	something	else	that	didn't	make	any
sense,	at	least	not	to	me.

233
          In	Luce	Caecae	Caligines	sunt,
          Et	in	Caliginibus,	 Lux.
          In	Arcu	 imperium	est,
          Et	in	imperio,	 Nox.


     Instinctively,	  I	ripped	 out	the	 page	and	shoved	it	 in	my	 pocket.	 My	 mother
was	dead	because	of	the	letter,	 and	possibly	 what	 was	written	 on	 these	pages.
They	belonged	with	me	now.
     "Ethan,	are	you	all	right?"	 Aunt	 Del's	voice	was	full	 of	concern.
     I	was	so	far	 from	 right	I	 couldn't	 remember	what	it	 felt	like.	 I	 had	to	get	out
of	this	room,	away	from	 my	mom's	past,	out	of	my	head.
     "Be	right	 back."	I	 bolted	down	the	stairs	to	the	guest	room	and	lay	on	the	bed
in	my	 dirty	 clothes.	I	stared	at	the	 ceiling,	painted	 sky	blue,	just	 like	 the	one	in
my	bedroom.	Stupid	bees.	The	joke	was	on	them,	and	they	didn't	even	know.
     Or	maybe	on	me.
     I	was	numb,	the	way	 you	get	when	you	try	 to	feel	everything	at	once.	I	 might
as	well	have	been	Aunt	Del	walking	 into	this	old	house.
     Abraham	Ravenwood	 wasn't	a	piece	of	 the	past.	He	was	alive,	 hiding	 in	the
shadows	with	  Sarafine.	My	  mother	 had	 known,	 and	 Sarafine	had	 killed	  her
because	of	it.
     My	 eyes	were	blurry.	  I	wiped	 them,	 expecting	tears,	but	 there	was	nothing
there.	I	 squeezed	my	eyes	shut,	 but	when	 I	 opened	them	all	 I	 could	 see	were
colors	and	lights	 flashing	 by	me,	as	if	 I	 was	running.	 I	saw	bits	 and	pieces	--	a
wall,	 dented	silver	trash	 cans,	cigarette	butts.	Whatever	I'd	 experienced	when	 I
was	staring	into	my	bathroom	mirror	 was	happening	again.	I	tried	to	get	up,	but	I
was	too	dizzy.	The	pieces	kept	flying	 by,	finally	 slowing	 so	my	mind	could	catch
up.
     I	 was	in	 a	room,	 a	bedroom,	 maybe.	It	 was	 hard	to	 tell	 from	 where	I	 was
standing.	The	floor	 was	gray	 concrete,	and	the	white	 walls	were	 covered	in	the
same	black	 designs	I	  had	seen	 on	Lena's	 hands.	As	  I	 looked	 at	 them,	 they
seemed	to	move.
     I	scanned	the	room.	She	had	to	be	here	somewhere.
     "I	 feel	 so	different	  from	 everyone	else,	 even	other	Casters."	 It	 was	Lena's
voice.	I	looked	up,	following	  the	sound.
     They	were	above	me,	lying	 on	the	black-painted	ceiling.	 Lena	and	John	were
head	to	head,	talking	 back	and	 forth	 without	 looking	 at	each	other.	 They	were
staring	at	the	floor	  the	way	I	 stared	at	my	 ceiling	 at	night,	 when	I	 couldn't	 fall
asleep.	Lena's	hair	fell	around	her	shoulders,	flat	against	the	ceiling	as	if	 she	was

234
lying	on	the	floor.
     It	 would	 seem	 impossible,	 if	 I	 hadn't	 already	seen	it.	  Only	 this	 time,	 she
wasn't	the	only	one	on	the	ceiling.	And	I	 wasn't	there	to	pull	her	back	down.
     "No	 one	can	 explain	my	 powers	 to	me,	 not	even	 my	family.	  Because	they
don't	know."	 She	sounded	miserable	and	far	 away.	"And	  every	day	I	 wake	 up,
and	I	can	do	things	I	couldn't	the	day	before."
     "It's	 the	same	for	 me.	 One	day	 I	 woke	up	 and	thought	 about	somewhere	I
wanted	to	go,	and	a	second	later	I	was	there."	John	was	tossing	something	up	 in
the	air	and	catching	it,	 over	and	over.	 Except	he	was	tossing	it	 toward	 the	floor
instead	of	the	ceiling.
     "Are	 you	saying	that	you	didn't	know	 you	could	Travel?"
     "Not	 until	I	 did	it."	 He	closed	his	eyes,	but	he	didn't	stop	tossing	the	ball.
     "What	about	your	 parents?	Did	they	know?"
     "I	  never	  knew	  my	  parents.	 They	  took	  off	   when	  I	  was	 little.	   Even
Supernaturals	know	a	freak	 when	they	see	one."	If	 he	was	lying,	 I	 couldn't	 tell.
His	voice	was	bitter	and	hurt,	which	 sounded	genuine	to	me.
     Lena	rolled	 onto	her	side	 and	propped	herself	up	on	 her	elbow	 so	she	could
see	him.	"I'm	 sorry.	 That	must	 have	been	awful.	 At	 least	I	 had	my	 gramma	to
take	care	of	me."	She	looked	at	the	ball	and	it	froze	 in	midair.	 "Now	 I	don't	have
anyone."
     The	ball	 dropped	 to	the	 floor.	 It	 bounced	a	few	 times	 and	rolled	 under	the
bed.	John	turned	to	look	at	her.	"You	have	Ridley.	And	 me."
     "Trust	 me,	 once	you	 get	to	 know	 me,	 you	 won't	 be	able	 to	get	 away	 fast
enough."
     They	were	only	 inches	apart	now.	"You're	wrong.	 I	know	what	 it's	like	to	feel
alone	even	when	you're	with	other	people."
     She	didn't	say	anything.	 Is	that	what	 it	was	like	 when	she	was	with	 me?	Did
she	feel	alone	even	when	we	were	together?	When	she	was	in	my	arms?
     "L?"	 I	felt	 sick	when	he	said	it.	 "When	we	get	to	 the	Great	Barrier,	it's	gonna
be	different,	I	promise."
     "Most	 people	say	it	doesn't	exist."
     "That's	 because	they	 don't	 know	 how	  to	 find	 it.	 You	  can	only	  get	 there
through	the	Tunnels.	I'm	going	to	 take	you	there."	He	lifted	 her	chin	so	she	could
see	into	his	eyes.	"I	know	you're	scared.	But	you	have	me,	if	you	want	me."
     Lena	looked	away,	wiping	 one	of	 her	eyes	with	the	back	of	 her	hand.	I	could
see	the	black	designs,	which	looked	darker	now.	Less	like	 Sharpie	and	more	like
Ridley's	and	John's	tattoos.	She	was	staring	right	at	me,	but	she	couldn't	 see	me.
"I	have	to	make	sure	I	can't	hurt	anyone	else.	It	doesn't	matter	what	I	want."
     "It	 matters	 to	 me."	 John	ran	 his	 thumb	under	 her	 eye,	catching	 her	 tears,

235
leaning	closer	to	her.	"You	 can	trust	me.	I'd	never	hurt	you."	 He	pulled	her	to	his
chest,	her	head	resting	on	his	shoulder.
     Can	I?
     I	 couldn't	 hear	anything	 else,	 and	it	 became	harder	 to	 see	her,	like	  I	 was
zooming	out	somehow.	I	blinked	 hard,	trying	 to	stay	focused,	but	when	I	opened
my	eyes	again,	all	I	could	 see	was	the	swirling	blue	ceiling.	 I	turned	 on	my	side,
facing	the	wall.
     I	was	back	in	 Aunt	Caroline's	 room,	and	they	were	gone.	Together,	wherever
they	were.
     Lena	was	 moving	 on.	She	was	 opening	up	 to	John,	and	 he	was	reaching	 a
part	of	her	I	thought	was	gone.	Maybe	I	was	never	meant	to	reach	it.
     Macon	had	lived	in	 the	Dark,	and	my	mom	in	the	Light.
     Maybe	 we	weren't	 meant	to	 find	 a	 way	 that	Mortals	 and	 Casters	could	be
together,	because	we	weren't	meant	to	be.
     Someone	knocked	on	 the	door,	 even	though	 it	 was	open.	"Ethan?	 Are	 you
okay?"	Liv.	 Her	footsteps	were	quiet,	but	I	could	hear	them.	I	didn't	 move.
     The	edge	of	 the	bed	sank	a	 little	 when	she	sat	down.	 I	 felt	 her	hand	as	she
rubbed	the	back	of	 my	 head.	It	was	soothing	 and	familiar,	 as	if	 she'd	done	it	 a
thousand	times.	That	was	the	thing	about	Liv	--	it	 was	like	I'd	 known	her	forever.
She	always	seemed	to	sense	what	I	needed,	as	if	 she	knew	things	 I	didn't	 even
know	about	myself.
     "Ethan,	it's	 going	to	be	okay.	We'll	 figure	 out	what	it	 all	means,	I	promise."	 I
knew	she	meant	it.
     I	 rolled	 over.	The	sun	 had	set,	and	the	room	 was	dark.	 I	hadn't	 bothered	to
turn	on	the	lights.	But	I	 could	make	out	her	silhouette	as	she	stared	down	at	me.
     "I	 thought	you	weren't	supposed	to	get	involved."
     "I'm	 not.	It's	the	first	 thing	Professor	Ashcroft	 taught	me."	She	paused.	"But	I
can't	help	it."
     "I	 know."
     We	 stared	at	each	other	 in	 the	darkness,	her	 hand	resting	 against	my	 jaw,
where	it	had	fallen	when	I	 rolled	over.	But	 I	was	really	seeing	her,	the	possibility
of	her,	for	 the	first	 time.	I	 felt	 something.	There	was	no	denying	 it,	and	Liv	  felt
it,	too.	I	could	 tell	every	time	she	looked	at	me.
     Liv	 slid	down	and	curled	up	against	me,	leaning	her	head	on	my	shoulder.
     My	 mom	found	 a	way	 to	move	on	 after	Macon.	 She	had	fallen	in	 love	 with
my	dad,	which	 seemed	to	prove	you	 could	lose	the	love	 of	 your	life	 and	fall	 in
love	all	over	again.
     Didn't	 it?
     I	heard	a	quiet	whisper,	 not	from	 inside	my	heart	but	a	breath	away	from	 my

236
ear.	Liv	 leaned	closer.	"You'll	 figure	 this	out,	 like	 everything	else.	Besides,	you
have	something	most	Waywards	don't	have."
     "Yeah?	What's	that?"
     "An	 excellent	Keeper."
     I	slid	 my	hand	to	the	back	of	 Liv's	neck.	 Honeysuckle	and	soap	--	that's	what
she	smelled	like.
     "Is	that	why	 you	came?	Because	I	needed	a	Keeper?"
     She	didn't	 answer	right	 away.	I	 could	sense	her	trying	 to	 work	 it	out	 in	 her
mind.	How	 much	 she	should	say,	what	 she	should	risk.	 I	 knew	that's	what	 she
was	doing,	because	I	was	doing	the	same	thing.
     "It's	not	 the	only	reason,	but	it	should	be."
     "Because	you	aren't	supposed	to	get	involved?"
     I	 could	 feel	her	 heart	beating	 against	my	 chest.	She	fit	 under	 my	 shoulder
perfectly.
     "Because	I	don't	want	to	get	hurt."	 She	was	scared,	but	not	of	Dark	Casters	or
mutant	 Incubuses	or	 golden	 eyes.	 She	was	 afraid	 of	  something	 simpler	 but
equally	dangerous.	Smaller	but	infinitely	 more	powerful.
     I	pulled	 her	closer.	"Me	neither."	Because	I	was	afraid	of	it,	 too.
     We	didn't	 say	anything	else.	I	held	her	close,	and	I	thought	about	all	the	ways
a	person	could	get	hurt.	 The	ways	 I	could	 hurt	her	 and	hurt	myself.	 Those	two
things	were	 intertwined	 somehow.	 It's	hard	 to	 explain,	 but	when	 you	 were	as
closed	off	 as	 I	 was	the	 past	few	 months,	 opening	 up	felt	  about	as	 wrong	 as
stripping	naked	in	church.
     Hearts	will	 go	and	Stars	will	 follow,	 One	is	broken,	One	is	hollow.
     That	had	been	our	 song,	Lena's	and	mine.	 And	 I	had	been	broken.	 Did	 that
mean	I	had	to	 stay	hollow?	 Or	was	there	something	 different	 out	there	for	 me?
Maybe	a	whole	new	song?
     Some	Pink	Floyd,	for	 a	change?	Hollow	laughter	in	 marble	halls.
     I	smiled	in	 the	darkness,	listening	to	the	rhythmic	sound	of	her	breathing	until
it	softened	into	sleep.	I	 was	exhausted.	Even	though	we	were	back	in	the	Mortal
world,	  it	 still	   felt	 as	 if	  I	  was	 part	  of	 the	  Caster	 world,	  and	 Gatlin	  was
unbelievably	far	 away.	I	 couldn't	 make	sense	of	how	 I	 had	gotten	to	 this	place
any	more	than	I	could	measure	the	miles	I	had	come	or	the	distance	I	 still	had	to
go.
     I	drifted	 into	oblivion	 not	knowing	 what	I	 would	do	when	I	got	 there.

237
6.19	

238
                                              Bonaventure



I	was	running,	being	chased.	Scrambling	over	hedges	and	skidding	across	empty
streets	and	backyards.	The	one	constant	was	the	adrenaline.	There	was	no
stopping.
    Then	I	 saw	the	Harley,	driving	straight	at	me,	the	lights	getting	closer	and
closer.	They	weren't	yellow	but	green,	flashing	in	my	eyes	so	bright	I	had	to
cover	my	face	with	my	hands....
    I	 woke	up.	All	I	could	see	was	green,	flashing	on	and	off.
    I	 didn't	know	where	I	was,	until	I	realized	the	green	glow	was	coming	from
the	Arclight,	now	lit	up	like	the	Fourth	of	July.	It	was	on	the	mattress,	where	it
must	have	rolled	out	of	my	pocket.	Only	the	mattress	looked	different,	and	the
light	was	flashing	out	of	control.
    I	 remembered	slowly	--	the	stars,	the	Tunnels,	the	attic,	the	guest	room.	Then
I	realized	why	the	mattress	looked	different.
    Liv	 was	gone.




It	didn't	take	long	to	figure	out	where	Liv	was.	"Do	you	ever	sleep?"
    "Not	 as	much	as	you	do,	apparently."	As	usual,	Liv	didn't	look	up	from	her
telescope,	though	this	one	was	aluminum	and	much	smaller	than	the	one	she
kept	on	Marian's	porch.
    I	 sat	down	next	to	her	on	the	back	step.	The	yard	was	as	calm	as	my	aunt
herself,	a	quiet	patch	of	 green	spreading	underneath	a	broad	magnolia	tree.
"What	are	you	doing	up?"
    "I	 got	a	wake-up	call."	I	tried	to	sound	casual,	instead	of	how	I	actually	felt.
Awkward.	I	motioned	at	the	guest	room	window	on	the	second	floor.	Even	from
down	here,	you	could	see	pulsing	green	light	shining	through	the	glass	panes.
    "Strange.	I	suppose	I	got	one	as	well.	Take	a	look	through	the	celestron."	She
handed	me	the	miniature	scope.	It	looked	like	a	flashlight	except	for	the	large
lens	fitted	to	one	end.
    Our	hands	touched	as	I	took	it.	Not	so	much	as	a	shock.
    "Did	 you	make	this,	too?"
    She	smiled.	"Professor	Ashcroft	gave	it	to	me.	Now	stop	talking	and	look.

239
There."	She	pointed	right	over	the	magnolia,	which	 to	my	Mortal	 eye	looked	like
a	dark	expanse	of	starless	sky.
     I	 fitted	 the	scope	to	 my	 eye.	Now	 the	 sky	over	 the	tree	 was	streaked	with
light,	a	kind	 of	ghostly	 aura	trailing	 toward	the	ground	not	far	 from	 us.	"What	is
that,	a	falling	star?	Do	falling	 stars	leave	trails	like	that?"
     "It	 might.	If	 it	was	a	falling	 star."
     "How	 do	you	know	it's	 not?"
     She	tapped	the	scope.	"It	might	 be	falling,	 but	 it's	a	Caster	star	falling	 in	 the
Caster	sky,	remember?	Otherwise	we	could	see	it	without	the	scope."
     "Is	that	what	your	 crazy	watch	is	saying?"
     She	picked	 it	up	 from	 the	step	next	 to	her.	"I'm	  not	sure	what	 it's	saying.	 I
thought	it	was	broken	until	 I	saw	the	sky."
     The	Arclight	 was	still	 flashing	in	the	window,	 a	constant	green	strobe	light.
     I	remembered	something	from	 my	 dream.	It	felt	 as	if	 the	Harley	was	headed
right	 at	me.	 "We	 can't	 stay	here.	Something's	 happening."	 Something	here	 in
Savannah.
     Liv	 strapped	her	selenometer	back	onto	her	wrist.	"Whatever	it	is	seems	to	be
happening	over	there."	She	dropped	the	scope	into	her	backpack	and	pointed	into
the	distance.	It	was	time	to	go.
     I	held	out	 my	hand,	but	she	pulled	herself	to	her	feet.	"You	 wake	up	Link.	 I'll
get	my	things."


"I	still	 don't	see	why	this	 couldn't	wait	 until	mornin'."	 Link	 was	grouchy,	 and	his
spiky	hair	was	sticking	 up	everywhere.
     "Does	this	 thing	look	 like	 it	could	 wait	 until	 morning?"	The	 Arclight	 was	so
bright	now,	it	 lit	up	the	whole	 street	in	front	of	us.
     "Can	you	 put	it	 on	 a	lower	 setting	or	somethin'?	 Switch	off	 the	 high	beams
already."	Link	 shielded	his	eyes.
     "I	 don't	think	 it's	working."	  I	shook	the	 Arclight,	 but	the	flashing	 green	light
didn't	stop.
     "Man,	 you	broke	the	Magic	8	Ball."
     "I	 didn't	break	it.	I	 --"	I	 gave	up,	jamming	it	 into	my	pocket.	 "Yeah,	it's	pretty
much	broken."	The	light	 was	shining	through	my	jeans.
     "It's	 possible	 some	sort	 of	 Caster	power	 surge	triggered	 it	 and	shifted	 the
normal	balance	of	how	the	Arclight	 functions."	 Liv	 was	intrigued.
     Link	 wasn't.	"Like	 an	alarm?	That's	not	good."
     "We	don't	know	 that."
     "Are	 you	kidding?	 It's	never	 good	when	Commissioner	Gordon	 activates	the

240
Bat-Signal.	When	the	Fantastic	Four	see	the	number	four	in	the	sky."
     "I	 get	the	idea."
     "Yeah?	 Can	you	 get	one	that	 gets	us	where	 we're	tryin'	 to	 go,	 since	Ethan
broke	the	8	Ball?"
     Liv	  consulted	 her	 selenometer	and	 started	walking.	  "I	  can	 get	us	 to	 the
general	area	where	the	star	fell."	She	looked	at	me.	"I	 mean,	if	 it	was	a	star.	But
Link	 might	be	right.	 I	 don't	know	 exactly	where	 we're	going,	or	 what	we'll	 find
when	we	get	there."
     "Almost	  makes	a	guy	 wish	 he	had	 his	own	 pair	 of	 garden	shears,"	I	 said,
following	 Liv	 down	the	street.
     "Speakin'	 a	things	that	 aren't	normal,	 look	 who's	here."	 Link	 pointed	 to	the
curb	in	front	 of	 a	house	with	red	shutters.	Lucille	  was	sitting	on	 the	edge	of	the
sidewalk,	 staring	at	 us	 as	if	 we	 were	 holding	 her	 up.	 "Told	 you	 she'd	 come
back."
     Lucille	 licked	her	brown	 paws	sulkily,	 waiting.
     "Couldn't	 live	  without	 me,	could	 you,	 girl?	 I	 have	 that	effect	 on	 women."
Link	grinned,	 scratching	her	head.	She	batted	his	fingers	away.
     "Come	on,	now.	Aren't	 you	comin'?"	 Lucille	 didn't	budge.
     "Yep.	 He's	got	that	effect	on	women,"	 I	said	to	Liv	 as	Lucille	 stretched	out	in
front	of	the	house.
     "She'll	come	around,"	Link	 said.	"They	 always	do."
     That's	 when	 Lucille	   took	  off	  running	 down	  the	 street,	 in	  the	 opposite
direction	from	 the	way	we	went.




It	was	 the	middle	 of	 the	night	 and	 pitch-dark	 by	 the	time	 we	found	 ourselves
heading	out	of	 town.	It	 felt	 like	 we	had	been	walking	 for	 hours.	The	main	 road
was	always	 busy	 during	  the	day.	 Now	  it	 was	 deserted.	Which	  made	sense,
considering	where	it	had	led	us.	"You	sure	about	this?"
     "Not	 at	all.	 It's	only	 an	approximation	 based	on	the	available	 data."	Liv	 had
been	checking	  her	 little	  telescope	 about	 every	  five	  blocks.	 There	 was	 no
doubting	the	data.
     "I	 love	it	 when	she	talks	nerdy."	Link	 pulled	 on	her	braid	and	Liv	 batted	him
away.
     I	 stared	at	the	tall	 stone	columns	flanking	 the	entrance	to	 Savannah's	famed
Bonaventure	Cemetery,	on	the	outskirts	 of	town.	 It	was	one	of	 the	most	famous
cemeteries	in	 the	 South,	 and	 one	of	  the	most	 well	  protected.	 Which	 was	 a

241
problem,	since	it	had	closed	at	dusk.
     "Dude,	 this	is	a	joke,	 right?	 Are	you	 guys	sure	this	is	 where	we're	supposed
to	be?"	 Link	  didn't	 look	 too	 happy	 about	 wandering	 around	the	 cemetery	 at
night,	especially	with	 a	guard	at	the	 entrance	and	a	patrol	car	that	passed	by	the
front	gates	every	so	often.
     Liv	 looked	up	 at	a	statue	of	a	woman	clinging	 to	a	cross.	"Let's	 get	this	over
with."
     Link	 pulled	out	his	garden	shears.	"I	don't	think	these	babies	will	 do	the	job."
     "Not	 through	 the	gates."	I	 pointed	at	the	 wall	 on	the	other	side	 of	the	 trees.
"Over	them."
     Liv	  managed	to	step	 on	every	 part	 of	 my	 face,	 kick	 me	in	 the	 neck,	 and
wrench	her	sneakers	deep	into	my	shoulder	blade	before	I	shoved	all	 six	pounds
of	her	over	the	gate.	She	lost	her	balance	at	the	top	and	landed	with	a	thump.
     "I'm	 fine.	No	worries,"	 Liv	 called	from	 the	other	side	of	the	wall.
     Link	 and	I	 looked	at	 each	other,	and	he	bent	down.	 "You	 first.	 I'll	 climb	 up
the	hard	way."
     I	stepped	on	his	back,	grabbing	 onto	the	wall.	 He	pushed	himself	 up	until	 he
was	standing.	"Yeah?	How	are	you	gonna	do	that?"
     "Gotta	  look	 for	  a	 tree	 that's	 close	 enough	 to	 the	 wall.	  Has	 to	  be	 one
somewhere	around	here.	Don't	worry.	I'll	 find	you."
     I	was	at	the	top.	I	clung	to	the	wall	 with	 both	hands.
     "I	 didn't	ditch	school	all	 these	years	for	nothin'."
     I	smiled,	and	let	myself	 fall.


Five	minutes	and	seven	trees	later,	the	Arclight	 led	 us	deeper	into	the	cemetery,
past	the	crumbling	 Confederate	headstones	and	the	statues	guarding	the	homes
of	those	who	had	been	forgotten.	There	was	a	tight	cluster	of	moss-covered	oaks,
whose	crossed	branches	created	an	arch	 over	the	 path,	barely	 wide	 enough	to
squeeze	through.	The	Arclight	was	flashing	and	pulsing.
     "We're	  here.	 This	  is	  it,	  right?"	   I	  looked	  over	  Liv's	  shoulder	  at	 the
selenometer.
     Link	  looked	 around.	 "Where?	  I	 don't	 see	 anything."	  I	 pointed	 to	  space
between	the	trees.	"Seriously?"
     Liv	  looked	 nervous,	 too.	 She	 didn't	 want	  to	 climb	  through	 brambles	 of
Spanish	moss	in	a	dark	graveyard.	"I	can't	get	a	reading	now.	It's	going	crazy."
     "It	 doesn't	matter.	This	is	it,	I'm	sure."
     "You	 think	 Lena	and	 Ridley	 and	John	are	back	there?"	Link	  looked	like	 he
was	planning	to	go	back	and	wait	for	us	out	front,	 or	maybe	at	a	rib	joint.

242
     "I	 don't	know."	I	 pushed	the	moss	aside	and	stepped	through.
     On	the	other	side,	the	trees	were	even	more	ominous,	hanging	over	our	heads
and	creating	a	sky	 of	their	 own.	There	 was	a	clearing	ahead	of	 us,	with	 a	huge
statue	of	 a	 beseeching	 angel	 in	 the	 center	 of	 the	 graves.	 The	 graves	 were
bordered	in	stone,	outlining	  the	breadth	of	 each	plot.	You	 could	 almost	see	the
coffins	buried	in	 the	earth	beneath	them.
     "Ethan,	look."	 Liv	 pointed	past	the	statue.	I	could	see	silhouettes	framed	by	a
tiny	slice	of	 moonlight.	They	were	moving.
     We	had	company.
     Link	 shook	his	head.	"This	can't	be	good."
     For	a	second,	I	couldn't	move.	What	if	 it	was	Lena	and	John?	What	were	they
doing	in	 a	graveyard	at	night,	alone?	I	 followed	 the	path,	flanked	 by	even	more
statues	--	kneeling	angels	staring	into	 the	heavens,	or	the	ones	looking	 down	 at
us	as	they	wept.
     I	had	no	 idea	what	to	expect,	but	 when	the	two	 figures	came	into	 view,	they
were	the	last	two	people	I	expected	to	see.
     Amma	and	Arelia,	 Macon's	mother.	The	last	time	 I'd	seen	her	was	at	Macon's
funeral.	They	were	 sitting	 between	the	graves.	I	was	a	dead	man.	I	 should	have
known	Amma	would	 find	 me.
     There	was	another	woman	sitting	in	 the	dirt	with	 them.	I	didn't	 recognize	her.
She	was	a	 little	  older	 than	Arelia,	  with	 the	 same	golden	 skin.	 Her	 hair	 was
woven	in	 hundreds	of	tiny	 braids,	and	she	was	wearing	 twenty	or	 thirty	 strands
of	beads	--	some	gemstones	and	colored	glass,	others	tiny	birds	and	animals.	She
had	at	least	ten	holes	winding	around	each	ear,	and	long	earrings	hung	from	each
hole.
     The	three	of	them	were	sitting	 cross-legged	in	a	circle,	headstones	dotting	the
dirt	around	them.	Their	 hands	were	joined	in	 the	center	of	the	circle.	Amma	 had
her	back	to	us,	but	I	had	no	doubt	she	knew	I	was	there.
     "It	 took	 you	long	 enough.	We've	 been	waitin',	 and	you	know	 how	 I	 hate	to
wait."	 Amma's	 voice	was	 no	more	 agitated	than	usual,	 which	 didn't	make	 any
sense,	since	I	had	disappeared	without	even	a	note.
     "Amma,	 I'm	really	 sorry	--"
     She	waved	 her	hand	as	if	  she	was	swatting	 a	fly.	  "No	 time	 for	 that	now."
Amma	shook	the	bone	in	her	hand	--	a	graveyard	bone,	I	was	willing	 to	bet.
     I	looked	at	Amma.	 "Did	 you	bring	us	here?"
     "Can't	 say	I	 did.	Somethin'	 else	brought	 you,	somethin'	 stronger	than	me.	 I
just	knew	you	were	comin'."
     "How?"
     Amma	 gave	me	 some	of	 her	best	stinkeye.	 "How	  does	a	bird	 know	 to	 fly

243
south?	How	does	a	catfish	know	 how	 to	swim?	I	 don't	know	 how	 many	times	I
have	to	tell	you,	Ethan	Wate.	They	don't	call	me	a	Seer	for	nothin'."
     "I	 foresaw	your	arrival,	 too."	 Arelia	 was	stating	a	fact,	but	it	 annoyed	Amma
just	the	same.	I	could	tell	by	the	look	on	her	face.
     Amma	 raised	her	chin.	"After	  I	mentioned	 it."	 Amma	was	 used	to	being	the
only	Seer	in	Gatlin,	and	she	didn't	like	 being	trumped,	even	if	it	was	by	a	Diviner
with	supernatural	gifts.
     The	 other	woman,	 the	 one	 I	 didn't	 know,	 turned	 to	 Amma.	 "We	 bes'	 get
started,	Amarie.	They're	waitin'."
     "Come	 sit	 down	 here."	 Amma	 motioned	 to	 us.	"Twyla's	  ready."	 Twyla.	 I
recognized	the	name.
     Arelia	 answered	the	question	before	I	asked.	"This	 is	my	sister,	Twyla.	 She's
come	a	long	way	to	be	with	us	here	tonight."	 I	remembered.	Lena	had	mentioned
her	Great-Aunt	Twyla,	 the	one	who	had	never	left	New	Orleans.	Until	 now.
     "	 'At's	 right.	 Now	 you	come	 on	sit	 by	me,	 cher.	Don't	 be	'fraid.	 It's	 only	 a
Circle	 a	 Sight."	 Twyla	  patted	 the	 space	next	 to	 her.	 Amma	  was	 sitting	 on
Twyla's	other	side,	giving	 me	the	Look.	Liv	 stepped	back,	looking	pretty	 freaked
out,	even	if	she	was	training	to	be	a	Keeper.	Link	 stayed	right	behind	her.	Amma
had	that	effect	 on	people,	and	 from	 the	looks	 of	things,	 Twyla	 and	Arelia	  did,
too.
     "My	 sister	is	a	powerful	Necromancer."	 Arelia's	voice	was	proud.
     Link	 made	a	face	and	whispered	 to	Liv.	 "She	 gets	with	 dead	people?	That's
the	kinda	thing	a	person	should	keep	to	themselves."
     Liv	 rolled	  her	eyes.	"Not	  a	necrophiliac,	 stupid.	 A	 Necromancer,	 a	Caster
capable	of	calling	and	communicating	with	 the	dead."
     Arelia	 nodded.	"That's	right,	 and	we	 need	help	from	 someone	who's	already
left	this	world."
     I	 knew	 right	 away	 who	 she	 was	talking	  about,	or	 at	 least	I	 hoped	 I	 did.
"Amma,	are	we	trying	 to	call	Macon?"
     Sadness	passed	across	her	face.	"I	wish	 I	 could	say	 we	were,	but	 wherever
Melchizedek's	gone,	we	can't	go."
     "It's	 time."	 Twyla	 pulled	 something	out	 of	 her	pocket	and	looked	 at	Amma
and	Arelia.	 You	 could	feel	 the	shift	 in	their	 demeanor.	The	three	of	 them	were
all	business	now,	even	if	it	was	the	business	of	waking	the	dead.
     Arelia	 opened	her	hands	in	front	 of	her	lips	 and	spoke	softly	into	 them.	"My
power	is	your	power,	sisters."	She	tossed	tiny	stones	into	the	center	of	the	circle.
     "Moonstones,"	Liv	 whispered.
     Amma	  pulled	 out	  a	 sack	 of	  chicken	 bones.	 I	  would	  know	  that	 smell
anywhere.	It	was	the	smell	 of	my	 kitchen	back	home.	 "My	 power's	your	 power,

244
sisters."
     Amma	 tossed	the	bones	into	 the	circle	 with	 the	moonstones.	Twyla	 opened
her	own	 hand,	revealing	 a	 tiny	 carving	 in	 the	shape	of	 a	bird.	 She	 spoke	the
words	that	gave	it	power.


    "One	 unto	this	world,	 one	unto	da	next.
    Open	the	door	to	da	one	who's	annexed."


     She	started	to	chant,	loud	and	feverish,	the	unfamiliar	 words	rippling	 through
the	air.	Her	 eyes	rolled	back	in	 her	head,	but	her	eyelids	 remained	open.	Arelia
began	to	chant	as	well,	shaking	long	strands	of	tasseled	beads.
     Amma	 grabbed	my	chin	 so	she	could	 look	me	 in	the	eye.	 "I	 know	this	 isn't
goin'	to	be	easy,	but	there	are	things	you	need	to	know."
     The	air	in	 the	center	of	the	Circle	 of	Sight	 began	to	swirl	and	churn,	 creating
a	thin	 white	 mist.	 Twyla,	  Arelia,	 and	Amma	  continued	to	 chant,	 their	 voices
reaching	a	crescendo.	The	mist	seemed	to	act	on	their	 command,	gaining	 speed
and	density,	swirling	upward	 like	a	growing	 tornado.
     Without	 warning,	Twyla	 inhaled	 sharply,	as	if	she	was	taking	her	last	breath.
The	mist	seemed	to	follow,	 disappearing	into	her	mouth.	For	 a	minute,	I	thought
she	was	going	 to	 drop	dead.	She	sat	 there,	her	back	 so	straight	 you	 would've
thought	she	was	tied	to	a	rack,	eyes	rolled	back	in	her	head,	mouth	still	open.
     Link	  retreated	 to	 a	 safe	 distance	 while	 Liv	   scrambled	forward	  to	  help,
reaching	for	Twyla.	 But	Amma	grabbed	her	arm	in	midair.	 "Wait."
     Twyla	 exhaled.	 The	white	 mist	 raced	 from	 her	lips,	 rising	 over	 the	 circle.
Taking	form.	 The	 mist	 swirled	 upward,	creating	 a	body	as	it	 moved.	 The	bare
feet,	peeking	out	beneath	a	white	dress,	the	torso	filling	 the	dress	as	if	inflating	a
balloon.	 It	 was	 a	Sheer,	rising	  from	 the	 haze.	I	 watched	 as	the	 mist	 snaked
upward,	creating	a	torso,	a	delicate	neck,	and	finally	a	face.
     It	was	--
     My	 mother.
     Staring	back	at	me	with	the	same	luminous,	ethereal	quality	unique	to	 Sheers.
But	beyond	 the	 translucence,	she	looked	 exactly	 like	 my	 mother.	 Her	eyelids
fluttered,	and	she	looked	at	me.	The	Sheer	didn't	just	look	like	 my	mother.	It	 was
my	mother.
     She	spoke,	and	her	voice	 was	as	soft	and	melodic	 as	I	remembered.	"Ethan,
sweetheart,	I've	been	waiting	for	you."
     I	 stared	at	her,	speechless.	In	every	 dream	I'd	 had	of	 her	since	 the	day	she

245
died,	every	photograph,	every	memory	--	she	was	never	as	real	as	this.
     "There	is	 so	much	I	 need	to	tell	 you,	so	much	 I	can't	 say.	I've	tried	 to	show
you	the	way,	send	you	the	songs...."
     She	sent	me	the	songs.	The	songs	only	Lena	and	I	could	hear.	I	spoke,	but	my
voice	 sounded	 far	 away,	 as	 if	  it	 wasn't	  my	 own.	 Seventeen	Moons	  --	 the
Shadowing	Song.	"It	was	you,	this	whole	 time."
     She	smiled.	"Yes.	You	 needed	me.	But	now	he	needs	you,	and	you	need	him,
too."
     "Who?	 Are	you	talking	 about	Dad?"	 But	I	 knew	she	wasn't	talking	about	my
father.	She	was	talking	about	the	other	man	who	meant	so	much	to	both	of	us.
     Macon.
     She	didn't	know	he	was	gone.
     "Are	 you	 talking	 about	Macon?"	 I	saw	a	 spark	of	recognition	 in	 her	eyes.	I
had	to	tell	her.	If	 something	had	happened	to	Lena,	I	would	want	someone	to	tell
me.	No	matter	how	 much	everything	 changed.	"Macon's	gone,	Mom.	 He	died	 a
few	months	ago.	He	can't	help	me."
     I	watched	her	shimmer	in	 the	moonlight.	She	was	as	beautiful	as	the	last	time
I	 saw	her,	 when	 she	hugged	me	 on	 the	rainy	 porch	 before	 I	 left	 for	  school.
"Listen	to	 me,	Ethan.	He'll	 always	be	with	 you.	Only	 you	can	redeem	him."	Her
image	began	to	fade.
     I	 reached	out,	desperate	to	touch	her,	but	 my	hand	only	 slipped	 through	the
air.	"Mom?"
     "The	Claiming	 Moon	 has	been	called."	She	was	disappearing,	vanishing	into
the	night.	"If	 Darkness	prevails,	the	Seventeenth	Moon	will	 be	the	last."	I	 almost
couldn't	see	her	anymore.	The	mist	 was	swirling	 slowly	 again,	above	the	circle.
"Hurry,	 Ethan.	You	don't	have	much	time,	 but	you	can	do	this.	I	have	faith."	 She
smiled	and	I	tried	 to	memorize	her	 expression,	because	I	knew	she	was	slipping
away.
     "What	if	 I'm	 too	late?"
     I	could	 hear	her	distant	voice.	"I	 tried	to	 keep	you	safe.	I	should	have	known
I	couldn't.	You	 were	always	special."
     I	stared	at	the	white	haze,	churning	like	my	 stomach.
     "My	 sweet	summer	boy.	I'll	 be	thinking	of	 you.	I	love	--"
     The	 words	 dwindled	  into	  nothing.	 My	  mom	 had	 been	 here.	 For	 a	 few
minutes,	I	had	seen	her	smile	and	heard	her	voice.	Now	she	was	gone.
     I	had	lost	her	all	over	again.
     "I	 love	you,	too,	Mom."

246
6.19	

247
                                                          Scars



There's	somethin'	 I've	got	 to	tell	 you."	 Amma	 wrung	her	hands	nervously.	 "It's
about	the	 night	 a	 the	Sixteenth	 Moon,	  Lena's	birthday."	  It	 took	 a	 second	to
realize	she	was	 talking	 to	 me.	I	 was	still	  staring	 into	 the	center	of	 the	 circle,
where	my	mother	had	been	a	moment	before.
     This	time,	 my	mom	 wasn't	sending	me	messages	in	books	or	the	verses	of	 a
song.	I	had	seen	her.
     "Tell	 da	boy."
     "Hush,	Twyla."	 Arelia	 put	her	hand	on	her	sister's	arm.
     "Lies.	 Lies	 are	da	 place	where	 darkness	grows.	You	 tell	  da	boy.	 Tell	 him
now."
     "What	 are	you	 talking	 about?"	I	 looked	 from	 Twyla	 to	 Arelia.	 Amma	 shot
them	a	look	that	Twyla	answered	with	 a	shake	of	her	beaded	braids.
     "Listen	 to	 me,	 Ethan	Wate."	  Amma's	 voice	 was	uneven	 and	shaky.	 "You
didn't	fall	 from	the	top	of	the	crypt,	 at	least	not	the	way	we	told	you."
     "What?"	 She	wasn't	 making	 any	sense.	Why	 was	 she	talking	 about	 Lena's
birthday	after	I	had	just	seen	the	ghost	of	my	dead	mother?
     "You	 didn't	fall,	 see?"	she	repeated.
     "What	 are	you	talking	 about?	Of	course	I	 fell.	 I	woke	 up	on	the	 ground,	flat
on	my	back."
     "That's	 not	 how	 you	 got	there."	 Amma	 hesitated.	 "It	 was	 Lena's	mamma.
Sarafine	stabbed	you	with	a	knife."	Amma	 looked	right	 into	my	eyes.	"She	killed
you.	You	were	dead,	and	we	brought	you	back."
     She	killed	you.
     I	 repeated	the	words	to	 myself,	the	 pieces	snapping	together	so	fast	I	 could
barely	make	sense	of	them.	Instead,	they	made	sense	of	me	--
     the	dream	that	wasn't	a	dream,	but	a	memory	of	not	breathing	and	not	feeling
and	not	thinking	and	not	seeing	--
     the	dirt	and	flames	that	carried	my	body	 away	as	my	life	flowed	 out	--
     "Ethan!	 You	 all	right?"	 I	 could	hear	Amma,	 but	 she	was	far	away,	as	far	 as
she	was	that	night	when	I	was	on	the	ground.
     I	could	be	in	 the	ground	now,	like	my	 mom	and	Macon.
     I	should	be.
     "Ethan?"	Link	 was	shaking	me.

248
     My	  body	  filled	  with	   sensations	I	  couldn't	  control	  and	  didn't	 want	  to
remember.	Blood	in	my	mouth,	 blood	roaring	into	 my	ears	--
     "He's	passing	out."	Liv	 was	holding	my	 head.
     There	had	been	pain	and	noise	and	something	else.	Voices.	Shapes.	People.
     I	had	died.
     I	reached	under	my	shirt,	running	 my	hand	over	the	scar	on	my	stomach.	The
scar	from	 where	Sarafine	had	stabbed	me	 with	 a	real	knife.	 I	 barely	 noticed	it
anymore,	 but	 now	 it	  would	  be	 a	constant	 reminder	  of	 the	 night	  I	 died.	  I
remembered	how	Lena	reacted	when	she	saw	it.
     "You're	 still	 the	same	person,	and	Lena	still	loves	you.	Her	love	 is	the	reason
you're	here	now."	Arelia's	 voice	 was	gentle,	knowing.	 I	opened	my	 eyes,	letting
the	blur	of	shapes	become	people	as	I	settled	back	into	myself	again.
     My	 thoughts	 were	so	 jumbled.	 Even	now,	 nothing	 was	 making	 any	sense.
"What	do	you	mean,	her	love	is	the	reason	I'm	here	now?"
     Amma	 spoke	quietly,	 and	 I	 had	to	 strain	to	 hear	her.	"Lena's	 the	one	 who
brought	you	back.	I	helped	her,	me	and	your	mamma."
     The	words	 didn't	fit	 together,	so	 I	tried	 unrolling	 them	out	 again	for	 myself.
Lena	and	Amma	 brought	 me	back	 from	 the	dead,	together.	 And	 together	they
had	kept	it	from	me	until	 now.	I	rubbed	the	scar	on	my	skin.	It	 felt	like	 the	truth.
     "Since	 when	does	Lena	 know	 how	to	 raise	the	 dead?	If	 she	did,	 don't	you
think	she	would've	brought	Macon	 back	by	now?"
     Amma	 looked	at	me.	I	 had	never	seen	her	so	scared.	"She	didn't	do	it	on	her
own.	She	used	the	Binding	Spell	from	The	Book	a	Moons.	Binds	death	to	life."
     Lena	had	used	The	Book	of	Moons.
     The	  Book	  that	  had	  cursed	 Genevieve	  and	  Lena's	 whole	   family	   for
generations,	Claiming	all	the	children	 in	Lena's	family	 for	 Light	 or	Dark	on	their
sixteenth	birthdays.	The	 Book	 Genevieve	had	used	to	bring	 Ethan	Carter	 Wate
back	from	 the	 dead	for	 only	 a	 second	--	 an	act	 she	spent	the	 rest	of	 her	 life
paying	for.
     I	 couldn't	 think.	 My	  mind	 started	caving	 in	 on	itself	  again,	and	I	 couldn't
follow	 my	own	thoughts.	Genevieve.	Lena.	The	price.
     "How	 could	 you?"	 I	 pushed	myself	away	 from	 them,	out	 of	 their	 Circle	 of
Sight.	I'd	seen	enough.
     "I	  didn't	 have	 a	choice.	 She	 couldn't	 let	  you	 go."	 Amma	  looked	 at	 me,
ashamed.	"I	couldn't	either."
     I	scrambled	to	my	 feet,	shaking	my	head.	"It's	a	lie.	She	wouldn't	 do	it."	But	 I
knew	she	would.	They	 both	would.	 It	was	exactly	 what	they	would	 have	done.	I
knew,	because	I	would've	done	it,	too.
     It	didn't	 matter	now.

249
     In	my	 whole	life,	 I	 had	never	been	so	angry	with	Amma,	 or	so	disappointed.
"You	knew	 the	Book	wouldn't	 give	anything	 without	 taking	something	in	 return.
You	told	me	that	yourself."
     "I	 know."
     "Lena	 will	 have	to	 pay	a	price	 for	 this,	because	of	me.	 You	both	 will."	  My
head	felt	like	it	was	going	 to	split	in	half,	 or	explode.
     A	  renegade	tear	 caught	 on	 Amma's	 cheek.	 She	 put	 two	  fingers	 on	 her
forehead	and	closed	her	eyes,	Amma's	version	of	making	the	sign	of	 the	cross,	a
silent	prayer.	"She's	payin'	it	right	 now."
     I	couldn't	 breathe.
     Lena's	eyes.	The	stunt	at	the	fair.	Running	 away	with	John	Breed.	The	words
found	their	way	out,	even	as	I	tried	to	hold	 them	in.
     "She's	going	Dark	because	of	me."
     "If	  Lena's	 going	 Dark,	  it's	 not	 because	a	 that	 Book.	 The	 Book	  made	 a
different	kinda	trade."	 Amma	stopped,	as	if	she	couldn't	bear	to	tell	me	the	rest.
     "What	kind	 of	trade?"
     "It	 gave	one	life	  but	took	 another.	We	knew	 there'd	be	 consequences."	The
words	caught	in	her	throat.	"We	just	didn't	 know	it	 would	be	Melchizedek."
     Macon.
     It	couldn't	 be	true.
     It	gave	one	life	but	took	another.	 A	different	kind	of	trade.
     My	 life	for	 Macon's.
     It	 all	made	 sense.	The	way	Lena	had	been	acting	 the	past	few	 months.	The
way	she	had	been	pulling	away	from	 me,	from	 everyone.	The	way	she	had	been
blaming	herself	for	Macon's	death.
     It	was	true.	She	had	killed	him.
     To	save	me.
     I	thought	 about	her	notebook	and	the	Charmed	page	I'd	found.	 What	had	the
words	said?	Amma?	 Sarafine?	Macon?	The	Book?	 It	 was	the	real	story	 of	 that
night.	 I	 remembered	 the	 poems	written	  on	 her	 wall.	 Nobody	  the	Dead	 and
Nobody	the	Living.	 Two	 sides	of	the	same	coin.	Macon	and	me.
     Nothing	 green	can	stay.	Months	 ago,	I	believed	 she'd	gotten	the	Frost	poem
wrong.	But	of	 course,	she	hadn't.	She	was	talking	about	herself.
     I	thought	 about	how	it	 seemed	painful	for	 her	to	 look	at	me.	 No	wonder	 she
felt	guilty.	 No	 wonder	she	ran.	I	wondered	if	 she	could	ever	stand	to	look	 at	me
again.	Lena	had	done	it	all	because	of	me.	It	wasn't	her	fault.
     It	was	mine.

250
                                                        *	*	 *

No	one	said	anything.	There	was	no	turning	back	now,	not	for	any	of	us.	What
Lena	and	Amma	had	done	that	night	couldn't	be	undone.	I	shouldn't	be	here,	but
I	was.
    "It's	 da	Order,	and	you	can't	stop	da	Order."	Twyla	closed	her	eyes,	as	if	she
could	hear	something	I	couldn't.
    Amma	pulled	a	handkerchief	from	her	pocket	and	wiped	her	face.	"I'm	sorry
I	didn't	tell	you,	but	I'm	not	sorry	we	did	it.	It	was	the	only	way."
    "You	 don't	 understand.	Lena	thinks	she's	going	Dark.	She	ran	away	with
some	kind	of	Dark	Caster,	or	Incubus.	She's	in	danger	because	of	me."
    "Nonsense.	That	girl	did	what	she	had	to	do	because	she	loves	you."
    Arelia	 collected	their	offerings	from	the	ground	--	the	bones,	the	sparrow,	the
moonstones.
    "Nothing	can	make	Lena	go	Dark,	Ethan.	She	has	to	choose	it."
    "But	 she	thinks	she's	Dark	because	she	killed	Macon.	She	thinks	she's	already
chosen."
    "But	 she	hasn't,"	Liv	said.	She	was	standing	a	few	feet	away,	to	give	us	some
privacy.
    Link	 was	sitting	on	 an	old	stone	bench,	a	few	steps	behind	her.	"Then	we
have	to	find	her	and	tell	her."	He	didn't	act	like	he	just	found	out	that	I'd	died	and
been	brought	back	to	life.	He	acted	like	everything	was	the	same.	I	went	over
and	sat	down	on	the	bench	next	to	Link.
    Liv	 looked	over	at	me.	"Are	you	all	right?"
    Liv.	 I	 couldn't	look	at	her.	I'd	been	jealous	and	hurt,	and	I	had	dragged	Liv
into	the	middle	of	my	 own	broken	mess	of	a	life.	All	 because	I	thought	Lena
didn't	love	me	anymore.	But	I	was	stupid,	and	I	was	wrong.	Lena	loved	me	so
much,	she	was	willing	to	risk	everything	to	save	me.
    I	 had	given	up	on	Lena,	after	she	had	refused	to	give	up	on	me.	I	owed	her
my	life.	It	was	as	simple	as	that.
    My	 fingers	touched	something	carved	into	the	edge	of	the	bench.	Words.


                                          IN	THE	COOL,	COOL,	COOL
                                                OF	THE	EVENING


    It	 was	the	song	that	was	playing	at	Ravenwood	the	first	night	I	met	Macon.
The	coincidence	was	too	much,	especially	for	a	world	with	no	coincidences.	It
had	to	be	some	kind	of	sign.

251
     Sign	of	 what?	What	 I	 had	done	to	Macon?	 I	couldn't	 even	think	 about	how
Lena	must	have	felt,	 realizing	 she	had	lost	him	 in	 my	place.	 What	if	 I	 had	lost
my	mom	that	way?	Would	 I	 have	been	able	to	look	at	Lena	alive	 without	seeing
my	mother	dead?
     "Just	a	minute."	 I	 pushed	off	 the	bench	and	took	 off	 down	the	path	 through
the	trees,	the	 way	we	 had	come.	 I	 breathed	the	night	 air	 deep	into	 my	 lungs,
because	I	could	still	 breathe.	When	I	 finally	  stopped	running,	I	 stared	up	at	the
stars	and	the	sky.
     Was	Lena	staring	at	the	same	sky,	or	one	I	could	never	see?	Were	our	moons
really	so	different?
     I	 reached	into	my	 pocket	for	 the	Arclight,	  so	it	 could	show	 me	how	 to	find
her,	but	it	didn't.	Instead,	it	showed	me	something	else	--

    Macon	 had	 never	been	like	 his	father,	 Silas,	and	they	 both	knew	it.	 He	 had
    always	 been	more	like	 his	mother,	 Arelia.	 A	powerful	 Light	 Caster,	who	 his
    father	 had	 fallen	 deeply	in	 love	with	 while	 he	 was	away	 at	college	 in	 New
    Orleans.	 Not	unlike	 the	way	he	and	Jane	had	met	and	fallen	 in	 love	when	he
    was	 studying	at	Duke.	 And	like	Macon,	 his	father	 had	fallen	 in	love	 with	his
    mother	  before	the	 Transformation.	  Before	 his	 grandfather	  had	 convinced
    Silas	 a	 relationship	 with	 a	 Light	 Caster	 was	an	 abomination	 against	 their
    kind.
        It	  had	 taken	 Macon's	 grandfather	 years	 to	 tear	 his	 mother	 and	 father
    apart.	  By	that	 time,	 he	and	 Hunting	 and	Leah	 were	born.	 His	 mother	 had
    been	 forced	 to	use	her	 powers	 as	a	 Diviner	  to	escape	Silas'	 rage	 and	his
    uncontrollable	  urge	 to	 feed.	She	had	 fled	 to	 New	 Orleans	 with	 Leah.	His
    father	 would	never	have	let	her	take	his	sons.
        His	 mother	was	the	 only	one	Macon	 could	turn	 to	now.	The	only	 one	who
    would	 understand	that	he	had	fallen	in	 love	with	a	Mortal.	 The	greatest	act	of
    sacrilege	 against	his	kind,	the	Blood	Incubus.
        The	Demon	Soldier.
        Macon	 hadn't	 told	his	 mother	he	was	coming,	 but	she	would	be	expecting
    him.	 He	climbed	 up	from	 the	Tunnels	 into	the	 sweet	heat	of	a	 New	Orleans
    summer	 night.	Fireflies	  blinked	in	 the	darkness,	and	 the	smell	of	 magnolias
    was	 overpowering.	She	was	waiting	 for	 him	 on	the	porch,	 tatting	 lace	in	 an
    old	 wooden	rocking	chair.	 It	had	been	a	long	time.
        "Mamma,	 I	need	your	help."
        She	 put	 down	 her	 needle	and	 hoop	 and	 rose	from	  the	chair.	  "I	 know.
    Everything's	 ready,	cher."
        There	 was	only	one	thing	 powerful	 enough	to	stop	an	Incubus,	 aside	from

252
one	of	its	own	kind.
   An	 Arclight.
   They	 were	considered	 medieval	devices,	weapons	created	 to	 control	 and
imprison	 the	most	powerful	 of	 the	Harmers,	 the	Incubus.	 Macon	 had	never
seen	one	before.	There	were	very	few	left,	and	they	were	almost	impossible	to
find.
   But	 his	mother	had	one,	and	he	needed	it.
   Macon	  followed	 her	 into	 the	 kitchen.	 She	 opened	a	 small	 cabinet	 that
served	as	an	 altar	 to	 the	spirits.	 She	unwrapped	 a	small	 wooden	 box	with
Niadic	script,	 the	ancient	Caster	language,	around	the	perimeter.


                         THE	ONE	WHO	 SEEKS	IT	 SHALL	 FIND
                              IT	THE	 HOUSE	OF	THE	 UNHOLY
                                    THE	 KEY	 TO	THE	 TRUTH


   "Your	  father	 gave	 this	 to	me	 before	 the	Transformation.	  It	 was	 passed
down	in	the	 Ravenwood	family	for	 generations.	Your	 granddaddy	 claimed	it
belonged	to	Abraham	 himself,	and	I	 believe	it	 did.	It's	 marked	by	 his	hatred
and	bigotry."
   She	 opened	the	 box,	revealing	  the	ebony	 sphere.	Macon	  could	 feel	the
energy,	even	without	touching	 it	--	 the	grisly	 possibility	 of	an	 eternity	within
its	glistening	walls.
   "Macon,	  you	 must	 understand.	 Once	 an	 Incubus	 is	 trapped	 inside	 the
Arclight,	 there	is	 no	way	out	 from	within.	  You	must	be	released.	If	 you	give
this	to	 someone,	you	 have	to	 be	sure	 with	 all	 certainty	 that	 you	 can	 trust
them,	because	you	will	be	putting	more	than	your	 life	in	 their	hands.	You	will
be	giving	 them	a	 thousand	lives.	 That's	what	 an	 eternity	 would	feel	 like	 in
there."
   She	 held	the	 box	 higher	 so	he	 could	 see	it,	 as	 if	 he	could	 imagine	 the
confines	just	by	looking	at	it.
   "I	  understand,	  Mamma.	 I	  can	 trust	 Jane.	 She's	 the	 most	 honest	 and
principled	person	I've	 ever	met,	and	she	loves	me.	Despite	what	I	am."
   Arelia	 touched	Macon's	 cheek.	"There	is	nothing	 wrong	with	 who	you	are,
cher.	If	there	were,	it	would	be	my	fault.	 I	doomed	you	to	this	fate."
   Macon	 bent	down	 and	kissed	her	forehead.	"I	  love	you,	Mamma.	 None	of
this	is	your	fault.	 It's	his."
   His	 father.

253
   Silas	 was	possibly	a	 greater	threat	 to	Jane	than	 he	was.	His	 father	was	a
slave	to	the	doctrine	of	the	first	Ravenwood	Blood	Incubus.	Abraham.
   "It's	 not	 his	fault,	 Macon.	You	don't	 know	what	your	 grandfather	was	like.
How	he	bullied	 your	 father	into	 believing	 his	twisted	 brand	of	 superiority	 --
that	Mortals	  were	beneath	Casters	and	 Incubuses	alike,	 simply	a	 source	of
blood	 to	 satisfy	 their	 lust.	  Your	 father	 was	 indoctrinated,	  like	 his	 father
before	him."
   Macon	  didn't	  care.	 He	 stopped	 feeling	 sorry	 for	  his	 father	  long	 ago,
stopped	wondering	what	it	was	about	Silas	his	mother	could	have	loved.
   "Tell	 me	how	to	use	it."	Macon	 reached	out	tentatively.	"Can	I	 touch	it?"
   "Yes.	The	 person	who	touches	you	with	 it	 must	have	intent,	and	even	then
it's	harmless	without	the	Carmen	Defixionis."
   His	  mother	  removed	  a	 small	  pouch,	  a	 gris-gris	   bag,	  the	 strongest
protection	 voodoo	could	 offer,	from	 the	 door	of	 the	cellar	 and	 disappeared
down	 the	 dark	  stairs.	 When	 she	 returned,	  she	 was	 carrying	  something
wrapped	in	a	dusty	piece	of	burlap.	She	laid	it	 on	the	table	and	unwrapped	it.
   The	Responsum.
   Literally	  translated,	it	 meant	"the	Answer."
   It	 was	written	in	 Niadic.	It	 contained	all	the	laws	that	 governed	his	kind.
   It	 was	the	oldest	 of	books.	There	were	only	 a	few	copies	in	 the	world.	 His
mother	turned	the	brittle	 pages	carefully,	until	 she	reached	the	right	one.
   "Carcer."
   The	Prison.
   The	sketch	of	 the	Arclight	 looked	exactly	like	 the	one	resting	in	 the	velvet-
lined	box	sitting	on	his	mother's	kitchen	table,	 next	to	her	uneaten	etouffee.
   "How	 does	it	work?"
   "It's	 rather	 simple.	A	 person	need	only	touch	the	Arclight	  and	the	Incubus
they	wish	 to	  imprison	 and	 speak	 the	Carmen,	 at	 the	 same	 moment.	The
Arclight	 will	 do	the	rest."
   "Is	 the	Carmen	in	the	book?"
   "No,	  it's	much	 too	 powerful	 to	be	 trusted	to	 the	 written	 word.	 You	must
learn	the	Carmen	from	someone	who	knows	it,	and	commit	it	to	memory."
   She	lowered	 her	 voice	 as	if	 she	was	 afraid	 someone	might	 be	listening.
Then	she	 whispered	the	 words	 that	 could	 condemn	 him	 to	 an	 eternity	 of
misery.


     "Comprehende,	Liga,	Cruci	 Fige.
     Capture,	Cage,	and	Crucify."

254
        Arelia	 closed	the	lid	 of	the	box	and	handed	it	to	Macon.	 "Be	careful.	 In	the
    Arc	 there	is	power,	and	in	the	power	there	is	Night."
        Macon	 kissed	her	forehead.	"I	promise."
        He	 turned	 to	leave,	 but	his	 mother's	 voice	called	 him	 back.	"You'll	  need
    this."	 She	scrawled	several	lines	on	a	piece	of	parchment.
        "What's	 this?"
        "The	 only	key	to	that	 door."	 She	gestured	to	the	box	tucked	under	his	arm.
    "The	 only	way	to	get	you	back	out."




I	opened	 my	 eyes.	I	 was	on	 my	 back	in	 the	 dirt,	 staring	up	 at	 the	stars.	The
Arclight	  was	Macon's,	 as	Marian	  had	said.	 I	 didn't	 know	 where	 he	was,	 the
Otherworld	 or	some	kind	 of	Caster	heaven.	I	 didn't	know	 why	 he	was	showing
me	all	this,	but	if	 I	had	learned	anything	tonight,	 I	knew	everything	 happened	for
a	reason.
     I	had	to	figure	 out	the	reason	before	it	was	too	late.


We	were	 still	 standing	in	 Bonaventure	 Cemetery,	although	 now	 we	were	 near
the	entrance.	I	 didn't	 bother	to	 tell	 Amma	I	 wasn't	 coming	 back	with	 her.	She
seemed	to	know.
     "We	better	take	off."	 I	hugged	Amma.
     She	grabbed	my	hands	and	gave	them	 a	squeeze,	hard.	"One	step	at	a	time,
Ethan	Wate.	 Your	 mamma	may	 say	this	 is	somethin'	 you	 hafta	do,	 but	I'll	  be
watchin'	every	 step	a	 the	way."	 I	 knew	 how	hard	 it	 was	for	 her	 to	let	 me	go,
instead	of	grounding	me	and	sending	me	straight	 to	my	room,	 for	the	rest	of	 my
life.
     Things	were	as	bad	as	they	seemed.	This	was	proof.
     Arelia	 stepped	forward	and	pressed	something	into	my	hand,	a	small	doll	like
the	ones	Amma	made.	It	was	a	voodoo	charm.	"I	 had	faith	in	 your	mother,	and	I
have	faith	in	 you,	Ethan.	This	 is	my	 way	of	 saying	good	luck,	 because	this	isn't
going	to	be	easy."
     "The	right	 thing	 and	the	easy	thing	are	never	the	same."	I	repeated	the	words
my	mother	 had	said	to	 me	a	 hundred	times.	 I	was	 channeling	her,	 in	my	 own
way.
     Twyla	 touched	my	 cheek	with	 her	bony	finger.	 "Da	 truth	in	 both	da	worlds.
Have	to	lose	 to	gain.	We're	 not	here	long,	 cher."	 It	 was	a	warning,	 almost	like
she	knew	something	I	didn't.	After	 what	I'd	seen	tonight,	I	was	sure	she	did.

255
     Amma	threw	 her	skinny	 arms	around	me	in	one	last	bone-crushing	hug.	"I'm
gonna	make	 you	 some	 luck,	 my	  way,"	 she	 whispered,	 and	 turned	 to	 Link.
"Wesley	 Jefferson	Lincoln,	  you	best	 come	back	 in	 one	piece,	or	 I'll	  tell	 your
mamma	what	you	were	doin'	in	my	 basement	when	you	were	nine	years	old,	you
hear	me?"
     Link	 smiled	at	the	familiar	 threat.	"Yes,	ma'am."
     Amma	 didn't	say	anything	 to	Liv	  --	just	 a	quick	nod	 in	her	 direction.	It	 was
her	way	 of	 showing	where	 her	loyalties	 lay.	 Now	 that	 I	 knew	what	 Lena	 had
done	for	me,	I	had	no	doubt	about	how	Amma	felt	 about	her.
     Amma	 cleared	her	throat.	 "The	guards	are	gone,	 but	Twyla	 can't	hold	 them
off	forever.	You'd	 best	get	on."
     I	pushed	open	the	wrought	iron	gate,	with	Link	 and	Liv	 behind	me.
     I'm	coming,	L.	 Whether	you	want	me	to	or	not.

256
6.19	

257
                                              Down	    Below



Nobody	said	a	word	as	we	walked	along	the	edge	of	the	road	toward	the	park
and	the	 Savannah	Doorwell.	We	 decided	not	 to	 risk	 going	 back	to	 Aunt
Caroline's,	since	Aunt	Del	would	be	there	and	wasn't	likely	to	let	us	keep	going
without	her.	Beyond	that,	there	didn't	seem	to	be	anything	worth	saying.	Link
tried	to	get	his	hair	to	stick	up	without	the	aid	of	industrial	strength	hair	gel,	and
Liv	 checked	her	selenometer	and	scribbled	in	her	tiny	red	notebook	once	or
twice.
    The	same	old	things.
    Only	 the	 same	old	things	weren't	the	 same	this	morning,	in	 the	gloomy
darkness	before	dawn.	My	mind	was	reeling,	and	I	stumbled	more	than	a	few
times.	This	night	was	worse	than	a	nightmare.	I	couldn't	wake	up.	I	didn't	even
have	to	shut	my	eyes	to	see	the	dream,	Sarafine	and	the	knife	--	Lena	crying	out
for	me.
    I	 had	died.
    I	 was	dead,	for	who	knows	how	long.
    Minutes?
    Hours?
    If	 it	 wasn't	for	Lena,	I	would	be	lying	in	the	dirt	in	His	Garden	of	Perpetual
Peace	right	now.	The	second	sealed	cedar	box	in	our	family	plot.
    Had	I	felt	things?	Seen	things?	Had	it	changed	me?	I	touched	the	hard	line	of
the	scar	beneath	my	shirt.	Was	it	 really	my	 scar?	Or	was	it	 the	memory	of
something	that	happened	to	the	other	Ethan	Wate,	the	one	who	didn't	come
back?
    It	  was	all	 a	 confusing	blur,	 like	 the	dreams	Lena	and	 I	 shared,	or	the
difference	between	the	two	skies	Liv	had	shown	me,	the	night	the	Southern	Star
disappeared.	Which	part	was	real?	Had	I	unconsciously	known	what	Lena	had
done?	Had	I	sensed	it	 somewhere	below	everything	else	that	had	happened
between	us?
    If	 she	had	known	what	she	was	choosing,	would	she	have	chosen	differently?
    I	 owed	my	life	to	her,	but	I	didn't	feel	happy.	All	I	felt	was	brokenness.	The
fear	of	dirt	and	nothingness	and	being	alone.	The	loss	of	my	mom	and	Macon
and,	in	a	way,	Lena.	And	something	else.
    The	crippling	sadness	and	the	incredible	guilt	of	being	the	one	who	lived.

258
Forsyth	Park	was	eerie	at	dawn.	I	 had	never	seen	it	when	it	wasn't	teeming	 with
people.	Without	  them,	I	 almost	 didn't	 recognize	 the	door	 to	 the	 Tunnels.	No
trolley	 bells,	no	sightseers.	No	 miniature	 dogs	or	gardeners	trimming	 azaleas.	I
thought	of	 all	the	 living,	 breathing	 people	who	would	 wander	 through	the	park
today.
     "You	 didn't	see	it."	Liv	 pulled	on	my	 arm.
     "What?"
     "The	door.	You	 walked	right	 by	it."
     She	was	 right.	 We	 had	walked	 past	 the	archway	 before	 I	 recognized	it.	  I
almost	forgot	how	 subtly	the	Caster	world	 worked,	always	hidden	 in	plain	sight.
You	couldn't	 have	seen	the	Outer	Door	 in	the	park	 unless	you	were	looking	 for
it,	and	the	archway	kept	it	 in	perpetual	shadow,	probably	a	Cast	of	its	 own.	Link
went	to	 work,	  ratcheting	 his	shears	into	  the	crack	 between	the	 door	 and	 the
frame	as	quickly	 as	possible,	prying	 it	 open	with	 a	 groan.	The	dim	 recesses	of
the	tunnel	were	even	darker	than	the	summer	dawn.
     "I	 can't	believe	that	works."	I	shook	my	 head.
     "I've	 been	thinking	 about	it	 since	we	left	 Gatlin,"	 Liv	 said.	"I	 think	 it	 makes
loads	of	sense."
     "It	 makes	sense	that	a	crappy	pair	of	garden	shears	can	open	a	Caster	door?"
     "That's	 the	beauty	 of	 the	 Order	of	 Things.	 I	  told	 you,	 there's	the	magical
universe	and	the	material	universe."	Liv	stared	up	at	the	sky.
     My	 eyes	followed	hers.	"Like	 the	two	skies."
     "Exactly.	 One	isn't	any	more	real	than	the	other.	They	coexist."
     "So	rusty	metal	 scissors	can	take	on	a	magic	portal?"	I	don't	know	 why	I	 was
surprised.
     "Not	 always.	But	 where	 the	two	 universes	meet,	there	will	  always	be	some
sort	of	seam.	Right?"	It	made	perfect	sense	to	Liv.
     I	nodded.
     "I	 wonder	 if	  a	strength	 in	 one	universe	 corresponds	to	 a	weakness	in	 the
other."	She	was	talking	to	herself	as	much	as	to	me.
     "You	 mean,	the	 door	is	 easy	for	Link	  to	open	 because	it's	impossible	for	 a
Caster?"	Link	had	been	having	 a	suspiciously	easy	time	with	 the	Doorwells.	 On
the	other	hand,	Liv	didn't	 know	Link	 had	been	picking	locks	 since	his	mom	gave
him	his	first	 curfew,	in	about	sixth	grade.
     "Possibly.	It	 might	account	for	what's	happening	with	 the	Arclight."
     "Or	 what	about	this?	 The	Caster	doors	keep	on	 openin'	because	I'm	a	ragin'
stud."	Link	 flexed.
     "Or	  the	Casters	 who	 built	  these	Tunnels	  hundreds	of	  years	ago	 weren't
thinking	about	garden	shears,"	I	said.

259
     "Because	they	were	thinkin'	 about	my	extreme	studliness,	in	 both	universes."
He	stuck	the	shears	back	in	his	belt.	"Ladies	first."
     Liv	 climbed	down	into	 the	tunnel.	"As	if	 I	should	be	surprised."




We	 followed	  the	 stairs	 back	 down	  into	 the	  still	  air	 of	  the	 tunnel.	 It	  was
completely	quiet,	 without	 even	an	 echo	from	 our	footsteps.	 The	silence	settled
over	us,	 thick	 and	 heavy.	The	 air	 beneath	the	 Mortal	 world	  had	none	 of	 the
weightlessness	of	the	air	above.
     At	 the	bottom	of	the	Doorwell,	 we	found	 ourselves	facing	the	same	dark	road
that	had	 led	 us	to	 Savannah.	The	 one	 that	had	 split	 into	  two	 directions:	 the
forbidding,	 shadowy	 street	 we	were	 on,	 and	 the	meadow	 path	 suffused	with
light.	 Directly	 in	 front	of	 us,	the	old	 neon	motel	 sign	was	flickering	  on	and	off
now,	but	that	was	the	only	difference.
     That,	 and	Lucille	  lying	 rolled	  up	beneath	it,	  the	light	  hitting	 her	 fur	 as	it
blinked.	She	yawned	to	see	us,	slowly	pulling	herself	up	one	paw	at	a	time.
     "You're	 gettin'	 to	be	a	 tease,	Lucille."	 Link	 squatted	on	 his	heels	to	 scratch
her	ears.	Lucille	meowed,	or	 growled,	depending	on	how	 you	looked	 at	it.	"Aw,
I	forgive	 you."	Everything	 was	a	compliment	to	Link.
     "What	now?"	 I	faced	the	crossroads.
     "Stairway	 to	hell,	or	the	Yellow	  Brick	 Road?	Why	don't	you	give	 your	8	Ball
a	shake	and	see	if	it's	ready	to	play	again."	Link	stood	up.
     I	took	 the	Arclight	 out	of	my	 pocket.	It	was	still	 glowing,	 flashing	on	and	off,
but	the	 emerald	color	 that	led	 us	to	 Savannah	was	gone.	Now	 it	 had	 turned	a
deep	blue,	like	one	of	those	satellite	photos	of	the	Earth.
     Liv	 touched	the	sphere,	the	color	deepening	under	her	fingertip.	 "The	 blue	is
so	much	more	intense	than	the	green.	I	think	it's	getting	stronger."
     "Or	 your	 superpowers	are	 getting	 stronger."	 Link	 gave	 me	a	 shove,	and	I
almost	dropped	the	Arclight.
     "And	 you	 wonder	 why	 this	thing	 stopped	working?"	  I	 pulled	it	 away	 from
him,	annoyed.
     Link	 checked	me	with	 his	 shoulder.	"Try	 to	read	my	 mind.	 Wait,	no.	 Try	to
fly."
     "Stop	 messing	around,"	 Liv	  snapped.	"You	 heard	 Ethan's	mom.	 We	 don't
have	much	 time.	The	 Arclight	  will	  work	 or	 it	 won't.	 Either	 way,	 we	need	an
answer."
     Link	 straightened	up.	The	 weight	of	 what	we	 had	seen	at	the	graveyard	was

260
on	all	our	shoulders	now.	The	strain	was	beginning	to	show.
     "Shh.	 Listen	 --"	 I	 took	 a	few	 steps	forward,	  in	 the	direction	 of	 the	 tunnel
carpeted	in	tall	grass.	You	could	actually	hear	the	birds	chirping	 now.
     I	 raised	the	Arclight	  and	held	my	 breath.	I	 wouldn't	 have	minded	 if	 it	went
black	and	sent	us	down	 the	other	path,	the	 one	with	 the	shadows,	the	rusty	fire
escapes	crawling	down	the	sides	of	dark	buildings,	 the	unmarked	doors.	As	long
as	it	gave	us	an	answer.
     Not	this	time.
     "Try	 the	other	 way,"	 Liv	 said,	never	taking	 her	eyes	off	 the	light.	 I	 retraced
my	steps.
     No	change.
     No	Arclight,	  and	no	 Wayward.	Because	deep	down	I	 knew	 that	without	 the
Arclight,	 I	wouldn't	 have	been	able	to	find	my	way	out	 of	a	paper	bag,	especially
not	in	the	Tunnels.
     "I	 guess	that's	the	answer.	We're	screwed."	I	pocketed	the	ball.
     "Great."	Link	 started	down	the	sunlit	 path	without	another	thought.
     "Where	are	you	going?"
     "No	 offense,	 but	 unless	you	 have	some	 kinda	 secret	Wayward	 clue	 about
where	to	go,	I'm	 not	goin'	down	 there."	He	looked	 back	at	the	darker	path.	"The
way	I	see	it,	we're	lost	no	matter	what,	right?"
     "Pretty	much."
     "Or	 if	 you	 look	 at	it	 the	other	 way,	we've	 got	a	fifty-fifty	    chance	of	gettin'
things	right	 half	 the	time."	 I	didn't	 try	 to	correct	 his	math.	"So	 I	figure	 we	 take
our	chances	on	Oz	and	tell	ourselves	things	are	finally	lookin'	 up.	'Cause	what	do
we	have	to	lose?"	It	was	hard	to	argue	with	 Link's	 twisted	logic	 when	he	tried	to
be	logical.
     "Got	a	better	idea?"
     Liv	 shook	her	head.	"Shockingly,	no."
     We	headed	for	Oz.
     The	tunnel	really	 was	right	 out	of	 a	page	of	one	of	my	 mom's	tattered	old	L.
Frank	Baum	books.	Willows	  stretched	over	the	dusty	path,	and	the	underground
sky	was	open	and	endless	and	blue.
     The	scene	was	calm,	which	 had	the	opposite	effect	 on	me.	I	was	used	to	 the
shadows.	This	path	 seemed	too	idyllic.	  I	expected	a	 Vex	to	 fly	 down	 over	 the
hills	in	the	distance	any	second.
     Or	a	house	to	drop	on	my	head	when	I	least	expected	it.
     My	 life	 had	taken	a	stranger	turn	than	I	 could've	ever	 imagined.	What	 was	I
doing	on	 this	path?	Where	 was	I	headed	really?	 Who	was	 I	to	 take	on	a	 battle
between	powers	I	didn't	understand	--	armed	with	 a	runaway	cat,	a	uniquely	 bad

261
drummer,	a	pair	of	garden	shears,	and	an	Ovaltine-drinking	teen	Galileo?
     To	save	a	girl	who	didn't	 want	to	be	saved?
     "Wait	 up,	you	stupid	cat!"	 Link	 scrambled	after	Lucille,	 who	 had	become	the
leader,	zigzagging	her	way	 in	front	 of	us	as	if	 she	knew	exactly	 where	we	were
going.	It	was	ironic,	 because	I	didn't	have	a	clue.




Two	hours	later,	the	sun	was	still	shining,	 and	my	uneasy	feelings	were	growing.
Liv	 and	Link	 were	walking	 ahead	of	 me,	which	 was	Liv's	 way	of	 avoiding	 me,
or	at	least	the	 situation.	I	 couldn't	 blame	her.	 She'd	seen	my	mother	 and	heard
everything	Amma	 said.	She	knew	what	Lena	had	done	for	 me,	how	it	 explained
her	 Dark	 and	  erratic	 behavior.	  Nothing	  had	 changed,	 but	 the	 reasons	 for
everything	 had.	For	 the	second	time	 this	 summer,	a	girl	  I	 cared	about	--	 who
cared	about	me	--	couldn't	bear	to	look	me	in	the	eye.
     Instead,	she	was	 passing	the	time	 walking	 up	 the	path	 with	 Link,	 teaching
him	British	 insults	and	pretending	to	laugh	at	his	jokes.
     "Your	 room	is	grotty.	 Your	 car	is	skanky,	maybe	manky,"	Liv	 teased,	but	her
heart	wasn't	in	it.
     "How	 do	you	know?"
     "From	 looking	 at	you."	 Liv	 sounded	distant.	Teasing	Link	  didn't	seem	to	be
enough	of	a	distraction.
     "What	 about	me?"	Link	 ran	his	hand	over	his	 spiky	hair,	to	 make	sure	it	was
sticking	up	just	right.
     "Let's	see.	You,	you're	a	git,	a	prat."	Liv	 tried	 to	force	a	smile.
     "That's	all	good,	right?"
     "Of	 course.	The	best."
     Good	 old	 Link.	 His	 trademark	 charmless	charm	 could	 salvage	almost	 any
desperate	social	situation.
     "Do	 you	 hear	that?"	 Liv	 stopped	walking.	  Usually	 when	I	 heard	singing,	 I
was	the	only	 one,	and	it	was	Lena's	song.	This	 time,	 everyone	heard	it,	and	the
song	was	a	far	 cry	from	 the	hypnotic	 voice	 of	 Seventeen	Moons.	This	was	bad
singing,	dying	animal	 bad.	Lucille	meowed,	her	hair	standing	on	end.
     Link	 looked	around.	"What	is	 that?"
     "I	 don't	know.	It	 sounds	almost	like	..."	I	stopped.
     "Someone	in	trouble?"	Liv	 held	her	hand	near	her	ear.
     "I	 was	going	to	 say	'Leaning	on	the	Everlasting	 Arms.'	"	 It	 was	an	old	hymn
they	sang	at	the	Sisters'	church.	I	was	half	right.

262
     When	we	 rounded	the	corner,	Aunt	 Prue	was	walking	  toward	us	holding	 on
to	Thelma's	 arm,	singing	 as	if	  it	 was	Sunday	at	 church.	She	was	 wearing	 her
white	 flowered	 dress	and	matching	 white	 gloves,	shuffling	  along	 in	 her	beige
orthopedic	shoes.	Harlon	 James	was	scampering	along	 behind	 them,	nearly	 as
large	as	Aunt	Prue's	patent-leather	handbag.	It	looked	like	the	three	of	them	were
out	for	a	stroll	on	a	sunny	afternoon.
     Lucille	 meowed	and	sat	down	on	the	path	in	front	of	us.
     Link	 scratched	his	 head	behind	her.	 "Dude,	 am	I	 seein'	things?	 'Cause	that
looks	a	 lot	like	  your	crazy	 aunt	and	that	 fleabag	dog	 a	hers."	 At	 first,	 I	 didn't
answer	him.	I	 was	too	busy	figuring	  the	odds	of	this	 being	some	kind	of	 Caster
mind	 trick.	 We'd	 get	close	 enough,	then	 Sarafine	would	 step	 right	 out	of	 my
aunt's	skin	and	kill	all	 three	of	us.
     "Maybe	 it's	 Sarafine."	 I	 was	 thinking	 out	 loud,	 trying	 to	 find	 the	 logic	 in
something	completely	illogical.
     Liv	 shook	her	head.	"I	 don't	think	 so.	Cataclysts	can	project	 themselves	into
the	bodies	of	 others,	 but	 they	can't	 inhabit	 two	 people	at	 once.	Three,	 if	 you
count	the	dog."
     "Who	 would	count	that	dog?"	Link	 made	a	face.
     Part	of	 me,	the	biggest	part	of	 me,	wanted	to	 take	off	 and	figure	it	 out	later.
But	they	saw	us.	Aunt	 Prue,	or	the	creature	impersonating	Aunt	Prue,	waved	her
hankie	in	the	air.	"Ethan!"
     Link	 looked	back	at	me.	"Should	we	make	a	run	for	it?"
     "Findin'	 you	was	harder	than	herdin'	cats!"	 Aunt	Prue	called,	shuffling	 across
the	grass	as	fast	as	she	could.	Lucille	meowed,	tossing	her	head.	"Now,	Thelma,
keep	up."	Even	at	a	distance,	it	was	impossible	to	mistake	the	off-kilter	 walk	 and
the	bossy	tone.
     "No,	that's	her."	Too	 late	to	run.
     "How	 did	 they	 get	down	 here?"	Link	 was	 as	stumped	as	I	was.	 It	 was	one
thing	to	find	 out	Carlton	 Eaton	delivered	the	mail	 to	the	Lunae	 Libri,	 but	seeing
my	hundred-year-old	 great-aunt	wandering	around	in	 the	Tunnels	in	 her	church
dress	was	something	else.
     Aunt	 Prue	dug	her	cane	into	the	grass,	working	her	way	up	the	path.	"Wesley
Lincoln!	 Are	you	 gonna	stand	there	and	watch	an	old	woman	work	herself	inta	a
state,	or	are	you	gonna	get	on	over	here	and	help	me	up	this	hill?"
     "Yes,	ma'am.	I	 mean,	no,	ma'am."	 Link	 almost	tripped	 as	he	ran	to	hook	his
arm	through	hers.	I	caught	the	other.
     The	shock	of	seeing	her	was	starting	to	wear	off	 a	little.	 "Aunt	 Prue,	how	did
you	get	down	here?"
     "Same	way	as	you,	 I	expect.	Came	down	 through	one	a	them	 doors.	There's

263
one	right	behind	Missionary	 Baptist.	I	 used	it	ta	sneak	outta	Bible	school	when	I
was	younger	than	you."
     "But	 how	 did	 you	 know	 about	the	 Tunnels?"	 I	 couldn't	 figure	 it.	 Had	 she
followed	us?
     "I've	 been	down	in	 these	Tunnels	more	 times	than	a	 sinner's	swore	offa	 the
bottle.	You	  think	 you're	 the	only	  one	who	 knows	 'bout	 what	 goes	on	in	 this
town?"	She	knew.	 She	was	one	of	them,	 like	my	 mom	 and	Marian	and	Carlton
Eaton	--	Mortals	who	had	somehow	become	part	of	the	Caster	world.
     "Do	Aunt	 Grace	and	Aunt	Mercy	 know?"
     "	'Course	not.	Those	two	can't	keep	a	secret	ta	save	their	lives.	That's	why	my
daddy	only	told	me.	And	 I	never	told	a	soul,	'cept	Thelma."
     Thelma	squeezed	Aunt	Prue's	arm	affectionately.	 "She	only	 told	 me	because
she	couldn't	climb	down	the	stairs	on	her	own	anymore."
     Aunt	 Prue	 swatted	at	 Thelma	 with	  her	handkerchief.	 "Now,	  Thelma,	 you
know	that's	not	true.	Don't	tell	 stories."
     "Did	 Professor	Ashcroft	  send	you	after	 us?"	Liv	  looked	up	 nervously	 from
her	notebook.
     Aunt	 Prue	sniffed.	"No	 one	sends	me	anywhere,	not	hardly.	I'm	 too	old	ta	be
sent.	Came	on	 my	 own."	 She	pointed	 at	me.	 "But	 you	 best	hope	 Amma	 isn't
down	here	lookin'	for	 you.	She's	been	boilin'	bones	since	you	left."
     If	 she	only	knew.
     "Then	 what	are	 you	doing	 down	 here,	Aunt	 Prue?"	Even	 if	 she	was	in	 the
know,	the	Tunnels	didn't	seem	like	the	safest	place	for	an	old	lady.
     "Came	ta	bring	 you	these."	Aunt	 Prue	opened	her	pocketbook	and	held	it	out
so	we	could	see	inside.	Under	the	 sewing	scissors	and	coupons	and	King	James
pocket	Bible	 was	a	thick	 stack	of	 yellowed	 papers,	folded	neatly	into	 a	bundle.
"Go	on,	now.	Take	 'em."	She	might	as	well	 have	told	me	to	stab	myself	with	 the
sewing	scissors.	There	was	no	way	I	 was	going	to	reach	into	 my	aunt's	purse.	It
was	the	ultimate	violation	 of	Southern	etiquette.
     Liv	 seemed	to	understand	the	 problem.	"May	 I?"	 Maybe	 British	 men	 didn't
go	through	women's	purses	either.
     "That's	what	I	 brought	'em	for."
     Liv	 lifted	 the	papers	gently	 out	of	 Aunt	Prue's	purse.	"These	are	really	 old."
She	opened	them	carefully	 on	 the	soft	 grass.	"They	 can't	be	what	 I	 think	 they
are."
     I	  bent	 down	  and	 studied	 them.	 The	  papers	 looked	 like	  schematics	 or
architectural	 plans.	They	 were	 marked	 in	 all	  different	 colors	 and	 written	 by
many	different	 hands.	They	 were	 painstakingly	 drawn	across	a	 grid,	 each	line
perfectly	measured	and	straight.	Liv	 smoothed	the	paper	flat,	and	I	could	 see	the

264
long	rows	of	lines	intersecting	 one	another.
     "Depends	on	what	ya	think	they	are,	I	reckon."
     Liv's	 hands	were	shaking.	 "They're	maps	of	 the	Tunnels."	 She	looked	 up	at
Aunt	Prue.	"Do	 you	 mind	if	 I	 ask	where	you	 got	these,	ma'am?	I've	never	 seen
anything	like	them,	not	even	in	the	Lunae	Libri."
     Aunt	 Prue	unwrapped	 a	red	 and	white	  striped	peppermint	 from	 her	 purse.
"My	 daddy	gave	'em	ta	me,	like	 my	 granddaddy	gave	'em	ta	him.	 They're	older
than	dirt."
     I	 was	 speechless.	No	matter	 how	 normal	 Lena	 thought	 my	 life	 would	  be
without	her,	she	was	wrong.	Curse	or	no	curse,	my	family	 tree	was	all	tangled	up
with	Casters.
     And	their	 maps,	fortunately	for	us.
     "They're	 not	 close	ta	 done.	 I	 was	a	 real	draftswoman	 in	 my	 day,	 but	 my
bursitis	got	the	best	a	me."
     "I	 tried	 to	 help,	but	 I	 don't	 have	the	 knack	for	 it,	 like	  your	aunt."	 Thelma
looked	apologetic.	Aunt	Prue	waved	her	handkerchief.
     "You	 drew	these?"
     "I	 drew	my	share."	She	pushed	on	her	cane,	straightening	with	pride.
     Liv	 stared	at	the	maps	in	awe.	"How?	The	Tunnels	are	absolutely	endless."
     "An	 itty	bit	 at	a	time.	Those	maps	don't	show	all	a	the	Tunnels.	The	Carolinas
mostly,	and	some	a	Georgia.	That's	'bout	 as	far	as	we	got."	 It	was	unbelievable.
How	could	my	 scattered	aunt	have	drafted	maps	of	the	Caster	Tunnels?
     "How	 did	 you	 do	this	 without	 Aunt	 Grace	and	Aunt	 Mercy	 finding	  out?"	I
couldn't	remember	 a	time	 when	the	 three	of	 them	 weren't	so	 close,	they	 were
bumping	into	each	other.
     "We	 didn't	 always	live	 together,	 Ethan."	She	lowered	 her	 voice,	as	if	 Aunt
Mercy	 and	Aunt	 Grace	might	 be	 listening.	 "And	 I	 don't	 really	 play	 bridge	on
Thursdays."	I	 tried	to	 imagine	Aunt	 Prue	charting	 the	Caster	Tunnels	while	 the
other	elderly	members	of	the	DAR	 played	cards	at	the	church	social	hall.
     "Take	 'em.	I	 reckon	you'll	 need	'em	 if	 you're	fixin'	  ta	stay	down	 here.	Gets
real	confusin'	after	 a	while.	 Some	days	I'd	get	 myself	so	turned	 around,	I	could
barely	get	myself	back	ta	South	Carolina."
     "Thanks,	Aunt	 Prue.	But	 --"	 I	stopped.	I	 didn't	 know	how	 to	explain	 it	all	 --
the	Arclight	  and	the	 visions,	 Lena	and	 John	Breed	 and	the	Great	 Barrier,	 the
moon	out	of	time	and	the	missing	star,	not	to	mention	the	crazy	dials	 spinning	on
Liv's	 wrist.	Least	 of	all,	 Sarafine	and	Abraham.	 It	 wasn't	a	story	 for	one	 of	the
oldest	citizens	in	Gatlin.
     Aunt	 Prue	cut	me	off	 with	 a	wave	of	her	 handkerchief	in	my	 face.	"Y'all	 are
as	lost	 as	a	hog	 at	 a	pig	 pick.	  Unless	you	 wanna	 be	slapped	 on	a	 bun	 with

265
Carolina	Gold,	you	best	pay	attention."
     "Yes,	 ma'am."	  I	 thought	 I	  knew	 right	  where	 this	 particular	  lecture	 was
headed.	But	I	 was	as	wrong	 as	Savannah	Snow	wearing	a	sleeveless	dress	and
chewing	gum	at	youth	choir.
     "Now	 you	 listen	up,	 ya	hear?"	She	pointed	 her	bony	 finger	 at	me.	"Carlton
came	sniffin'	 around	ta	see	what	I	 knew	 'bout	someone	breakin'	inta	 the	Caster
door	at	the	fairgrounds.	Next	thing	 I	hear,	that	Duchannes	girl	is	missin',	you	and
Wesley	have	run	off,	 and	that	girl	 stayin'	with	 Marian	--	 you	know,	 the	one	who
puts	milk	 in	 her	tea	--	is	 nowhere	ta	be	seen.	Seems	ta	me	that's	one	too	 many
coincidences,	even	for	Gatlin."
     Big	surprise	there.	Carlton	spreading	the	news.
     "Whatever	it	 is,	you	need	these,	and	I	want	you	ta	take	'em.	I	 don't	have	time
for	all	 this	 nonsense."	I	guessed	right.	She	knew	 what	we	 were	doing,	 whether
she	let	on	or	not.
     "I	 sure	appreciate	your	concern,	Aunt	Prue."
     "I	 ain't	concerned.	Not	 so	long	 as	you	take	 the	maps."	She	patted	my	 hand.
"Ya'll	 are	 gonna	find	  that	gold-eyed	 Lena	 Du-channes.	Even	 a	 blind	 squirrel
sometimes	finds	himself	a	nut."
     "I	 hope	so,	ma'am."
     Aunt	 Prue	patted	my	hand	and	took	 hold	 of	her	cane.	"Then	 you	better	 stop
talkin'	 ta	old	 ladies	 and	meet	 that	trouble	 halfway,	 so	 there'll	 only	 be	half	  as
much.	Good	 Lord	 willin'	  and	 the	creek	 don't	rise."	 She	 steered	Thelma	away
from	us.
     Lucille	 ran	 along	behind	 them	for	 a	 minute,	the	 bell	on	 her	collar	 jingling.
Aunt	Prue	 stopped	and	smiled.	"See	you	 still	 got	 that	cat.	I	 was	waitin'	 for	 the
right	time	 ta	let	 her	offa	 that	clothesline.	 She	knows	a	 trick	 or	two.	 You'll	 see.
You	still	 got	her	tag,	don't	ya?"
     "Yes,	ma'am.	It's	in	my	 pocket."
     "Needs	one	a	those	rings	to	fix	 it	 on	her	collar.	 But	you	hold	 on	ta	it,	 and	I'll
get	ya	 one."	Aunt	  Prue	unwrapped	another	 peppermint	 and	dropped	it	 on	 the
ground	for	Lucille.	 "I'm	 real	 sorry	I	called	 you	a	deserter,	ole	girl,	but	 you	know
Mercy'd	never	have	let	me	give	you	up	otherwise."
     Lucille	 sniffed	the	peppermint.
     Thelma	 waved	and	 smiled	 her	big	 Dolly	  Parton	smile.	 "Good	 luck,	 Sweet
Meat."
     I	 watched	them	walk	 down	 the	hill	 behind	 us,	wondering	 what	else	I	 didn't
know	about	the	 people	in	my	 family.	 Who	 else	seemed	senile	and	clueless,	but
was	actually	watching	 my	 every	move?	Who	 else	was	protecting	Caster	Scrolls
and	secrets	in	their	 spare	time	or	 mapping	a	 world	 most	of	 Gatlin	 didn't	 know

266
existed?
     Lucille	 licked	the	peppermint.	If	 she	knew,	she	wasn't	talking.


"Okay,	so	we've	 got	a	map.	That's	gotta	be	something,	 right,	MJ?"	 Link's	 mood
improved	after	Aunt	 Prue	and	Thelma	disappeared	down	the	path.
     "Liv?"	  She	didn't	hear	me.	She	was	flipping	 pages	in	her	 notebook	with	 one
hand	and	tracing	a	pathway	across	the	map	with	the	other.
     "Here's	Charleston,	and	this	must	be	Savannah.	So	if	you	assume	the	Arclight
has	been	helping	us	find	the	southern	pathway,	toward	the	coast	..."
     "Why	 the	coast?"	I	interrupted.
     "Due	 south.	As	if	 we	were	 following	 the	 Southern	Star,	remember?"	Liv	 sat
back,	frustrated.	 "There	 are	 so	many	 branching	 pathways.	 We're	 only	 a	 few
hours	from	 the	Savannah	Doorwell,	 but	 that	could	 mean	anything	 down	here."
She	was	right.	 If	 time	 and	physics	didn't	 directly	 correspond	 above	and	below
the	ground,	who	was	to	say	we	weren't	in	China	by	now?
     "Even	 if	we	 knew	where	 we	were,	it	 could	 take	days	to	find	 it	 on	this	 map.
We	don't	have	time."
     "Well,	 we'd	better	get	started.	It's	all	we've	got."
     But	it	 was	something	--	something	that	made	it	feel	 like	we	might	 actually	be
able	to	find	Lena.	I	 wasn't	sure	whether	it	was	because	I	believed	the	maps	could
get	us	there	or	because	I	thought	I	could.
     It	didn't	 matter,	as	long	as	I	found	Lena	in	time.
     Good	Lord	willin'	  and	the	creek	don't	rise.

267
6.19	

268
                                                  Bad	   Girl



My	 optimism	was	short-lived.	The	more	I	thought	about	finding	Lena,	the	more
I	thought	about	John.	What	if	Liv	was	right,	and	Lena	would	never	go	back	to
being	the	girl	I	remembered?	What	if	we	were	already	too	late?	I	thought	about
the	swirling	black	designs	on	her	hands.
    I	 was	still	thinking	about	it	when	the	words	drifted	into	my	mind.	They	were
faint	at	first.	For	a	second,	I	thought	it	was	Lena's	voice.	But	when	I	heard	the
familiar	melody,	I	knew	I	was	wrong.


         Seventeen	moons,	seventeen	years
         Know	the	loss,	stay	the	fears
         Wait	for	him	and	he	appears
         Seventeen	moons,	seventeen	tears	...


    My	 Shadowing	Song.	I	tried	to	figure	out	what	my	mother	was	trying	to	tell
me.	You	don't	have	much	time.	Her	words	rattled	around	in	my	mind.	Wait	for
him	and	he	appears....	Was	she	talking	about	Abraham?
    If	 she	was,	what	was	I	going	to	do?
    I	 was	so	absorbed	in	the	verse,	I	didn't	realize	Link	was	talking	to	me.	"Did
you	hear	that?"
    "The	song?"
    "What	 song?"	He	signaled	us	to	be	quiet.	He	was	talking	about	something
else.	It	sounded	like	dry	leaves	crunching	behind	us,	and	the	low	whipping	of	the
wind.	But	there	wasn't	even	a	breeze.
    "I	 don't	--"	Liv	began,	but	Link	shut	her	down.
    "Shh!"
    Liv	 rolled	her	eyes.	"Are	all	American	guys	as	brave	as	the	two	of	you?"
    "I	 heard	it,	too."	I	 looked	around,	but	there	was	nothing,	not	a	single	living
thing.	Lucille's	ears	perked	up.
    Everything	 happened	so	quickly	it	 was	impossible	to	 follow.	 Because	it
wasn't	a	living	thing	I'd	heard.
    It	 was	Hunting	Ravenwood,	Macon's	brother	--	and	his	killer.

269
Hunting's	menacing,	inhuman	 smile	was	the	first	 thing	 I	saw.	He	 materialized	a
few	 feet	 away	 from	 us,	 so	 quickly	  he	 was	almost	 a	 blur.	  Another	 Incubus
appeared,	and	another.	They	ripped	out	of	nowhere,	one	after	the	next,	like	 links
in	a	chain.	The	chain	tightened,	and	they	formed	a	circle	around	us.
     They	were	all	 Blood	Incubuses,	with	 the	same	black	eyes	and	matching	ivory
canines,	except	for	one.	Larkin,	 Lena's	cousin	 and	Hunting's	lackey,	 had	a	long
brown	snake	 curled	around	 his	neck.	 The	 snake	had	the	same	yellow	  eyes	as
Larkin.
     He	nodded	at	 the	snake	slithering	 down	his	 arm.	"Copperheads.	Nasty	 little
bitches.	You	 don't	want	 to	 get	bit	 by	 one	of	 these.	But	 then	there	are	a	 lot	 of
ways	to	get	bitten."
     "I	  would	 have	 to	 agree."	 Hunting	  laughed,	 baring	 his	 canines.	A	  rabid-
looking	animal	 crouched	behind	him.	It	 had	the	huge	muzzle	of	a	Saint	Bernard,
but	instead	of	 big,	droopy	 eyes,	it	had	sharp,	yellow	  ones.	The	hair	on	 its	back
bristled	like	a	wolf's.	 Hunting	 had	gotten	himself	a	dog	--	or	something.
     Liv	 clung	 to	 my	arm,	 her	nails	 digging	 into	my	 skin.	 She	couldn't	 take	her
eyes	off	Hunting	 or	his	pet.	I	 was	pretty	sure	she	had	only	seen	a	Blood	Incubus
in	one	 of	 her	Caster	volumes.	 "That's	 a	Packhound.	 They're	 trained	to	 go	 for
blood.	Stay	away	from	it."
     Hunting	 lit	  a	cigarette.	 "Ah,	  Ethan,	I	  see	you've	 found	 yourself	 a	 Mortal
girlfriend.	 It's	about	time.	And	 I	think	 this	one's	a	real	keeper."	He	laughed	at	his
own	bad	joke,	 exhaling	 wide	 smoke	rings	into	 the	 perfectly	 blue	sky.	 "Almost
makes	me	 want	 to	  let	 you	 go."	 The	 Packhound	 growled	  low	 in	  its	 throat.
"Almost."
     "You	 --	 you	 can	let	 us	go,"	 Link	 stammered.	"We	  won't	tell	  anybody.	We
swear."	One	of	 the	Incubuses	laughed.	Hunting	 jerked	his	head	around,	and	the
Demon	didn't	utter	another	sound.	It	was	obvious	who	was	calling	 the	shots.
     "Why	 would	I	 care	if	you	 told	anyone?	In	fact,	I	 enjoy	the	limelight.	 I'm	 a	bit
of	a	thespian."	 He	stepped	closer	 to	Link,	  but	I	 was	the	one	 he	was	watching.
"Who	would	 you	tell,	 anyway?	Now	 that	my	niece	killed	 Macon.	 Didn't	see	that
one	coming."
     Hunting's	 Packhound	was	foaming	at	the	mouth,	 and	so	were	his	other	dogs,
the	Incubuses	that	only	 looked	 human.	One	 of	them	 inched	closer	 to	Liv.	  She
jumped,	tightening	her	grip	around	my	 arm.
     "Why	 don't	you	 stop	trying	 to	scare	us?"	I	 tried	to	 sound	tough,	but	I	 wasn't
fooling	anyone.	This	time,	 they	all	roared	with	 laughter.
     "You	 think	 we're	 trying	 to	scare	you?	 Thought	you	 were	smarter	 than	that,
Ethan.	My	boys	and	I	are	hungry.	We	missed	breakfast."
     Liv's	 voice	was	tiny.	"You	 can't	mean	..."

270
     Hunting	 winked	  at	 Liv.	  "Don't	 worry,	  sweetheart.	We	 may	 just	 bite	 that
pretty	neck	of	yours	 and	make	you	one	of	us."	My	 breath	caught	in	my	 throat.	It
had	never	occurred	to	me	that	Incubuses	could	transform	humans	into	their	kind.
     Could	they?
     Hunting	 flicked	 his	 cigarette	into	 a	 patch	of	 bluebells.	For	 a	second,	I	 was
struck	by	 the	irony	  of	 the	situation.	 A	 pack	of	 leather-clad,	 cigarette-smoking
Incubuses	were	standing	in	a	meadow	right	 out	 of	The	Sound	of	Music,	 waiting
to	kill	 us	while	the	birds	were	singing	in	 the	trees.	"It's	been	fun	chatting	with	the
three	of	you,	but	I'm	getting	 bored.	I	have	a	rather	short	attention	span."
     He	whipped	 his	 neck	around,	farther	 than	any	human's	 could	possibly	 turn.
Hunting	was	 going	to	kill	  me,	and	his	buddies	were	 going	to	kill	  Link	 and	Liv.
My	brain	tried	 to	process	it	while	my	 heart	focused	on	beating.
     "Let's	do	this,"	 Larkin	 said,	flicking	 a	forked	tongue	that	matched	his	snake's.
     Liv	 buried	 her	 face	into	 my	 shoulder.	 She	didn't	 want	 to	watch.	 I	 tried	 to
think.	I	was	no	match	for	 Hunting,	but	everyone	had	an	Achilles'	heel,	right?
     "On	my	 count,"	growled	Hunting.	 "No	 survivors."
     My	 mind	raced.	The	Arclight.	  I	had	the	ultimate	 weapon	against	an	Incubus,
but	I	had	no	idea	how	to	use	it.	I	moved	my	hand	closer	to	my	pocket.
     "No,"	 Liv	  whispered.	"There's	 no	use."	She	shut	 her	eyes,	and	I	 pulled	 her
closer.	My	 last	 thoughts	were	 about	the	 two	girls	  who	meant	 so	much	 to	me.
Lena,	the	one	I	would	never	save.	And	Liv,	 the	one	I	was	about	to	get	killed.
     But	Hunting	 never	attacked.
     Instead,	he	cocked	 his	head	to	 the	side	 awkwardly,	 like	 a	wolf	  listening	 to
another	wolf	 calling.	 Then	 he	stepped	back	 and	the	other	 Incubuses	followed,
even	Larkin	  and	 the	 demonic	 Saint	 Bernard.	 His	 minions	  were	 disoriented,
looking	 around	at	each	other.	They	stared	at	Hunting,	 waiting	 for	 direction,	 but
he	didn't	give	 them	any.	 Instead,	he	backed	up	slowly	 and	the	 others	followed.
They	were	closing	in	on	us,	but	in	 reverse.	Hunting's	expression	changed,	and	he
looked	more	like	a	man	again,	rather	than	the	Demon	he	truly	was.
     "What's	happening?"	Liv	 whispered.
     "I	 don't	 know."	  It	 was	clear	 Hunting	  and	his	 lackeys	were	 confused,	 too,
because	they	kept	circling	and	pacing,	moving	 farther	and	farther	 away	from	us.
Something	was	controlling	them,	but	what?
     Hunting	 locked	 eyes	with	 me.	 "I'll	 be	 seeing	you.	 Sooner	than	you	 think."
They	were	leaving.	 Hunting	 kept	shaking	his	 head,	as	if	he	was	trying	 to	 shake
something	--	or	someone	--	out	of	it.	The	pack	had	a	new	leader,	someone	he	had
no	choice	but	to	follow.
     Someone	very	persuasive.
     And	very	 pretty.

271
     Ridley	 was	leaning	against	a	tree	a	couple	of	yards	behind	them,	licking	away
at	a	lollipop.	The	Incubuses	dematerialized,	one	by	one.
     "Who	 is	that?"	 Liv	 noticed	Ridley,	 oddly	 not	that	out	 of	place	with	 her	pink
and	blond	streaked	hair,	weird	miniskirt	 with	 some	sort	of	suspenders,	and	spiky
sandals.	She	looked	  like	 a	 Caster	 Little	  Red	Riding	  Hood,	 taking	  poisoned
muffins	 to	 her	wicked	 grandmother.	 Liv	  may	not	 have	gotten	 a	good	 look	 at
Ridley	at	Exile,	 but	she	was	impossible	to	miss	now.
     Link's	 eyes	locked	on	Ridley.	"A	 real	bad	girl."
     Ridley	 sauntered	toward	us,	 overconfident	 as	usual.	She	tossed	the	lollipop
into	the	grass.	"Damn,	that	really	took	it	 out	of	me."
     "Did	 you	save	us?"	Liv	was	still	 rattled.
     "Sure	did,	 Mary	Poppins.	 You	can	thank	me	later.	 We	should	get	outta	here.
Larkin's	an	idiot,	 but	Uncle	 Hunting's	powerful.	 My	 influence	 won't	last	long	 on
him."	 Her	 brother	 and	her	 uncle	 --	 a	lot	 of	 bad	 apples	had	 fallen	 off	 Lena's
family	 tree.	Ridley	  zeroed	in	 on	my	 arm,	or	 rather	 Liv's	 arm	wrapped	 around
mine.	She	took	off	her	shades,	and	her	yellow	eyes	glowed.
     Liv	 barely	 noticed.	 "What's	 with	 you	 people?	It's	always	 Mary	 Poppins.	 Is
she	the	only	British	character	Americans	have	ever	heard	of?"
     "I	 don't	believe	 we've	been	properly	 introduced,	although	 I	 keep	seeing	you
everywhere."	 Ridley	 looked	  at	 me,	 narrowing	 her	 eyes.	 "I'm	 Lena's	 cousin,
Ridley."
     "I'm	 Liv.	 I	work	 at	the	library	with	 Ethan."
     "Well,	 since	I've	 seen	you	at	a	Caster	club	 and	now	 in	a	Caster	Tunnel,	 I'm
assuming	we	aren't	talking	about	that	hayseed	library	in	 Gat-dung.	Which	 would
make	you	a	Keeper.	Am	I	getting	warm?"
     Liv	   let	 go	  of	  my	  arm.	  "Actually,	   I'm	  a	  Keeper-in-Training,	  but	  my
preparation	has	been	quite	extensive."
     Ridley	 looked	Liv	  up	and	down	and	unwrapped	 a	piece	of	gum.	 "Obviously
not	that	extensive	if	you	 don't	recognize	a	Siren	when	you	see	one."	Ridley	blew
a	bubble.	It	popped	in	Liv's	 face.	"Let's	get	going	before	my	 uncle	starts	thinking
for	himself	again."
     "We're	not	going	 anywhere	with	you."
     She	rolled	 her	eyes,	twisting	 her	gum	 around	her	finger.	 "If	  you'd	rather	 be
my	uncle's	lunch,	 suit	yourself.	 It's	a	personal	choice,	 but	I've	 gotta	tell	 you,	he
has	disgusting	table	manners."
     "Why	 did	you	help	us?	What's	the	catch?"	I	asked.
     "No	 catch."	Ridley	 looked	over	 at	Link,	 who	was	recovering	 from	 the	shock
of	seeing	her.	"Couldn't	let	anything	 happen	to	my	boy	toy."
     "Because	I	mean	so	much	to	you,	right?"	Link	 snapped.

272
     "Don't	 look	 so	wounded.	 We	had	fun	 while	 it	 lasted."	Link	  may	have	been
hurt,	but	Ridley	was	the	one	who	looked	uncomfortable.
     "Whatever	you	say,	Babe."
     "Don't	 call	 me	 Babe."	 Ridley	 tossed	her	 hair	 and	 popped	another	 bubble.
"You	 can	follow	  me,	or	stay	 here	and	try	 to	take	 on	my	 uncle	by	 yourselves."
She	stalked	off	into	the	trees.	"The	 Blood	pack	will	  be	tracking	you	the	second	I
get	out	of	their	heads."
     The	Blood	pack.	Great.	They	had	a	name.
     Liv	 said	what	we	were	all	 thinking.	 "Ridley's	 right.	If	 the	pack	is	tracking	 us,
it	isn't	 going	 to	take	 them	long	 to	 catch	up	with	  us	again."	 She	looked	at	 me.
"We	don't	have	a	choice."	Liv	 disappeared	into	the	forest	after	Ridley.
     As	much	as	I	didn't	 want	to	follow	  Ridley	anywhere,	getting	 killed	 by	a	pack
of	 Blood	 Incubuses	wasn't	 an	appealing	 alternative.	 We	 didn't	 discuss	it,	 but
Link	must	have	agreed,	because	we	fell	in	line	behind	them.
     Ridley	 seemed	to	know	 exactly	 where	she	was	going,	 though	I	 noticed	 Liv
never	put	away	the	maps.	Ridley	 cut	across	the	meadow,	ignoring	 the	path,	and
headed	for	a	cluster	of	trees	in	the	 distance.	Her	sandals	didn't	seem	to	slow	her
down,	and	the	rest	of	us	had	trouble	keeping	up.
     Link	 jogged	 ahead	to	catch	 up	with	 her.	 "So	what're	 you	 really	 doin'	 here,
Rid?"
     "It's	 pathetic	 to	 admit,	 but	 I'm	 here	 to	 help	you	 and	 your	 merry	 band	 of
fools."
     Link	  stifled	 a	laugh.	 "Yeah,	 right.	 The	 lollipops	  don't	work	  anymore.	Try
again."
     The	grass	was	 higher	as	we	 neared	the	trees.	We	 were	walking	  so	fast	the
blades	cut	 against	my	 shins,	but	 I	 didn't	 slow	 down.	 I	 wanted	 to	 know	 what
Ridley	was	up	to	as	much	as	Link	did.
     "I	 don't	have	an	agenda,	Hot	Stuff.	 I'm	not	 here	for	you.	 I'm	here	to	help	 my
cousin."
     "You	 don't	care	about	Lena,"	I	snapped.
     Ridley	 stopped	and	turned	 to	face	me.	 "You	 know	 what	 I	don't	 care	about,
Short	 Straw?	 You.	  But	  for	  whatever	 reason,	 you	  and	 my	 cousin	  have	 a
connection,	and	 you	 may	 be	 the	 only	 person	 who	 can	convince	 her	 to	 turn
around	before	it's	too	late."
     I	stopped	walking.
     Liv	 looked	 at	 her	coldly.	 "You	  mean	before	she	gets	to	 the	 Great	Barrier?
The	place	you	told	her	about?"
     Ridley's	 eyes	 narrowed,	 and	 she	glanced	 at	 Liv.	  "Give	 this	 girl	  a	 prize.
Keeper	does	know	a	thing	 or	 two."	 Liv	 didn't	 smile.	"But	 I	 wasn't	the	one	who

273
told	her	about	the	Barrier.	It	was	John.	He's	obsessed	with	it."
     "John?	You	 mean	the	 John	you	 introduced	her	 to?	The	guy	 you	 convinced
her	to	run	away	with?"	 I	was	shouting,	 and	I	didn't	 care	if	the	whole	Blood	 pack
heard	me.
     "Slow	  down,	 Short	 Straw.	 Lena	 makes	 her	 own	 decisions,	 whether	 you
believe	it	or	not."	 Ridley's	voice	lost	some	of	its	edge.	"She	wanted	to	go."
     I	 remembered	watching	Lena	 and	John,	listening	 to	them	talk	 about	a	place
where	they	could	 be	accepted	for	who	 they	were.	 A	place	 where	they	could	 be
themselves.	Of	course	 Lena	wanted	to	 go	there.	 It	 was	what	 she	had	dreamed
about	her	whole	life.
     "Why	  the	sudden	change	 of	 heart,	Ridley?	 Why	 do	 you	 want	 to	 stop	her
now?"
     "The	Barrier	 is	dangerous.	It's	not	what	she	thinks."
     "You	  mean	Lena	 doesn't	know	 Sarafine	 is	 trying	  to	pull	  the	 Seventeenth
Moon	out	of	time?	But	 you	knew,	didn't	 you?"	Ridley	 looked	away.	I	was	right.
     Ridley	 was	picking	 at	the	purple	polish	 on	her	nails,	 a	nervous	habit	Casters
and	Mortals	shared.	She	nodded.	"Sarafine	isn't	doing	it	alone."
     My	 mother's	 letter	to	 Macon	 flashed	through	 my	 mind.	 Abraham.	Sarafine
was	working	with	 Abraham,	someone	who	was	powerful	 enough	to	help	her	call
the	moon.
     "Abraham,"	 Liv	 said	quietly.	"Well,	 that's	lovely."
     Link	  reacted	before	I	 did.	 "And	  you	 didn't	 tell	 Lena?	 Are	 you	 really	 that
crazy	and	screwed	up?"
     "I	 --"
     I	cut	her	off.	 "She's	a	coward."
     Ridley	  straightened,	 her	 yellow	  eyes	glowing	  with	  rage.	 "I'm	  a	 coward
because	I	don't	 want	 to	 end	 up	dead?	Do	  you	 know	 what	 my	 aunt	and	 that
monster	would	do	to	me?"	 Her	voice	was	shaky,	but	she	tried	to	 hide	it.	"I'd	 like
to	see	you	face	those	two,	 Short	 Straw.	Abraham	 makes	Lena's	mom	look	 like
your	little	 kitty	 cat."
     Lucille	 hissed.
     "It	 doesn't	matter,	as	long	as	Lena	doesn't	get	to	the	Barrier.	And	 if	you	 want
to	stop	 her,	we	 need	to	 get	moving.	 I	 don't	 know	 the	 way	 there.	I	 just	 know
where	I	ditched	them."
     "Then	how	 did	you	plan	to	 get	to	the	Great	Barrier?"	It	 was	impossible	to	tell
if	she	was	lying.
     "John	knows	the	way."
     "Does	 John	know	 Sarafine	 and	 Abraham	 are	there?"	 Had	he	 been	setting
Lena	up	all	along?

274
     Ridley	 shook	 her	head.	"I	 don't	 know.	 The	 guy's	hard	 to	 read.	He's	got	 ...
issues."
     "How	 are	we	 going	 to	convince	 her	 not	to	 go?"	I	 had	 already	tried	 to	 talk
Lena	out	of	running	away,	and	it	hadn't	gone	well.
     "That's	 your	 department.	Maybe	 this	 will	  help."	 She	tossed	 me	a	 battered
spiral	 notebook.	 I	 would	  have	 recognized	 it	 anywhere.	 I	 had	 spent	 enough
afternoons	watching	Lena	write	in	 it.
     "You	 stole	her	notebook?"
     Ridley	 tossed	her	hair.	 "Steal	is	 such	an	ugly	 word.	 I	 borrowed	it,	 and	you
should	be	thanking	 me.	 Maybe	 there's	something	useful	 in	 all	 that	disgusting,
sentimental	dribble."
     I	unzipped	 my	backpack	and	slid	 the	notebook	inside.	 It	felt	 weird	 to	hold	 a
piece	of	 Lena	 in	 my	 hands	again.	 Now	 I	 was	 carrying	 Lena's	 secrets	in	 my
backpack	and	my	 mother's	 in	 my	back	 pocket.	 I	 wasn't	sure	how	 many	 more
secrets	I	could	handle.
     Liv	 was	more	interested	in	Ridley's	 motives	than	Lena's	notebook.	"Hold	 on.
Now	we're	supposed	to	believe	you're	one	of	the	good	guys?"
     "Hell	 no.	I'm	 bad	to	the	bone.	And	I	 could	give	 a	rat's	ass	what	you	believe."
Ridley	shot	 me	a	look	 out	of	 the	corner	 of	her	 eye.	"In	 fact,	I'm	 having	 a	hard
time	figuring	 out	what	you're	doing	here	in	the	first	 place."
     I	stepped	in	before	 Ridley	used	another	lollipop	  to	get	Liv	 to	offer	 herself	to
Hunting	as	a	snack.	"So	that's	it?	You	want	to	help	us	find	Lena?"
     "That's	right,	 Short	Straw.	We	may	 not	like	each	other,	but	we	 have	common
interests."	She	turned	toward	 Liv	  but	spoke	to	 me.	"We	 love	 the	same	person,
and	she's	in	 trouble.	So	 I	 defected.	Now	 let's	 get	a	move	 on	before	 my	 uncle
catches	the	three	of	you."
     Link	 stared	at	Ridley.	"Man,	I	 didn't	see	this	comin'."
     "Don't	 make	more	of	 it	than	 it	is.	 I'll	 be	back	to	my	 own	bad	self	 as	soon	as
we	get	Lena	to	turn	back."
     "You	 never	know,	Rid.	 Maybe	the	Wizard	 will	 give	you	 a	heart	if	we	kill	  the
Wicked	Witch."
     Ridley	 turned	away,	digging	 the	spikes	of	her	sandals	into	the	mud.	"Like	 I'd
want	one."

275
6.19	

276
                                            Consequences



We	 tried	to	keep	up	with	Ridley,	who	was	weaving	in	and	out	of	the	trees.	Liv
was	behind	her,	consulting	the	map	or	her	selenometer	constantly.	She	didn't
trust	Ridley	any	more	than	the	rest	of	us	did.
    There	was	something	bothering	me.	A	part	of	me	believed	her.	Maybe	she
really	cared	about	Lena.	It	was	unlikely,	but	if	there	was	a	chance	Ridley	was
telling	the	truth,	I	had	to	follow	her.	I	owed	Lena	a	debt	I	could	never	repay.
    I	 didn't	know	if	there	was	a	future	for	us.	If	Lena	would	ever	again	be	the	girl
I	fell	in	love	with.	But	it	didn't	matter.
    The	Arclight	 was	heating	up	inside	my	pocket.	I	pulled	it	out,	expecting	to
see	a	pool	of	iridescent	color,	but	the	surface	was	black.	Now	all	I	could	see	was
my	reflection.	The	Arclight	seemed	more	than	broken.	It	had	become	completely
random.
    Ridley's	eyes	widened	when	she	saw	it,	and	she	stopped	walking	for	the	first
time	in	a	long	while.	"Where'd	you	get	that,	Short	Straw?"
    "Marian	gave	it	to	me."	I	didn't	want	Ridley	to	know	it	had	been	my	mother's,
or	who	had	given	it	to	her.
    "Well,	 that	might	even	the	odds	a	little.	I	don't	think	you	can	get	my	Uncle
Hunting	in	there,	but	maybe	one	of	the	members	of	his	pack."
    "I'm	 not	exactly	sure	how	to	use	it."	I	almost	didn't	tell	her,	but	it	was	true.
    Ridley	 lifted	an	eyebrow.	"Little	Miss	Know-It-All	  couldn't	tell	you?"	Liv's
cheeks	flushed.	Ridley	took	her	time	unwrapping	a	stick	of	pink	gum	and	folded
it	into	her	mouth.	"You	 have	to	touch	him	with	it."	 She	stepped	closer	to	me.
"Which	means	you	have	to	get	close."
    "Whatever."	Link	pushed	past	her.	"There	are	two	of	us.	We	can	swing	it."
    Liv	 tucked	her	pencil	behind	her	ear.	She	had	been	taking	notes.	"Link	might
be	right.	I	wouldn't	want	to	 get	near	any	of	them.	But	if	we	had	no	choice,	it
would	be	worth	a	try."
    "Then	 you	have	to	lay	the	Cast.	You	know,	speak	the	incantation	and	all."
Ridley	was	leaning	against	a	tree,	smirking.	She	knew	we	didn't	know	the	Cast.
Lucille	was	sitting	at	Ridley's	feet,	studying	her.
    "I'm	 guessing	you	aren't	going	to	tell	us	what	it	is."
    "How	 should	I	know?	It's	not	like	there	are	a	lot	of	those	things	around."
    Liv	 spread	the	map	out	in	her	lap,	carefully	smoothing	it.	"We're	going	the

277
right	way.	 If	 we	keep	going	east,	this	 path	should	eventually	 lead	to	the	shore."
She	pointed	to	a	dense	cluster	of	trees.
     "Where?	That	forest?"	Link	 looked	dubious.
     "Don't	 be	scared,	Hot	Rod.	I'll	  take	Hansel,	you	take	Gretel."	 Ridley	 winked
at	Link,	 like	 she	still	 had	power	over	him.	 Which	 she	did,	but	 it	had	nothing	 to
do	with	her	gifts	 as	a	Siren.
     "I'll	 be	all	 right	on	my	 own.	Why	 don't	you	 have	another	piece	a	gum?"	Link
pushed	past	her.
     Maybe	Ridley	 was	like	chicken	pox;	 you	could	only	catch	it	 once.




"How	long	 can	it	take	to	pee?"	Ridley	threw	 a	rock	in	the	direction	 of	a	clump	of
bushes,	anxious	to	get	going	again.
     "I	 can	hear	you."	Link's	voice	came	from	 the	bushes.
     "Good	to	know	 at	least	some	of	your	bodily	functions	 are	working."
     Liv	 looked	 at	me	and	rolled	 her	eyes.	The	longer	we	 walked,	the	more	 Link
and	Ridley	went	at	it.
     "You're	 not	makin'	it	any	easier."
     "You	 need	me	to	come	back	there	and	help	you?"
     "You're	 all	talk,	 Rid,"	 Link	 called	from	 behind	the	bushes.	She	started	to	get
up,	and	Liv	looked	shocked.	Ridley	 smiled	and	sat	down	again,	satisfied.
     I	 studied	 the	sphere	 in	 my	 hands	as	 the	color	  changed	from	 black	 to	 an
iridescent	green.	Nothing	 useful,	just	 colors	that	 seemed	on	perpetual	overload.
Maybe	Link	 was	right.	Maybe	I	 had	broken	it.
     Ridley	 looked	 confused,	or	 interested.	It	 was	hard	 to	tell.	 "What's	 with	 the
light?"
     "It's	like	 a	compass.	It	lights	up	if	 we're	going	the	right	 way."	At	 least,	it	used
to.
     "Hmm.	 I	didn't	know	 they	did	that."	 She	was	bored	again.
     "I'm	 sure	there	are	a	lot	of	things	you	don't	know."	Liv	 smiled	 innocently.
     "Careful,	 or	I	might	 convince	you	to	take	a	swim	in	the	river."
     I	 watched	 the	Arclight.	  There	 was	something	 different	 about	 it.	 The	 light
began	to	  pulse	 with	   a	 brightness	 and	 speed	 I	  hadn't	 seen	 since	 we	  left
Bonaventure	Cemetery.	I	turned	to	show	Liv.	 "L,	look	 at	this."
     Ridley's	head	whipped	toward	me,	and	I	froze.
     I	had	called	Liv	 "L."
     There	was	only	 one	L	 in	my	 life.	 Even	though	Liv	 didn't	 notice,	 Ridley	did.

278
Her	eyes	were	wild	 as	she	sucked	on	her	 lollipop.	 She	was	staring	 right	 at	me,
and	I	 could	 feel	 my	 will	 slipping	  away.	I	 dropped	 the	 Arclight,	 and	 it	 rolled
across	the	mossy	forest	floor.
     Liv	 crouched	over	the	Arclight,	  sitting	on	 her	heels.	"That's	strange.	Why	do
you	suppose	it's	 flashing	 green	again?	 Another	 visit	 from	 Amma,	 Arelia,	  and
Twyla?"
     "It's	 probably	 a	 bomb."	 I	 heard	Link's	  voice,	 but	I	 couldn't	 say	 a	word.	 I
dropped	to	the	ground	at	 Ridley's	feet.	It	 had	been	a	while	 since	she	had	flexed
her	Siren	powers	 on	me.	 I	had	 a	fleeting	 thought	 before	my	 face	hit	 the	 mud.
Either	Link	 was	right,	 and	he	was	immune	to	her	now,	or	she	was	really	holding
back.	If	that	was	true,	it	was	something	new	for	her.
     "If	 you	 hurt	my	 cousin	...	 if	 you	so	much	 as	think	about	hurting	 my	 cousin,
you'll	 spend	 the	 rest	of	  your	 miserable	 life	 as	 my	 slave.	 Understand,	 Short
Straw?"
     My	 head	lifted	  involuntarily	  and	twisted,	 which	 made	my	 neck	 feel	like	 it
was	about	 to	 snap.	My	  eyes	forced	 themselves	open,	 and	I	 was	 staring	 into
Ridley's	glowing	 yellow	 eyes.	They	were	burning	so	bright,	I	was	getting	dizzy.
     "Stop	that."	 I	 heard	Liv's	 voice	and	felt	 the	weight	 of	my	 body	slam	 against
the	ground	before	I	 regained	control	 of	it.	 "For	 goodness	sake,	Ridley,	don't	 be
stupid."
     Liv	 and	Ridley	 were	standing	face	to	face.	Liv's	 arms	were	folded	 across	her
chest.	Ridley	held	the	 lollipop	 between	the	two	 of	them.	"Settle	 down,	Poppins.
Short	Straw	and	I	are	friends."
     "It	 doesn't	look	 that	way	to	 me."	Liv's	 voice	 was	rising.	 "Don't	 forget,	we're
the	ones	risking	  our	lives	 to	 save	Lena."	 Their	 faces	 were	lit	  with	 flashes	of
colored	light.	The	Arclight	  was	going	wild,	 pulsing	color	through	the	trees.
     "Don't	 get	your	knickers	in	a	twist,	 Mate."	Ridley's	 eyes	were	steely.
     Liv's	 were	dark.	 "Don't	 be	a	 bloody	fool.	 If	  Ethan	doesn't	care	about	Lena,
then	what	are	we	doing	in	the	middle	of	these	godforsaken	woods?"
     "Good	 question,	Keeper.	I	 know	 what	I'm	 doing	 here.	But	 if	 you	don't	 care
about	Boyfriend,	 what's	your	excuse?"	Ridley	was	standing	inches	from	 Liv,	 but
Liv	didn't	 back	down.
     "What	 am	 I	 doing	  here?	The	 Southern	 Star	has	 vanished,	 a	Cataclyst	 is
calling	a	moon	out	 of	time	at	the	mythical	 Great	Barrier,	 and	you're	asking	what
I'm	doing	here?	Are	you	serious?"
     "So	this	has	nothing	to	do	with	 Boyfriend?"
     "Ethan,	who	 is,	in	 fact,	no	 one's	boyfriend,	doesn't	know	 anything	 about	the
Caster	world."	Liv	 wasn't	rattled.	"He's	in	 over	his	head.	He	needs	a	Keeper."
     "Actually,	  you're	a	Keeper-in-Training.	  Asking	 you	for	 help	is	 like	 asking	a

279
nurse	to	 perform	 open-heart	 surgery.	And	  according	 to	your	  job	 description,
you're	not	supposed	to	get	involved.	 So	the	way	 I	see	it,	 you	aren't	a	very	 good
Keeper."	Ridley	was	right.	 There	were	rules,	and	Liv	was	breaking	them.
     "That	 may	  be	true,	 but	  I	 am	 an	 excellent	 astronomer.	 And	 without	  my
readings,	we	wouldn't	be	able	to	use	this	map	at	all,	 or	find	 the	Great	Barrier,	 or
Lena."
     The	Arclight	 went	cold	 in	my	hand.	It	was	completely	 black	again.
     "Did	 I	 miss	somethin'?"	Link	 stepped	out	of	 the	bushes,	zipping	his	 fly.	 The
girls	stared	at	him	as	I	pulled	myself	 up	out	of	the	mud.	"Sweet	tea	in	the	toilet.	 I
always	miss	the	good	stuff."
     "What	 --"	Liv	  tapped	on	her	selenometer.	"Something's	wrong.	The	 dials	are
going	crazy."
     Beyond	the	 trees,	a	crashing	noise	echoed	through	 the	forest.	Hunting	 must
have	caught	up	with	 us.	Then	I	had	another	thought,	 fleeting,	 but	it	 didn't	make
me	feel	any	less	guilty.
     Maybe	 it	  was	someone	 else,	someone	 who	 didn't	  like	 us	 following	  her.
Someone	who	could	control	things	in	the	natural	world.
     "Go!"
     The	crashing	grew	louder.	Without	 warning,	 the	trees	on	either	side	collapsed
in	front	 of	 me.	I	 backed	away.	The	 last	time	 trees	had	fallen	 in	 front	 of	me,	 it
hadn't	been	an	accident.
     Lena!	Is	that	you?
     A	few	 feet	around	us,	great	moss-covered	oaks	and	white	pines	ripped	up	out
of	the	mud,	roots	and	all,	crashing	back	to	the	ground.
     Lena,	don't!
     Link	 stumbled	toward	Ridley.	 "Unwrap	a	sucker,	Babe."
     "I	 told	you	not	to	call	 me	Babe."
     For	the	 first	 time	 in	hours,	 I	could	 see	the	sky.	 Only	 now	it	 was	 dark.	The
black	clouds	of	 Caster	magic	had	rolled	 in	over	 us.	Then	I	felt	 something,	from
far	away.
     More	like,	 I	heard	something.
     Lena.
     Ethan,	run!
     It	 was	her	voice,	the	 voice	that	had	been	silent	 for	 so	long.	But	 if	 Lena	was
telling	me	to	run,	who	 was	tearing	the	trees	out	of	the	ground?
     L,	what's	happening?
     I	 couldn't	 hear	 her	answer.	 There	was	 only	 darkness,	those	 Caster	clouds
rushing	at	 us	like	 they	 were	chasing	 us.	Until	  I	saw	 the	clouds	 for	 what	 they
were.

280
     "Look	 out!"	  I	 pulled	 Liv	 backward	 and	pushed	Link	 toward	 Ridley	 just	 in
time.	We	 fell	 into	the	 brush	as	a	shower	of	 broken	pines	came	falling	 from	 the
sky	like	rain.	 The	branches	flattened	into	a	great	pile	exactly	 where	we	had	been
standing.	Dust	stung	my	eyes,	and	I	couldn't	see	anything.	The	dirt	 caught	in	my
throat	as	I	coughed.
     Lena's	voice	was	 gone,	but	I	 heard	something	else.	A	 humming	sound,	as	if
we'd	stumbled	 across	the	hive	 of	 a	thousand	bees,	all	 looking	 to	 kill	  for	 their
queen.
     The	dust	 was	so	thick,	 I	 could	 barely	make	 out	the	 shapes	around	me.	Liv
was	lying	next	 to	me,	bleeding	above	one	eye.	Ridley	 was	whimpering,	 huddled
around	Link,	  who	 was	pinned	 by	 a	 massive	tree	 branch.	"Wake	 up,	 Shrinky
Dink.	Wake	up."
     As	 I	 crawled	toward	 them,	 Ridley	 shrank	 back.	The	 look	 on	her	 face	was
pure	terror.	Only	she	wasn't	looking	 at	me.	She	was	looking	at	something	behind
me.
     The	humming	 sound	grew	 louder.	I	 felt	the	 burning	cold	 of	 Caster	darkness
on	the	back	of	my	 neck.	When	I	turned	 around,	the	massive	pile	of	pine	 needles
that	had	 almost	buried	 us	 had	formed	 some	kind	  of	 bonfire.	 The	 pyramid	 of
needles	created	a	 pyre,	 a	 giant	 burning	 platform	  pointing	 up	 into	  the	 black
clouds.	But	 the	flames	weren't	 red,	and	they	 didn't	produce	 heat.	They	were	 as
yellow	as	Ridley's	eyes,	and	they	emitted	only	cold,	sorrow,	 and	fear.
     Ridley's	whimpering	 grew	louder.	"She's	here."
     I	 looked	up	 as	a	stone	slab	 emerged	from	 the	hissing	 yellow	 flames	of	 the
pyre.	A	 woman	lay	 on	top	of	 the	rock.	 She	looked	almost	peaceful,	 like	a	 dead
saint	about	to	be	carried	through	the	streets.	But	she	was	no	saint.
     Sarafine.
     Her	 eyes	jerked	open,	and	 her	lips	 curved	into	 a	cold	 smile.	 She	stretched,
like	a	cat	waking	 from	 a	nap,	then	rose	to	stand	on	the	stone.	From	down	below
where	we	stood,	she	might	as	well	have	been	fifty	feet	tall.
     "Were	 you	expecting	 someone	else,	Ethan?	I	can	understand	the	 confusion.
You	 know	 what	 they	say.	 Like	 mother,	 like	 daughter.	In	 this	 case,	more	 and
more	every	day	now."
     My	 heart	was	pounding.	I	 could	see	Sarafine's	red	lips,	her	long	black	 hair.	I
turned	away.	 I	 didn't	 want	to	 see	her	 face,	the	 face	that	 looked	 so	much	 like
Lena's.	"Get	away	from	me,	witch."
     Ridley	 was	still	 crying,	 huddled	 next	to	 Link,	 rocking	 back	and	forth	 like	 a
madwoman.
     Lena?	Can	you	hear	me?
     Sarafine's	haunting	 voice	  rose	over	 the	 flames,	 and	 she	was	 there	again,

281
standing	at	the	top	of	the	fire.	 "I'm	 not	here	for	 you,	Ethan.	I'll	 leave	you	for	 my
darling	daughter.	She's	grown	up	 so	much	this	year,	hasn't	she?	There's	nothing
like	watching	your	 child	reach	her	full	 potential.	Really	makes	a	mother	proud."
     I	watched	the	flames	crawl	up	her	legs.	"You're	 wrong.	Lena's	not	like	 you."
     "I	 think	  I've	 heard	that	 somewhere	before	 --	 on	 Lena's	birthday,	  perhaps.
Except	then	you	 believed	 it,	 and	now	 you're	lying.	 You	 know	 you've	 lost	 her.
She	can't	change	what	was	meant	to	be."
     The	flames	were	 at	her	waist.	She	had	the	perfect	features	of	 the	Duchannes
women,	but	 they	seemed	disfigured	 on	Sarafine.	 "Maybe	 Lena	can't	change	it,
but	I	can.	I'll	 do	whatever	I	have	to	do	to	protect	her."
     Sarafine	smiled,	 and	I	 cringed.	Her	 smile	 was	so	much	 like	 Lena's,	or	how
Lena's	smile	seemed	lately.	As	the	flames	moved	up	her	chest,	she	disappeared.
     "So	strong	and	so	much	like	your	mother.	 Her	last	words	were	something	like
that.	Or	 were	 they?"	 I	 heard	 a	whisper	 in	  my	 ear.	"You	  see,	I've	 forgotten,
because	it	didn't	matter."
     I	froze.	 Sarafine	was	standing	right	next	 to	me	now,	still	 wreathed	in	 flames.
I	knew	it	 wasn't	an	earthly	fire,	though,	 because	the	closer	she	came,	the	colder	I
felt.
     "Your	 mother	 didn't	 matter.	 Her	 death	was	neither	 noble	 nor	 important.	 It
was	simply	something	I	felt	 like	 doing	at	the	time.	It	 meant	nothing."	The	flames
rose	to	her	neck	and	leaped	up,	consuming	her	body.	"Just	like	you."
     I	reached	for	 her	throat.	I	wanted	 to	tear	it	out.	 But	my	 hand	slipped	through
her,	into	the	air.	There	was	nothing	there.	She	was	an	apparition.	I	 wanted	to	kill
her	and	I	couldn't	even	touch	her.
     Sarafine	 laughed.	"You	  think	 I	 would	 waste	 my	 time	 coming	 here	 in	 the
flesh,	Mortal?"	  She	 turned	to	 Ridley,	  who	 was	 still	 rocking,	  with	 her	 hands
clamped	over	 her	mouth.	 "Amusing,	 don't	 you	 think,	 Ridley?"	 Sarafine	 raised
her	hand	and	flung	open	her	fingers.
     Ridley	 rose	to	her	feet,	her	hands	clinging	to	her	own	throat.	 I	watched	as	the
spikes	of	 Ridley's	 sandals	rose,	hovering	 above	the	 ground	as	her	 face	turned
purple	and	she	choked	herself.	Her	blond	 hair	hung	 down	from	 her	body,	like	 a
lifeless	doll.
     Sarafine's	ghostly	  form	 dissolved	 into	 Ridley's	 body.	 Ridley	  glowed	 with
yellow	 light	 --	her	 skin,	her	hair,	 her	eyes.	The	light	  was	so	bright,	 she	had	no
pupils	at	all.	 Even	in	the	darkness	of	the	forest,	I	 had	to	shield	my	 face.	Ridley's
head	jerked	up,	like	a	marionette's,	and	she	started	to	speak.
     "My	  power	 is	growing,	  and	soon	 the	Seventeenth	Moon	 will	  be	 upon	us,
called	out	 of	 time,	 as	only	 a	 mother	 can.	I	 decide	 when	the	 sun	sets.	I	 have
moved	stars	for	  my	 child,	 and	she	 will	  Claim	 herself	 and	join	 me.	 Only	 my

282
daughter	 could	  block	  out	 the	  Sixteenth	 Moon,	  and	 only	  I	  can	  raise	 the
Seventeenth.	There	are	no	others	like	us,	not	in	either	 of	our	worlds.	 We	are	the
beginning	and	the	 end."	Ridley's	 body	 collapsed	back	onto	 the	ground,	 like	 an
empty	sack.
     The	Arclight	  was	burning	in	 my	pocket.	 I	hoped	Sarafine	couldn't	 sense	it.	I
remembered	the	flashing	 --	 the	Arclight	  tried	 to	 warn	 me.	I	 should	have	 paid
attention.
     "You	 betrayed	us,	Ridley.	You're	 a	traitor.	The	Father	is	 not	as	forgiving	 as	I
am."	The	Father.	Sarafine	could	only	 be	talking	about	one	person	--	the	father	of
the	Ravenwood	line	of	Blood	 Incubuses,	the	father	who	started	it	all.	Abraham.
     Sarafine's	voice	 echoed	over	the	sound	of	 the	 flames.	"You	 will	  be	judged,
but	I	will	 not	deny	him	 the	pleasure.	You	were	my	responsibility,	and	now	you're
my	shame.	I	think	it's	 only	fitting	 that	I	 leave	you	with	 a	parting	gift."	 She	raised
her	arms	high	above	her	head.	"Since	you	are	so	intent	on	helping	these	Mortals,
from	this	moment	forward	 you	will	  live	as	a	Mortal	 and	die	as	one.	Your	powers
have	been	returned	to	the	Dark	Fire	from	which	they	were	born."
     Ridley	 bolted	 upright	  and	screamed,	her	 pain	 echoing	 through	 the	 forest.
Then	it	 was	gone	--	 the	fallen	 trees,	the	fire,	 Sarafine	--	 everything.	 The	forest
was	just	as	it	 had	been	a	few	minutes	before.	 Green	and	dark,	full	 of	 pines	and
oaks	and	black	mud.	 Every	tree,	every	 branch,	was	back	in	 place,	as	if	 nothing
had	happened.
     Liv	 was	 pouring	water	 from	 a	plastic	 bottle	 into	Ridley's	 mouth.	 Liv's	 face
was	still	 muddy	and	bleeding,	 but	she	seemed	okay.	Ridley,	 on	the	 other	hand,
was	as	white	as	a	ghost.
     "That	 was	incredibly	 powerful	 magic.	 An	 apparition	 able	to	possess	a	Dark
Caster."	Liv	 shook	her	head.	I	touched	the	blood	above	her	eye,	and	she	winced.
"And	 Cast	at	the	 same	time,	if	 what	 she	said	about	Ridley's	 powers	 is	true."	 I
looked	at	Ridley	 doubtfully.	 It	was	hard	to	 imagine	Ridley	 without	 her	Power	of
Persuasion.	"In	any	 event,	Ridley	 won't	 be	quite	right,	 not	 for	some	time."	 Liv
doused	part	of	her	sweatshirt	with	water	and	wiped	Ridley's	face.	"I	 didn't	realize
the	chance	she	was	 taking	 by	coming	 here.	 She	must	really	  care	about	all	 of
you."
     "Not	 all	of	 us,"	I	said,	trying	 to	 help	Liv	 prop	Ridley	 up.	Ridley	 coughed	out
the	water	and	pulled	her	hand	across	her	mouth,	smearing	her	pink	 lipstick.	 She
looked	like	 a	cheerleader	who	had	been	dunked	at	the	school	fair	 one	too	many
times.	She	tried	to	speak.	"Link.	Is	he	...?"
     I	 was	 kneeling	  next	 to	 him.	  The	 tree	 limb	 that	 had	 fallen	  on	 him	 had
disappeared,	but	Link	 was	 still	 moaning	 in	 pain.	It	 seemed	impossible	 that	he
was	hurt,	that	any	of	us	were,	since	there	was	no	sign	of	what	had	happened	here

283
--	no	fallen	 trees,	not	a	twig	 out	 of	place.	But	 Link's	 arm	was	 purple	and	about
twice	its	normal	size,	and	his	pants	were	ripped.
     "Ridley?"	 Link	 opened	his	eyes.
     "She's	fine.	 We're	all	 fine."	 I	 ripped	open	 his	pant	leg	 even	more.	His	 knee
was	bleeding.
     Link	 tried	to	laugh.	"What're	 you	lookin'	 at?"
     "Your	 ugly	 face."	I	 leaned	over	him,	watching	 to	see	if	his	 eyes	could	focus.
He	was	going	to	be	okay.
     "You're	 not	gonna	kiss	me,	are	you?"
     Right	then,	I	 was	so	relieved	I	almost	could	have.
     "Pucker	up."

284
6.19	

285
                                           No	  One	  Special



That	night,	 we	slept	in	the	forest	between	the	roots	of	an	enormous	tree,	the
biggest	I'd	ever	seen.	Link's	knee	was	bandaged	in	my	spare	T-shirt,	and	his	arm
was	in	a	 sling	made	from	 part	of	 my	Jackson	sweatshirt.	Ridley	lay	on	the
opposite	side	of	the	 tree	with	 her	eyes	wide	 open,	staring	up	at	 the	sky.	I
wondered	if	she	was	staring	at	the	Mortal	sky	now.	She	looked	exhausted,	but	I
didn't	think	she	was	going	to	get	any	sleep.
    I	 wondered	what	she	was	thinking,	if	she	regretted	helping	us.	Had	Ridley
really	lost	her	powers?
    How	 would	it	feel	to	 be	Mortal	when	you	had	always	been	something	else,
something	more?	When	 you	 had	never	 felt	 the	 "powerlessness	of	human
existence,"	as	Mrs.	English	had	said	in	class	last	year.	She	had	been	talking
about	H.	G.	 Wells'	The	Invisible	 Man,	but	right	 now	 Ridley	seemed	just	as
invisible.
    Could	you	be	happy	if	you	woke	up	and	suddenly	you	were	no	one	special?
    Could	Lena?	Is	that	what	life	with	me	would	feel	like?	Hadn't	Lena	suffered
enough	for	me	already?
    Like	 Ridley,	 I	couldn't	 fall	asleep,	but	I	 didn't	want	to	 stare	at	the	sky.	I
wanted	to	see	what	was	in	 Lena's	notebook.	A	 part	of	 me	knew	it	 was	 an
invasion	of	her	 privacy,	but	I	 also	knew	 there	might	be	something	in	 those
crumpled	pages	that	could	help	us.	After	about	an	hour,	I	 convinced	myself
reading	her	notebook	was	for	the	greater	good,	and	I	opened	it.
    At	 first	 it	was	hard	to	read,	since	my	cell	phone	was	my	only	light	source.
After	my	eyes	adjusted,	Lena's	handwriting	stared	back	at	me	from	between	the
blue	lines.	I	had	seen	the	familiar	print	often	enough	in	the	months	since	her
birthday,	but	I	 didn't	think	 I	 would	ever	 get	used	to	it.	 It	 was	such	a	sharp
contrast	to	the	girly	script	she	wrote	in	before	that	night.	It	surprised	me	even
more	to	see	actual	writing,	after	so	many	months	of	headstone	photographs	and
black	designs.	Dark	Caster	designs,	like	the	ones	on	her	hands,	were	scribbled	in
the	margins.	But	the	first	few	entries	were	dated	only	days	after	Macon's	death,
when	she	was	still	writing.

emptycrowded	daynights	/	all	the	same	(more	or	less)	fear	(less	and	more)	afraid
/	waiting	for	truth	to	strangle	me	in	my	sleep	/	if	i	ever	slept

286
     Fear	(less	and	 more)	afraid.	 I	 understood	the	words,	because	that's	how	she
had	acted.	Fearless	and	more	afraid.	Like	she	had	nothing	to	lose	but	 was	afraid
to	lose	it.
     I	flipped	 ahead	and	stopped	when	a	date	caught	my	 eye.	June	12th.	The	last
day	of	school.

darkness	hides	and	i	think	i	 can	hold	her	/	 smother	her	in	the	palm	 of	my	hand	/
but	when	i	look	my	hands	are	empty	/	quiet	as	her	fingers	fold	around	me

     I	 read	it	over	 and	over.	She	was	 describing	the	day	 at	the	lake,	 the	day	she
had	taken	things	too	far.	The	day	 she	could	have	killed	 me.	Who	was	the	"her"?
Sarafine?
     How	long	 had	she	been	fighting	it?	When	did	it	 start?	The	night	Macon	died?
When	she	started	wearing	his	clothes?
     I	 knew	I	 should	 close	the	notebook,	 but	I	 couldn't.	 Reading	her	 words	was
almost	like	hearing	her	thoughts	again.	I	 hadn't	known	them	in	 such	a	long	time,
and	I	wanted	to	 so	badly.	I	 turned	each	page,	looking	 for	 the	days	that	haunted
me.
     Like	 the	day	of	the	fair	--

mortal	 hearts	and	 mortal	 fears	 /	 something	they	can	 share	 i	untie	 him	 like	 a
sparrow

     Freedom	--	that's	what	sparrows	meant	to	a	Caster.
     All	  along	I	 thought	 she	was	trying	 to	 be	free	 from	 me,	but	 really	 she	was
trying	to	set	me	free.	As	if	 loving	her	was	a	cage	I	couldn't	escape.
     I	closed	the	 notebook.	It	hurt	 too	much	 to	read	it,	especially	 when	Lena	was
so	far	away,	in	all	the	ways	that	mattered.
     A	 few	 feet	away,	Ridley	 was	 still	 staring	blankly	  into	the	 Mortal	 stars.	For
the	first	time,	we	saw	the	same	sky.
     Liv	 was	 wedged	between	two	 roots,	 with	 me	on	 one	side	and	 Link	 on	 the
other.	After	  I	 found	 out	 the	truth	 about	 what	 happened	on	Lena's	 birthday,	 I
guess	I	expected	my	feelings	for	 Liv	 to	disappear.	But	even	now	I	 found	myself
wondering.	If	 things	 were	different,	 if	 I	had	never	met	 Lena,	if	 I	had	never	met
Liv	...
     I	 spent	 the	 next	  few	 hours	  watching	 Liv.	  When	  she	 slept,	 she	 looked
peaceful,	beautiful.	Not	Lena's	kind	 of	beautiful,	something	different.	 She	looked
content	--	like	 a	sunny	day,	 a	cold	glass	of	 milk,	 an	unopened	book	before	 you
cracked	the	binding.	There	was	nothing	tortured	 about	her.	She	looked	the	way	I

287
wanted	to	feel.
     Mortal.	 Hopeful.	Alive.
     When	I	finally	  drifted	off,	 I	felt	 that	way,	just	for	a	minute....




Lena	was	shaking	 me.	"Wake	 up,	Sleepyhead.	We	 have	to	 talk."	 I	 smiled	 and
pulled	her	 into	my	 arms.	I	 tried	to	 kiss	her,	 but	she	laughed	and	ducked	 away.
"This	isn't	that	kind	 of	a	dream."
     I	sat	up	and	looked	around.	We	 were	in	Macon's	bed	in	the	Tunnels.	 "All	 my
dreams	are	that	kind	of	dream,	L.	I'm	almost	seventeen."
     "This	 is	my	dream,	not	yours.	And	I've	 only	been	sixteen	for	four	months."
     "Won't	 Macon	be	mad	if	we're	here?"
     "Macon's	 dead,	don't	you	 remember?	You	 must	 really	 be	asleep."	She	was
right.	I	 had	forgotten	everything,	 and	now	it	all	 came	crashing	back.	Macon	was
gone.	The	trade.
     And	Lena	had	left	 me,	only	she	hadn't.	She	was	here.
     "So	 this	is	 a	dream?"	I	 was	 trying	 to	keep	 my	stomach	 from	 twisting	 with
loss,	the	guilt	of	everything	 I'd	done,	everything	I	owed	her.
     Lena	nodded.
     "Am	 I	dreaming	you,	or	are	you	dreaming	me?"
     "Does	it	 ever	make	a	difference,	when	it	 comes	to	us?"	She	was	avoiding	the
question.
     I	tried	 again.	"When	I	wake	up,	will	 you	be	gone?"
     "Yes.	But	 I	 had	to	see	you.	This	was	the	only	 way	for	 us	to	really	 talk."	 She
was	wearing	a	white	 T-shirt,	 one	of	my	 oldest,	softest	ones.	She	looked	tousled
and	beautiful,	in	the	way	I	 loved	best,	when	she	thought	she	looked	the	worst.
     I	put	my	 hands	around	her	waist	and	pulled	her	close.	"L,	I	saw	my	mom.	She
told	me	about	Macon.	I	think	 she	loved	him."
     "They	 loved	 each	other.	I've	 seen	the	visions,	 too."	 So	our	 connection	was
still	there.	I	felt	 a	wave	of	relief.
     "They	were	like	 us,	Lena."
     "And	 they	couldn't	be	together.	Like	us."
     It	was	a	dream,	I	 was	sure	of	it.	 Because	we	could	speak	these	terrible	truths
with	a	strange	remove,	as	if	they	 were	happening	to	other	people.	She	rested	her
head	on	my	chest,	picking	 mud	off	 my	shirt	 with	 her	fingers.	How	 had	my	shirt
gotten	so	muddy?	I	tried	to	remember	but	couldn't.
     "What	are	we	going	to	 do,	L?"

288
    "I	 don't	know,	Ethan.	I'm	scared."
    "What	do	you	want?"
    "You,"	 she	whispered.
    "So	why	is	it	so	hard?"
    "We're	all	wrong.	Everything's	all	wrong	when	I'm	with	you."
    "Does	this	feel	wrong?"	I	held	her	tighter.
    "No.	 But	how	I	feel	doesn't	matter	anymore."	I	felt	her	sigh	against	my	chest.
    "Who	told	you	that?"
    "No	 one	had	to	tell	me."	I	stared	into	her	eyes.	They	were	still	gold.
    "You	 can't	go	to	the	Great	Barrier.	You	have	to	come	back."
    "I	 can't	stop	now.	I	have	to	see	how	it	ends."
    I	 played	with	a	strand	of	her	curling	black	hair.	"Why	didn't	you	have	to	see
how	it	ended	with	us?"
    She	smiled	and	touched	my	face.	"Because	now	I	know	how	it	 ends	with
you."
    "How	 does	it	end?"
    "Like	 this."	She	bent	over	and	kissed	me,	and	her	hair	fell	around	my	face
like	rain.	I	pulled	up	the	covers,	and	she	climbed	beneath	them,	folding	into	my
arms.	As	we	kissed,	I	felt	the	heat	of	her	touch.	We	tumbled	in	the	bed.	I	was	on
top	of	her,	then	she	was	on	top	of	me.	The	heat	intensified	to	the	point	where	I
couldn't	breathe.	I	thought	my	skin	was	on	fire,	and	when	I	broke	away	from	her
kiss,	it	was.
    We	were	both	on	fire,	surrounded	by	flames	that	rose	higher	than	we	could
see,	and	the	bed	wasn't	a	bed	at	all	but	a	stone	slab.	It	was	burning	all	around	us,
the	yellow	flames	of	Sarafine's	fire.
    Lena	screamed	and	clung	to	me.	I	looked	down	from	where	we	were,	on	top
of	the	massive	pyramid	of	splintered	trees.	There	was	a	strange	circle	chiseled
into	the	stone	we	were	lying	on,	some	kind	of	Dark	Caster	symbol.
    "Lena,	 wake	up!	This	 isn't	you.	You	 didn't	 kill	 Macon.	You're	not	 going
Dark.	It	was	the	Book.	Amma	told	me	everything."
    The	pyre	had	been	for	us,	not	Sarafine.	I	could	hear	her	laughing	--	or	was	it
Lena?	I	couldn't	tell	the	difference	anymore.	"L,	listen	to	me!	You	don't	have	to
do	this	--"
    Lena	was	screaming.	She	couldn't	stop	screaming.
    By	 the	time	I	woke	up,	the	flames	had	consumed	us	both.

289
"Ethan?	Wake	up.	We	have	to	get	going."
     I	 sat	 up,	 breathing	 hard	 and	 dripping	 with	  sweat.	 I	 held	 out	 my	  hands.
Nothing.	 Not	 a	burn,	 not	 so	much	 as	a	scratch.	 It	 was	a	 nightmare.	 I	 looked
around.	Liv	 and	 Link	 were	 already	up.	 I	 rubbed	my	 face	with	  my	 hands.	My
heart	was	 still	 pounding,	  as	if	 the	 dream	 was	real	 and	 I	 had	 almost	 died.	 I
wondered	again	if	it	 was	my	dream	or	Lena's.	I	 wondered	if	 that	was	really	how
it	ended	for	us.	Fire	and	death,	just	as	Sarafine	would	want	it.
     Ridley	  was	sitting	  on	 a	 rock,	 sucking	  on	 a	lollipop,	   which	 was	 sort	 of
pathetic.	During	 the	night,	 she	seemed	to	have	moved	from	 a	state	of	 shock	to
one	of	denial.	She	was	acting	 as	if	nothing	 happened.	No	one	really	 knew	what
to	say.	She	was	like	 one	of	 those	war	 vets	suffering	 from	 post-traumatic	stress
disorder,	who	come	home	and	think	they're	still	 on	the	battlefield.
     She	was	 staring	 at	Link,	  tossing	her	 hair	 and	looking	  at	 him	 expectantly.
"Why	don't	 you	come	on	over	here,	Hot	Rod?"
     Link	 limped	over	to	my	 backpack	and	pulled	out	a	bottle	of	water.	"I'll	 pass."
     Ridley	 pushed	her	shades	on	 top	of	 her	head	 and	stared	at	him	 even	more
intently,	which	 made	it	 clear	her	powers	were	gone.	In	the	light	 of	 day,	Ridley's
eyes	were	as	blue	as	Liv's.
     "I	 said	come	over	here."	 Ridley	 inched	her	short	skirt	 farther	 up	her	bruised
thigh.	I	felt	 sorry	for	 her.	She	wasn't	a	Siren	anymore,	just	a	girl	who	looked	 like
one.
     "Why?"	 Link	 wasn't	catching	on.
     Ridley's	 tongue	was	bright	 red	as	she	gave	her	lollipop	  one	last	lick.	 "Don't
you	want	 to	kiss	me?"	 For	a	 second,	I	thought	 Link	 might	 play	along,	 but	that
would	only	 delay	the	inevitable.
     "No,	thanks."	 He	turned	away,	and	it	was	obvious	he	felt	guilty.
     Ridley's	 lip	  quivered.	 "Maybe	  it's	 temporary,	 and	 my	 powers	 will	   come
back."	She	was	trying	to	convince	herself	more	than	anyone.
     Someone	had	to	tell	 her.	The	sooner	she	faced	reality,	 the	sooner	she	would
be	able	to	move	on.	If	she	could.	"I	think	 they're	really	gone,	Ridley."
     She	whipped	around	to	face	 me,	her	voice	shaky.	"You	 don't	know	 that.	Just
because	you	went	out	with	a	Caster	doesn't	mean	you	know	anything."
     "I	 know	Dark	Casters	have	yellow	eyes."
     I	 heard	the	breath	catch	 in	her	 throat.	She	grabbed	the	 bottom	of	 her	filthy
tank	top	and	yanked	 it	up.	 Her	skin	 was	still	 smooth	and	golden,	 but	the	tattoo
that	had	encircled	her	navel	was	gone.	She	ran	her	hands	across	her	stomach,	and
then	crumbled.
     "It's	 true.	She	really	took	 my	 powers."	Ridley	 opened	her	fingers,	letting	 the
lollipop	 fall	 into	 the	 dirt.	She	 didn't	make	 a	sound,	but	 the	tears	ran	down	 her

290
face	in	two	silver	lines.
     Link	  walked	 over	 and	held	 out	 his	 hand	to	 pull	  her	up.	 "That's	 not	 true.
You're	still	 pretty	bad.	I	mean,	hot.	For	a	Mortal."
     Ridley	 jumped	to	 her	feet,	 hysterical.	"You	 think	 this	 is	funny?	 That	 losing
my	powers	is	like	losing	 one	of	your	stupid	basketball	games?	They're	who	I	am,
you	idiot!	 Without	  them	I'm	 nothing."	 Black	 streaks	ran	down	 her	cheeks.	She
was	shaking.
     Link	 picked	 up	her	 lollipop	 out	 of	 the	dirt.	 He	opened	the	water	 bottle	 and
doused	it.	"Give	 it	 some	time,	Rid.	 You'll	  develop	charms	all	 your	own.	 You'll
see."	He	handed	it	back	to	her.	Ridley	stared	back	at	him	blankly.
     Without	 looking	 away,	she	hurled	the	lollipop	as	far	as	she	could.

291
6.20	

292
                                         Common	      Thread



I	had	barely	slept.	Link's	arm	was	swollen	and	purple.	None	of	us	were	in	any
shape	to	trek	through	the	muddy	forest,	but	we	didn't	have	a	choice.
    "You	 guys	okay?	We	should	go."
    Link	 touched	his	arm	and	winced.	"I've	felt	better.	Like,	I	don't	know,	every
other	day	a	my	life."
    The	gash	on	Liv's	face	was	already	beginning	to	scab	over.	"I've	felt	worse,
but	that's	a	long	story,	which	involves	Wembley	Stadium,	a	bad	trip	on	the	tube,
and	far	too	many	doner	kebabs."
    I	 picked	up	my	backpack,	caked	with	mud.	"Where's	Lucille?"
    Link	  looked	around.	"Who	knows?	That	cat's	always	disappearin'.	Now	I
know	why	your	aunts	kept	her	on	a	leash."
    I	 whistled	into	the	trees,	but	there	was	no	sign	of	her.	"Lucille!	She	was	here
when	we	got	up."
    "Don't	worry,	man.	She'll	find	us.	Cats	have	that	sixth	sense,	you	know?"
    "She	 was	 probably	 tired	 of	 following	  us	 around,	since	 we	 never	get
anywhere,"	Ridley	said.	"That	cat's	a	whole	lot	smarter	than	we	are."
    I	 lost	track	of	their	conversation	after	that.	I	was	too	busy	listening	to	the	one
in	my	head.	I	 couldn't	stop	thinking	about	Lena	and	what	she'd	done	for	me.
Why	had	it	taken	me	so	long	to	see	what	was	right	in	front	of	me?
    I	  knew	Lena	had	been	punishing	herself	all	 this	 time.	The	 self-imposed
isolation,	the	morbid	pictures	of	headstones	taped	to	her	walls,	the	Dark	symbols
in	her	notebook	and	all	over	her	body,	wearing	her	dead	uncle's	clothes,	even
hanging	out	with	Ridley	and	John	--	it	was	never	about	me.	It	was	about	Macon.
    But	 I	never	realized	I	was	an	accomplice.	Lena	had	a	constant	reminder	of
the	crime	she	was	trying	herself	for,	over	and	over	again.	A	constant	reminder	of
what	she	lost.
    Me.
    She	had	to	look	at	me	every	day	and	hold	my	hand	and	kiss	me.	No	wonder
she	was	so	hot	and	cold,	kissing	me	one	minute	and	running	away	from	me	the
next.	I	thought	about	the	song	lyrics,	written	over	and	over	again	on	her	walls.
    Running	to	stand	still.
    She	couldn't	get	away,	and	I	wouldn't	let	her.	In	my	last	dream,	I	told	her	I
knew	about	the	trade.	I	wondered	if	she	had	the	dream,	too	--	if	 she	knew	I

293
shared	her	secret	burden.	That	she	didn't	have	to	carry	it	alone	anymore.
     I'm	so	sorry,	L.
     I	listened	 for	her	voice	 in	the	corners	of	my	 mind,	the	faintest	 possibility	 she
was	listening.	I	 didn't	 hear	a	sound,	but	I	saw	something,	 fleeting	images	in	 my
peripheral	vision.	  Snapshots	rushing	past	me	 like	 cars	in	 the	 fast	 lane	on	 the
interstate	...
     I	was	running,	 jumping,	 moving	 so	fast	I	couldn't	 focus.	Not	 until	 my	vision
adjusted	as	it	had	twice	before,	and	I	 could	make	out	the	shapes	of	trees,	leaves,
and	branches	rushing	 by.	 At	 first,	 all	 I	 could	 hear	 were	the	 leaves	crunching
beneath	me,	the	sound	of	the	air	as	I	moved	through	it.	Then	I	heard	voices.
     "We	have	to	go	back."	It	 was	Lena.	I	followed	 the	sound	into	the	trees.
     "We	can't.	You	 know	that."
     Sunlight	broke	 easily	through	the	leaves.	All	 I	could	 see	were	boots	--	Lena's
thrashed	ones	and	John's	heavy	black	ones.	They	were	standing	a	few	feet	away.
     Then	I	 saw	 their	 faces.	Lena's	expression	 was	stubborn.	 I	 knew	that	 look.
"Sarafine	found	them.	They	could	be	dead!"
     John	walked	closer	and	winced,	the	same	way	he	had	when	I	saw	them	in	the
bedroom.	It	  was	an	 involuntary	  reflex,	 a	 reaction	 to	 some	kind	 of	  pain.	 He
looked	down	into	her	golden	eyes.	"Don't	 you	mean	Ethan?"
     She	avoided	his	gaze.	"I	mean	all	 of	them.	Aren't	 you	at	least	a	little	 worried
about	Ridley?	  She	 disappeared.	You	 don't	 think	  those	 two	 things	 could	  be
connected?"
     "What	two	 things?"
     Lena's	shoulders	tensed.	"My	  cousin	disappearing	and	Sarafine	 showing	up
out	of	nowhere?"
     He	reached	out	and	took	 her	hand,	lacing	his	fingers	 between	hers	the	way	I
used	to.	"She's	always	been	somewhere,	Lena.	Your	mother	is	probably	the	most
powerful	 Dark	Caster	in	 the	world.	 Why	 would	she	want	 to	hurt	Ridley,	 one	of
her	own?"
     "I	 don't	know."	 Lena	was	shaking	 her	head,	her	resolve	weakening.	"It's	 just
..."
     "What?"
     "Even	though	 we're	not	together,	I	don't	 want	to	see	him	get	hurt.	He	 tried	to
protect	me."
     "From	what?"
     From	myself.
     I	heard	the	words,	 even	though	she	didn't	speak	them.	"From	 a	lot	 of	things.
It	was	different	then."
     "You	 were	pretending	 to	be	 someone	you	weren't,	trying	  to	make	everyone

294
happy.	Did	 you	 ever	think	 he	 wasn't	protecting	 you	 but	 holding	 you	 back?"	I
could	feel	my	heart	beating	faster,	my	muscles	tensing.
     I	was	holding	 him	back.
     "You	 know,	I	had	a	Mortal	 girlfriend	 once."
     Lena	looked	shocked.	"You	 did?"
     John	nodded.	"Yeah.	She	was	sweet,	and	I	loved	her."
     "What	happened?"	Lena	was	hanging	on	every	word.
     "It	 was	too	 hard.	She	didn't	 understand	what	 my	 life	 was	like.	 That	 I	don't
always	get	to	do	whatever	I	want	..."	He	sounded	like	he	was	telling	 the	truth.
     "Why	 couldn't	you	do	what	you	 wanted?"
     "My	 childhood	 was	 what	you	 would	 call	 strict.	 Straitjacket	 strict.	Even	 the
rules	had	rules."
     Lena	looked	confused.	"You	 mean	about	dating	Mortals?"
     John	winced	again,	cringing	 this	time.	"No,	 it	 wasn't	like	that.	The	 way	I	was
raised	was	because	I	was	different.	The	man	 who	raised	me	was	the	only	 father
I've	ever	known,	and	he	didn't	want	me	to	hurt	anyone."
     "I	 don't	want	to	hurt	anyone	either."
     "You're	 different.	I	 mean,	we	are."
     John	grabbed	Lena's	 hand	and	pulled	 her	 next	to	 him.	 "Don't	 worry.	 We'll
find	your	 cousin.	She	probably	ran	off	 with	 that	drummer	 from	 Suffer."	 He	was
right	about	 the	drummer,	just	 not	the	 one	he	was	betting	 on.	Suffer?	 Lena	was
hanging	out	 with	  John's	kind,	 in	 places	called	 Exile	 and	 Suffer.	 She	thought
that's	what	she	deserved.
     Lena	didn't	say	anything	 else,	but	she	didn't	let	go	of	his	hand.	I	tried	 to	force
myself	 to	 follow	  them,	 but	I	  couldn't.	 I	 didn't	 have	 control.	 That	 much	 was
obvious	from	 this	 bizarre	 vantage	point,	 so	close	to	 the	ground.	 I	 was	always
looking	up	 at	them.	It	didn't	 make	any	sense.	But	it	didn't	 matter,	because	now	I
was	running	again,	through	a	dark	tunnel.	Or	was	it	 a	cave?	I	could	smell	the	sea
as	the	black	walls	streaked	by.


I	rubbed	 my	 eyes,	surprised	to	 be	walking	 behind	 Liv	 instead	 of	lying	  on	the
ground.	 It	 was	 crazy	 to	 think	  I	 could	  be	 watching	 Lena	 in	  one	place	 and
following	 Liv	 through	the	Tunnels	at	the	same	time.	How	was	it	possible?
     The	strange	visions,	with	 the	off-kilter	  perspective	and	the	flashing	images	--
what	was	happening?	Why	 was	I	 able	to	 see	Lena	and	John?	I	had	 to	figure	 it
out.
     I	looked	 down	 at	my	hands.	I	 wasn't	holding	 anything	except	the	Arclight.	  I
tried	to	think	 back	to	the	first	 time	 I	saw	Lena	this	 way.	It	 was	in	my	 bathroom,

295
and	I	 didn't	 have	the	Arclight	  then.	 The	only	 thing	 I'd	 been	touching	 was	 the
sink.	There	had	to	be	a	common	thread,	but	I	couldn't	see	it.
     Ahead,	the	 tunnel	opened	up	 into	 a	stone	hall,	 where	 the	entrances	to	four
tunnels	converged.
     Link	 sighed.	"Which	 way?"
     I	  didn't	 answer.	  Because	when	  I	  looked	 down	  at	 the	 Arclight,	   I	  saw
something	else	just	beyond	it.
     Lucille.
     Sitting	 in	the	mouth	of	 the	tunnel	opposite	us,	expectantly.	I	 reached	into	my
back	pocket	and	pulled	out	the	silver	 tag	Aunt	Prue	had	given	me,	with	 Lucille's
name	engraved	on	it.	I	could	still	hear	Aunt	 Prue's	voice.
     See	you	still	 got	that	 cat.	I	 was	just	 waitin'	 for	 the	right	 time	ta	 let	her	 offa
that	clothesline.	She	knows	a	trick	or	two.	You'll	 see.
     In	a	split	second,	everything	fell	 into	place	and	I	knew.
     It	was	Lucille.
     The	images	speeding	past	me	every	time	 I	found	 my	way	 to	Lena	and	 John.
The	ground	so	close,	closer	than	 it	could	 ever	be	if	 I	was	standing.	 The	strange
vantage	point,	as	if	 I	 was	lying	 on	my	 stomach	looking	 up	at	them.	 It	all	 made
sense.	The	way	 Lucille	  kept	 disappearing	and	 reappearing	randomly.	 Only	  it
wasn't	random.
     I	 tried	to	 remember	the	times	 Lucille	 had	 vanished,	ticking	 them	 off	 in	my
head	one	by	one.	The	first	 time	I	 saw	Lena	with	 John	and	Ridley,	 I	 was	staring
into	  my	 bathroom	  mirror.	   I	  didn't	  remember	 Lucille	   disappearing,	 but	  I
remembered	she	was	sitting	on	 the	front	 porch	 the	next	morning.	 Which	 didn't
make	any	sense,	because	we	never	left	her	outside	at	night.
     The	 second	 time,	  Lucille	  had	 bolted	 in	  Forsyth	  Park	 when	 we	  got	 to
Savannah,	and	she	didn't	show	up	until	  after	we	left	 Bonaventure	--	 after	 I	had
seen	Lena	and	John	when	I	was	at	Aunt	 Caroline's.	And	 this	time,	 Link	 noticed
Lucille	 was	gone	when	we	came	back	down	 into	the	 Tunnels,	but	now	 here	she
was,	sitting	in	front	 of	us,	right	after	I	 had	just	seen	Lena.
     I	wasn't	the	one	seeing	Lena.
     Lucille	  was.	She	was	tracking	  Lena,	the	 same	way	we	 were	following	   the
maps	or	the	lights	or	the	pull	 of	the	moon.	I	 was	watching	Lena	through	the	cat's
eyes,	maybe	the	same	way	Macon	 had	watched	the	 world	 through	Boo's.	 How
was	it	possible?	Lucille	wasn't	a	Caster	cat	any	more	than	I	was	a	Caster.
     Was	she?
     "What	are	you,	Lucille?"
     The	cat	looked	me	in	the	eye	and	cocked	her	head	to	the	side.
     "Ethan?"	Liv	 was	watching	me.	"Are	 you	all	right?"

296
     "Yeah."	 I	shot	Lucille	  a	meaningful	look.	 She	ignored	me,	sniffing	 the	tip	 of
her	tail	gracefully.
     "You	 realize	she's	a	cat."	Liv	was	still	staring	at	me	curiously.
     "I	 know."
     "Just	checking."
     Great.	Not	only	 was	I	talking	 to	 a	cat,	but	now	I	 was	talking	about	 talking	to
a	cat.	"We	should	get	going."
     Liv	 took	a	deep	breath.	"Yes,	about	that.	I'm	afraid	we	can't."
     "Why	 not?"
     Liv	 motioned	me	 over	to	where	all	 of	Aunt	 Prue's	maps	were	laid	out	 on	the
smooth	dirt.	"You	 see	this	mark	 here?	That's	the	nearest	Doorwell.	It	 took	 me	a
while,	 but	 I've	 figured	 out	 loads	 of	 things	 about	this	 map.	 Your	 aunt	 wasn't
kidding.	She	must	have	spent	years	marking	it	up."
     "The	Doorwells	 are	marked?"
     "Looks	 that	way	 on	the	map.	See	these	red	D's,	with	 the	little	 circles	around
them?"	They	were	everywhere.	"And	 these	thin	red	lines?	I	believe	they're	closer
to	the	surface.	 There's	a	pattern.	It	 seems	the	darker	 the	color	 gets,	the	deeper
underground."
     I	pointed	to	a	grid	 of	black	lines.	"You're	 saying	these	would	be	the	deepest."
     Liv	  nodded.	 "Possibly	 also	 the	 Darkest.	 The	 concept	of	  Dark	 and	 Light
territories	 within	 the	 Underground	--	 it's	 groundbreaking,	 really.	 Certainly	 not
widely	known."
     "So	what's	the	problem?"
     "This."	 She	pointed	to	 two	 words	scribbled	 across	the	southernmost	edge	of
the	largest	page.	L	O	C	A	S	I	L	E	N	T	I	A.
     I	 remembered	the	second	word.	It	 sounded	like	the	 one	Lena	said	when	 she
laid	the	Cast	to	keep	me	from	 telling	 her	family	 she	was	leaving	Gatlin.	 "You're
saying	the	map	is	too	quiet?"
     Liv	 shook	her	 head.	"This	is	 where	the	map	 falls	silent,	 I'm	 afraid.	Because
we're	at	the	end.	 We've	reached	the	southern	shore,	which	 means	we're	off	 the
map.	Terra	 incognita."	 She	shrugged.	"You	 know	 what	they	 say.	Hic	dracones
sunt."
     "Yeah,	I	 hear	that	one	a	lot."	I	had	no	idea	what	she	was	talking	about.
     "'Here	be	dragons.'	It's	what	 sailors	used	to	write	on	maps	five	 hundred	years
ago,	when	the	map	ended	but	the	ocean	didn't."
     "I'd	 rather	face	dragons	than	Sarafine."	 I	 looked	at	the	 place	where	Liv	 was
tapping	her	finger.	 The	 web	of	 Tunnels	we	 had	come	from	 was	as	complex	 as
any	highway	system.	"So	what	now?"
     "I'm	 out	of	ideas.	I've	done	nothing	 but	stare	at	this	map	since	your	aunt	gave

297
it	to	us,	and	I	still	don't	know	how	to	get	to	the	Great	Barrier.	And	I	don't	even
know	if	I	 believe	it's	a	real	place."	We	stared	at	the	map	together.	"I'm	sorry.	I
know	I've	let	you	down	--	everyone,	really."
    I	 traced	the	outline	of	the	 coast	with	my	finger	until	 I	 came	to	Savannah,
where	the	Arclight	  had	stopped	working.	 The	 red	mark	 for	 the	 Savannah
Doorwell	lay	just	beneath	the	first	L	in	L	O	C	A	S	I	L	E	N	T	I	A.	As	I	stared	at
the	letters	and	the	red	marks	around	them,	the	missing	pattern	slowly	surfaced.	It
reminded	me	of	the	Bermuda	Triangle,	some	kind	of	 void	 where	everything
magically	disappeared.	"Loca	silentia	doesn't	mean	'where	the	map	falls	silent.'	"
    "It	 doesn't?"
    "I	 think	 it	 means	something	more	like	radio	silence,	for	a	Caster	anyway.
Think	about	it.	When	did	the	Arclight	stop	working	the	first	time?"
    Liv	 thought	back.	"Savannah.	Right	after	we"	--	she	looked	at	me,	blushing	--
"found	everything	in	the	attic."
    "Exactly.	 Once	we	entered	the	territory	marked	Loca	silentia,	the	Arclight
stopped	guiding	us.	I	think	we've	been	in	a	sort	of	supernatural	no-fly	zone,	like
the	Bermuda	Triangle,	since	we	moved	south	of	there."
    Liv	 looked	slowly	from	the	map	to	me,	working	it	out	in	her	mind.	When	she
finally	 spoke,	she	couldn't	keep	the	excitement	out	of	her	voice.	"The	seam.
We're	at	the	seam.	That's	what	the	Great	Barrier	is."
    "The	seam	of	what?"
    "The	 place	where	two	universes	meet."	Liv	looked	at	the	dial	on	her	wrist.
"The	Arclight	could've	been	on	some	kind	of	magical	overload	this	whole	time."
    I	 thought	about	Aunt	Prue	showing	up	when	she	did	--	and	where	she	did.	"I
bet	Aunt	Prue	knew	we	needed	the	maps.	We	had	just	entered	the	Loca	silentia
when	she	gave	them	to	us."
    "But	 the	 map	stops,	and	the	Great	Barrier	isn't	 on	it.	 So	how	 is	anyone
supposed	to	find	it?"	Liv	sighed.
    "My	  mom	could.	She	knew	how	to	find	 it	without	 the	star."	I	 wished	she
were	here	right	 now,	 even	a	 ghostly	vision	 of	 her	made	from	 smoke	and
graveyard	dirt	and	chicken	bones.
    "Did	 you	read	that	in	her	papers?"
    "No.	 It	was	something	John	said	to	Lena."	I	didn't	want	to	think	about	it,	even
if	the	information	was	useful.	"Where	are	we	again,	according	to	the	map?"
    She	 pointed.	"Right	 there."	 We	had	 reached	the	long	 curving	line	 that
followed	the	inlets	of	 the	southern	shore.	Caster	connections	wove	their	way
together	and	apart	until	they	met	at	the	edge	of	the	water	like	nerve	endings.
    "What	are	these	little	shapes?	Islands?"	Liv	chewed	on	the	end	of	her	pen.
    "Those	are	the	Sea	Islands."

298
     Liv	 leaned	over	me.	"Why	do	they	look	 so	familiar?"
     "I've	 been	wondering	that,	too.	I	thought	it	 was	from	staring	at	the	map	for	 so
long."
     It	 was	true.	I	knew	 those	shapes,	curving	in	and	out	like	 a	group	 of	lopsided
clouds.	Where	had	I	seen	them	before?
     I	pulled	 a	handful	 of	papers	--	my	 mother's	papers	--	out	of	 my	back	pocket.
There	it	was,	tucked	between	pages.	The	sheet	of	vellum	 covered	with	a	strange
Caster	design	that	looked	like	weird	clouds.
     She	knew	how	to	find	it,	without	the	star.
     "Hold	 on	 --"	 I	slid	 the	vellum	  on	top	of	 the	map.	 It	 was	like	 tracing	paper,
thin	as	an	onion	skin	on	Amma's	cutting	board.
     "I	 wonder	 ..."	 I	 slipped	 the	translucent	 sheet	into	 place	 over	 the	map,	 the
outlines	of	 each	shape	on	the	vellum	 lining	  up	perfectly	 with	 the	shape	on	 the
chart	 beneath	 it.	 Except	  for	  one,	 which	  materialized	 in	  a	 sort	 of	  ghostly
silhouette,	only	appearing	when	the	partial	outline	 of	the	map	grid	met	the	partial
outline	of	the	vellum.	 Without	 both	the	vellum	 and	the	map,	the	lines	looked	like
meaningless	scribbles.
     But	when	you	 held	them	just	right,	it	 all	came	together,	and	you	could	see	the
island.
     Like	 two	 halves	of	 a	Caster	key,	 or	two	 universes	stitched	together	 for	one
common	purpose.
     The	Great	 Barrier	 was	hidden	 in	 the	middle	  of	a	 Mortal	 coastal	 chain.	Of
course	it	was.
     I	stared	at	the	ink	on	the	page,	and	beneath	it.
     There	it	was.	The	most	powerful	 place	in	the	Caster	world,	appearing	through
pen	and	paper	as	if	by	magic.
     Hidden	in	 plain	sight.

299
6.20	

300
                                             No	  One's	   Son



The	door	itself	wasn't	that	unusual.
    Neither	was	the	Doorwell	 leading	up	to	it,	 or	the	curving	passage	we	had
followed	to	 find	our	 way	here.	Twist	 after	turn	through	corridors	built	 from
crumbling	rocks	 and	dirt	 and	splintering	 wood.	This	 is	 what	 tunnels	were
supposed	to	feel	like	--	damp	and	dark	and	tight.	It	was	almost	like	the	day	Link
and	I	followed	a	stray	dog	into	one	of	the	runoff	tunnels	in	Summerville.
    I	 guess	the	strangest	thing	was	how	ordinary	everything	seemed,	now	that	we
had	figured	out	the	secret	to	the	map.	Following	it	was	the	easy	part.
    Until	 now.
    "That's	it.	 It	 has	to	be."	Liv	 looked	up	from	 the	map.	I	 stared	past	her	to
where	a	wooden	staircase	led	up	to	streaks	of	light,	forming	the	outline	of	a	door
in	the	darkness.
    "You	 sure?"
    She	nodded	and	slid	the	map	into	her	pocket.
    "Then	let's	see	what's	out	there."	I	climbed	the	steps	to	the	door.
    "Not	 so	fast,	Short	Straw.	What	do	 you	think	is	 on	the	other	side	of	 that
door?"	Ridley	was	stalling.	She	looked	as	nervous	as	I	felt.
    Liv	 studied	the	door.	"According	to	the	legends,	old	magic,	neither	Light	or
Dark."
    Ridley	shook	her	head.	"You	have	no	idea	what	you're	talking	about,	Keeper.
Old	magic	 is	 wild.	 It's	 infinite.	 Chaos	in	 its	 purest	form.	 Not	 exactly	 the
combination	for	a	happy	ending	to	your	little	quest."
    I	 moved	closer	to	the	door.	Liv	and	Link	were	right	behind	me.	"Come	on,
Rid.	You	want	to	help	Lena	or	not?"	Link's	voice	echoed	off	the	walls.
    "I	 was	just	saying	..."	I	 could	hear	the	fear	in	Ridley's	voice.	I	tried	not	to
think	about	the	last	time	she	sounded	this	scared,	when	she	faced	Sarafine	in	the
woods.
    I	 pushed	the	door	and	 it	 creaked,	the	worn	wood	bending	and	straining.
Another	try	and	it	 would	open.	We	would	be	there,	wherever	there	was.	The
Great	Barrier.
    I	 wasn't	scared.	I	don't	know	why.	 But	I	 wasn't	thinking	about	entering	a
magical	universe	when	I	forced	the	door	open.	I	was	thinking	about	home.	The
wooden	panel	wasn't	all	that	different	from	 the	Outer	Door	 we	found	at	 the

301
fairgrounds,	under	the	 Tunnel	of	 Love.	 Maybe	it	 was	a	sign	 --	something	 from
the	beginning	reappearing	at	the	end.	I	wondered	if	 it	was	a	good	omen	or	 a	bad
one.
     It	didn't	 matter	what	was	on	the	other	side	of	the	door.	Lena	was	waiting.	 She
needed	me,	whether	she	knew	it	or	not.
     There	was	no	turning	back.
     I	leaned	against	the	panel,	and	it	 swung	open.	The	crack	of	light	 opened	into
a	blinding	field	 of	white.




I	stepped	into	the	harsh	light,	the	darkness	behind	me	now.	I	could	barely	see	the
steps	below	me.	I	breathed	in	the	air,	heavy	with	salt	and	sour	with	brine.
     Loca	silentia.	 Now	I	 understood.	The	moment	we	emerged	from	the	darkness
of	the	 Tunnels	into	 the	broad,	 flat	reflection	  of	the	 water,	there	was	 only	 light
and	silence.
     Slowly,	  my	 eyes	began	to	 adjust.	 We	 were	 on	 what	 looked	 like	 a	 rocky
Lowcountry	 beach,	covered	in	a	 spread	of	gray	and	white	 oyster	shells,	 framed
by	an	uneven	row	 of	 palmettos.	A	 splintered	 wooden	walkway	 stretched	along
the	perimeter	of	the	shoreline	facing	the	islands.	We	stood	there	now,	the	four	 of
us,	listening	to	what	should	have	been	the	waves	or	the	wind	or	even	a	gull	in	the
sky.	But	the	silence	was	so	thick,	it	stopped	us	in	our	tracks.
     The	 scene	was	 perfectly	 ordinary	 and	 incredibly	  surreal,	 as	vivid	  as	any
dream.	The	colors	 were	too	 bright,	 the	light	 too	 light.	 And	 in	 the	far	 shadows
beyond	the	shore,	the	dark	was	too	dark.	But	everything	 was	somehow	beautiful
here.	Even	the	darkness.	It	was	how	the	moment	felt	that	silenced	us.	Magic	was
unfolding	between	us,	encircling	 us	like	a	rope,	tying	us	to	one	another.
     As	 I	 started	 toward	 the	 walkway,	  the	rounded	 shores	of	  the	Sea	 Islands
emerged	in	the	distance.	Beyond	 that	was	only	 dense,	flat	fog.	 Tufts	 of	 swamp
grass	rose	from	the	 water	to	 form	 long,	shallow	 banks	rising	 in	 and	out	 of	the
coastal	mud.	Along	 the	 beach,	weathered	wooden	docks	 stretched	out	into	 the
unbroken	blue	water	until	 they	disappeared	into	the	black	deep.	The	docks	faded
down	the	coast	like	weathered	wooden	fingers.	Bridges	to	nowhere.
     I	looked	up	at	the	sky.	Not	 a	star	in	sight.	Liv	 looked	down	at	the	selenometer
whirring	 on	 her	 wrist,	 and	tapped	 it.	 "None	 of	 these	numbers	mean	anything
anymore.	We're	on	our	own	 now."	 She	unfastened	her	watch	and	slid	it	 into	her
pocket.
     "Guess	so."

302
     "What	 now?"	Link	  bent	to	pick	 up	a	shell	with	 his	 good	arm	and	chucked	it
into	the	distance.	The	water	 swallowed	it	 without	 a	sound.	Ridley	 stood	next	 to
him,	streaks	of	 pink	 hair	whipping	 in	 the	wind.	 On	 the	far	 edge	of	the	dock	 in
front	of	 us,	the	flag	 of	South	Carolina	 --	with	 the	silhouette	 of	a	palmetto	 and	a
crescent	moon	 on	a	 field	 of	 midnight	  blue	 --	 looked	 like	 a	 Caster	flag	 as	 it
fluttered	 from	 a	 spindly	 flagpole.	 When	 I	 looked	 at	 the	 flag	 more	 closely,	 I
realized	it	had	changed.	This	one	had	a	seven-pointed	star	in	the	sky,	next	to	 the
familiar	 crescent	moon	and	palmetto	silhouette.	The	Southern	Star,	right	there	on
the	flag,	as	if	it	had	fallen	 out	of	the	sky.
     If	 this	really	 was	the	seam	where	the	 Mortal	 and	the	magical	 touched,	there
was	no	sign	of	 it	here.	I	 don't	know	 what	I	 was	hoping	for.	 All	 I	 had	now	 were
one	too	many	stars	on	the	state	flag	and	a	feeling	of	 magic	as	thick	as	the	salt	in
the	air.
     I	 joined	the	others	at	 the	far	edge	of	 the	walkway.	 The	wind	 had	picked	 up,
and	the	flag	was	whipping	around	the	pole.	It	didn't	 make	a	sound.
     Liv	 consulted	the	folded	map.	"If	 we're	in	the	right	 place,	it	has	to	be	between
that	island,	beyond	the	buoy,	and	where	we're	standing."
     "I	 think	we're	in	the	right	 place."	I	was	sure	of	it.
     "How	 do	you	know?"
     "Remember	that	 Southern	Star	you	were	 telling	 me	about?"	I	 pointed	to	 the
flag.	"Think	 about	it.	 If	you	followed	  the	star	the	whole	way	here,	the	star	on	the
flag	is	 exactly	what	 you	would	 be	looking	 for.	 Some	kind	 of	 sign	you're	 at	the
right	spot."
     "Of	 course.	 The	 seven-pointed	star."	 She	examined	 the	 flag,	 touching	 the
fabric	as	if	she	was	allowing	herself	to	 believe	it	for	the	very	 first	time.
     There	wasn't	time	 for	that.	 I	knew	 we	had	to	keep	moving.	 "So	 what	are	we
even	looking	for?	Land?	Or	something	man-made?"
     "You	 mean	 this	isn't	 it?"	 Link	  looked	 disappointed	and	 shoved	his	 garden
shears	back	into	his	belt.
     "I	 think	 we	 still	 have	 to	cross	over	 the	 water.	It	 makes	sense,	really.	 Like
crossing	the	river	Styx	 to	get	to	Hades."	Liv	  flattened	the	map	against	her	palm.
"According	 to	the	map,	 we're	looking	 for	 some	kind	of	 connector	that	will	  take
us	across	the	water	to	the	Great	 Barrier	itself.	 Like	 a	sandbar	or	 a	bridge."	 She
held	the	vellum	over	the	map,	and	we	all	looked.
     Link	 took	them	out	 of	her	hands.	"Yeah,	I	 see	it.	Kinda	cool."	 He	flipped	 the
vellum	 up	 and	down	 across	 the	map.	 "Now	  you	 see	it,	 now	 you	 don't."	  He
dropped	the	map,	and	it	fluttered	into	a	mess	of	pages	on	the	sand.
     Liv	 bent	to	pick	it	 up.	"Careful	with	 that!	Are	 you	completely	mental?"
     "You	 mean,	like	 a	genius?"	 Sometimes	there	was	no	 point	in	 Link	  and	Liv

303
talking	at	all.	Liv	 pocketed	Aunt	 Prue's	map,	and	we	started	walking	again.
     Ridley	  picked	 up	 Lucille	   Ball.	 She	 hadn't	 said	 much	 since	 we	  left	 the
Tunnels.	 Maybe	  now	 that	  she	had	  been	declawed,	  she	 preferred	 Lucille's
company.	Or	maybe	she	was	scared.	She	probably	knew	better	than	the	rest	of	us
the	dangers	that	lay	ahead.
     I	could	 feel	the	Arclight	 burning	 in	my	pocket.	My	 heart	began	to	pound,	and
my	head	began	to	spin.
     What	was	 it	doing	 to	me?	Since	we	 crossed	over	into	 the	no	man's	land	the
map	called	Loca	silentia,	 the	light	 had	stopped	illuminating	 our	path	and	started
illuminating	 the	 past.	Macon's	past.	It	 had	 become	a	conduit	 for	 the	visions,	 a
direct	  line	  I	   couldn't	  control.	   The	  visions	   were	  coming	  intermittently,
interrupting	the	present	with	fragmented	bits	and	pieces	of	Macon's	past.
     An	 old	 palmetto	 frond	 snapped	loudly	  under	one	 of	 Ridley's	 shoes.	Then
something	else,	and	I	felt	myself	slipping	 away	--

    Macon	 could	 feel	 it	 immediately	 when	his	 shoulder	 snapped	--	 the	intense
    pain	 of	 his	bones	cracking.	 His	 skin	tightened,	as	 if	it	 could	 no	longer	 hold
    whatever	 was	lurking	 inside	him.	 The	breath	was	sucked	from	his	 lungs,	like
    he	was	 being	crushed.	His	vision	 began	to	blur,	 and	he	had	the	 sensation	he
    was	 falling,	 even	though	 he	could	 feel	 the	rocks	 tearing	 at	his	 flesh	as	 his
    body	seized	on	the	ground.
        The	Transformation.
        From	 this	 moment	forth,	 he	would	 not	be	able	 to	walk	 among	Mortals	  in
    the	 daylight.	 The	 sun	would	 singe	the	 flesh	from	 his	 body.	He	 wouldn't	 be
    able	 to	ignore	 the	urge	to	 feed	on	the	blood	of	 Mortals.	 He	was	one	of	 them
    now	 --	 another	Blood	 Incubus	 in	the	 long	 line	of	 killers	 on	 the	Ravenwood
    Family	 Tree.	A	predator	 walking	among	his	prey,	waiting	 to	feed.




I	was	back	again,	as	suddenly	as	I	had	gone.
     I	stumbled	 toward	Liv,	 my	 head	reeling.	"We've	got	 to	get	going.	Things	 are
getting	out	of	control."
     "What	things?"
     "The	Arclight	  --	the	things	in	 my	head,"	I	said,	unable	to	explain	 it	any	better
than	that.
     She	nodded.	"I	 thought	it	 might	get	 bad	for	you.	 I	wasn't	 sure	if	a	Wayward
would	react	 more	strongly	 to	an	intensely	 powerful	 place,	being	 as	sensitive	to
the	pull	of	 certain	Casters	as	you	are.	I	mean,	if	you	really	 are	..."	If	 I	really	 was

304
a	Wayward.	She	didn't	have	to	say	it.
     "So	you're	saying	you	finally	 believe	 the	Great	Barrier	is	real?"
     "No.	 Unless	..."	She	pointed	out	 past	the	farthest	dock	on	the	horizon,	 where
the	skinniest,	 most	 splintered	 dock	 extended	 past	 the	others,	 so	 far	 that	 we
couldn't	see	where	it	 ended,	except	that	it	 disappeared	into	fog.	 "That	 could	be
the	bridge	we're	looking	for."
     "Not	 much	of	a	bridge."	Link	 looked	skeptical.
     "Only	 one	way	to	find	out."	 I	walked	 ahead	of	them.
     As	we	picked	 our	way	across	rotting	boards	and	oyster	shells,	I	found	 myself
slipping	over	and	over.	I	 was	there,	and	I	wasn't.	In	and	out.	One	minute,	I	 could
hear	Ridley's	 and	 Link's	 voices	 echoing	 as	 they	bickered.	 The	 next,	 the	 fog
blurred	around	the	edges,	and	I	 was	pulled	 back	into	visions	 of	 Macon's	past.	I
knew	there	 was	something	 I	 was	supposed	to	 gain	from	 the	 visions,	 but	 they
were	coming	so	quickly	now	 it	was	impossible	to	figure	 out.
     I	thought	about	Amma.	 She	would	have	said,	"Everythin'	 means	somethin'."	I
tried	to	imagine	what	she	would	have	said	next.
     P.	O.	R.	 T.	E.	 N.	D.	 Seven	down.	As	 in,	you	 be	sure	to	pay	 attention	to	the
what	now,	Ethan	Wate,	because	that's	gonna	point	the	way	to	the	what's	next.
     She	was	right,	 as	usual	--	 everything	did	 mean	something,	didn't	 it?	 All	 the
changes	in	Lena	would	 have	added	up	to	 the	truth,	 if	 I	had	been	able	to	 see	it.
Even	now,	I	 tried	to	 piece	together	my	glimpses	of	 the	visions,	to	 find	 the	story
they	were	trying	to	tell.
     I	 didn't	have	 time,	though,	 because	as	we	reached	the	bridge,	I	 felt	 another
surge,	the	walkway	started	to	sway,	and	Ridley's	and	Link's	voices	faded	--

    The	 room	 was	dark,	 but	 Macon	 didn't	 need	light	 to	 see.	The	shelves	were
    lined	 with	books,	as	he	had	imagined	they	would	be.	Volumes	on	every	aspect
    of	 American	history,	 particularly	 the	wars	 that	had	shaped	this	country	--	 the
    Revolutionary	 War	 and	the	Civil	 War.	Macon	ran	 his	fingers	over	the	leather
    spines.	These	books	were	of	no	use	to	him	now.
        This	 was	a	different	 kind	 of	war.	 A	war	 among	the	Casters,	waged	within
    his	 own	family.
        He	 could	hear	footsteps	above,	the	sound	of	the	crescent	key	fitting	into	the
    lock.	 The	door	 creaked,	a	 slice	of	 light	 escaping	as	the	 hatch	in	 the	ceiling
    opened.	 He	wanted	 to	 reach	 out,	offer	 his	 hand	 to	 help	her	 down,	 but	 he
    didn't	 dare.
        It	 had	been	years	since	he	had	seen	or	touched	her.
        They	 had	only	 met	in	letters	 and	between	the	covers	of	 the	books	she	left
    for	 him	 in	the	Tunnels.	 But	he	hadn't	 seen	her	or	heard	 her	voice	in	 all	 that

305
time.	Marian	 had	made	sure	of	that.	She	stepped	through	the	door	cut	into	the
ceiling,	the	light	 spilling	  into	the	room.	 Macon's	breath	 caught	in	 his	throat.
She	was	even	more	beautiful	than	he	remembered.	Her	shiny	brown	hair	 was
held	away	from	her	face	by	a	pair	of	 red	reading	glasses.	She	smiled.
   "Jane."	 He	 hadn't	said	 her	name	aloud	 in	 such	a	long	 time.	It	 was	like	 a
song.
   "No	 one's	called	me	that	since	..."	She	looked	down.	"I	use	Lila	now."
   "Of	 course,	I	knew	that."
   Lila	 was	visibly	 nervous,	her	voice	shaky.	"I'm	sorry	 I	had	to	come,	but	this
was	the	only	 way."	 She	avoided	his	eyes.	It	 was	too	 painful	 to	look	 at	 him.
"What	 I	have	 to	 tell	 you	--	 it's	 not	 something	I	 could	 leave	for	  you	in	 the
study,	and	I	couldn't	risk	sending	a	message	through	the	Tunnels."
   Macon	 had	a	 small	study	in	 the	Tunnels,	a	 reprieve	from	 the	self-induced
exile	of	his	 solitary	 life	in	 Gatlin.	 Sometimes	Lila	pressed	messages	between
the	pages	of	the	 books	she	left	for	 him.	 The	messages	were	never	personal.
They	always	related	to	her	research	in	 the	Lunae	Libri	 --	possible	answers	to
the	questions	they	were	both	asking.
   "It's	  good	to	see	you."	 Macon	took	 a	step	forward,	 and	 Lila	 stiffened.	He
looked	hurt.	"It's	 safe.	I	can	control	the	urges	now."
   "It's	 not	 that.	I	 --	I	 shouldn't	be	here.	I	 told	 Mitchell	 I	was	working	 late	 in
the	archive.	I	 don't	like	to	 lie	to	him."	 Of	 course.	She	felt	guilty.	She	was	still
as	honest	as	Macon	remembered.
   "We	 are	in	an	archive."
   "Semantics,	Macon."
   Macon	 drew	a	heavy	breath	 at	the	sound	of	his	name	from	 her	lips.	"What
is	so	important	that	you	would	risk	 coming	to	me,	Lila?"
   "I've	 found	something	your	father	 kept	from	you."
   Macon's	 black	 eyes	darkened	at	the	mention	of	 his	father.	 "I	 haven't	seen
my	father	in	 years.	Not	since	--"	 He	didn't	 want	to	say	what	 he	was	thinking.
He	hadn't	seen	his	father	since	Silas	had	manipulated	Macon	 into	letting	 Lila
go.	Silas	and	his	twisted	views,	his	bigotry	 against	Mortals	 and	Casters	alike.
But	Macon	 didn't	 mention	any	of	 that.	He	 didn't	 want	to	 make	it	 harder	for
her.	"The	Transformation."
   "There	 is	something	you	need	to	know."	 Lila	 dropped	her	voice,	as	if	 what
she	was	about	to	say	could	only	be	spoken	in	whispers.	"Abraham	is	alive."
   Macon	 and	Lila	 didn't	have	time	to	react.	There	was	a	whirring	  sound,	and
a	figure	materialized	 in	the	darkness.
   "Bravo.	  She	really	 is	 much	 smarter	than	 I	 had	 anticipated.	 Lila,	  is	it?"
Abraham	was	 clapping	 loudly.	 "A	 tactical	  error	 on	 my	part,	 but	 one	your

306
sister	can	correct	easily	enough.	Wouldn't	you	agree,	Macon?"
   Macon's	 eyes	narrowed.	"Sarafine	is	not	my	sister."
   Abraham	 adjusted	his	string	 tie.	 With	his	white	 beard	and	 Sunday	suit,	he
looked	more	like	Colonel	Sanders	than	what	he	was	--	a	killer.
   "There's	 no	need	to	 be	nasty.	Sarafine	is	 your	father's	 daughter,	after	 all.
It's	 a	 shame	you	 two	 can't	 get	 along."	 Abraham	  walked	 casually	 toward
Macon.	"You	know,	I	always	 hoped	we	would	have	a	chance	to	meet.	I'm	sure
once	we	talk,	you'll	understand	your	place	in	 the	Order	of	Things."
   "I	  know	my	place.	 I	 made	my	choice	and	 Bound	myself	to	 the	Light	 long
ago."
   Abraham	 laughed	loudly.	 "As	 if	such	a	thing	 were	even	possible.	You're	a
Dark	creature	 by	nature,	 an	Incubus.	This	 ridiculous	 alliance	 with	the	 Light
Casters,	defending	 Mortals	  --	  it's	 inane.	 You	 belong	 with	  us,	 with	 your
family."	 Abraham	 looked	at	Lila.	  "And	 for	what?	 A	Mortal	  woman	you	 can
never	be	with?	One	who	is	married	to	another	man?"
   Lila	  knew	it	 wasn't	true.	 Macon	hadn't	 made	his	choice	 solely	because	of
her,	but	she	knew	she	was	part	of	the	reason.	 She	faced	Abraham,	mustering
all	 the	courage	 she	possessed.	"We're	going	 to	 find	 a	way	 to	 end	all	 that.
Casters	and	Mortals	should	be	able	to	do	more	than	just	coexist."
   Abraham's	  expression	 changed.	 His	 face	 darkened,	 and	 he	 no	 longer
looked	like	 an	aging	 Southern	gentleman.	He	 looked	sinister	 and	evil	 as	he
smiled	at	Macon.	"Your	 father	 and	Hunting	 --	we	hoped	you	would	 join	 us.	I
warned	Hunting	that	brothers	 are	often	a	disappointment.	As	are	sons."
   Macon	 turned	his	head	sharply,	 his	face	changing	to	 mirror	 Abraham's.	"I
am	no	one's	son."
   "At	 any	rate,	I	 can't	have	you	or	this	 woman	interfering	 with	our	 plans.	It's
unfortunate,	really.	 You	turned	 your	 back	on	your	 family	 because	you	loved
this	filthy	  Mortal,	 and	 yet	she	will	  die	because	you	dragged	 her	 into	 this."
Abraham	vanished,	materializing	 in	 front	 of	Lila.	 "Oh,	 well."	 He	 opened	his
mouth,	baring	his	gleaming	canines.
   Lila	  covered	her	 head	with	 her	 arms	and	 screamed,	waiting	 for	 the	 bite
that	never	came.	Macon	materialized	between	them.	Lila	felt	 the	weight	of	his
body	as	it	slammed	into	hers,	throwing	her	backward.	 "Lila,	 run!"
   For	 a	second	she	was	paralyzed,	as	the	two	of	them	thrashed	at	each	other.
The	sound	was	violent,	 as	if	the	 earth	was	tearing	 itself	 apart.	Lila	  watched
as	Macon	threw	 Abraham	 to	the	 ground,	his	 guttural	 cries	 ripping	 through
the	air.	Then	she	ran.

307
The	sky	 swirled	 around	 me	slowly,	  like	 someone	hit	 REWIND.	Liv	must	 have
been	talking	to	me,	because	I	could	see	her	mouth	forming	 words,	but	 I	couldn't
make	them	out.	I	closed	my	eyes	again.
     Abraham	had	killed	 my	mother.	 She	may	have	died	by	Sarafine's	hand,	but	it
was	Abraham	who	ordered	it.	I	was	sure	of	it.
     "Ethan?	Can	you	hear	me?"	Liv's	voice	was	frantic.
     "I'm	 okay."	 I	pushed	myself	 up	slowly.	 All	 three	of	 them	were	staring	 down
at	me,	and	Lucille	was	sitting	on	my	 chest.
     I	was	sprawled	out	on	the	rotting	 walkway.	 "Give	 it	to	me."	Liv	 was	trying	 to
pry	 the	Arclight	  out	 of	 my	 hands.	 "It's	 acting	 as	some	 kind	 of	 metaphysical
channel.	You	can't	control	it."
     I	didn't	 let	go.	It	was	a	channel	I	couldn't	afford	 to	close.
     "At	 least	tell	 me	 what	happened.	Who	 was	it	 now?	 Abraham	or	 Sarafine?"
Liv	put	 her	hand	on	my	shoulder	to	steady	me.
     "It's	fine.	 I	don't	want	to	talk	 about	it."
     Link	 stared	down	at	me.	"You	okay,	man?"
     I	blinked	 a	few	 times.	It	 was	as	if	 I	was	underwater,	 watching	them	through
ripples.	"I'm	 fine."
     Ridley	 stood	up	a	few	feet	away,	wiping	 her	hands	on	her	skirt.	"Famous	last
words."
     Liv	 picked	up	her	backpack	and	stood	staring	at	the	end	of	the	almost	endless
dock.	I	pulled	myself	 up	next	to	her.
     "This	 is	it."	I	 looked	at	Liv.	 "I	can	feel	it."
     I	shivered.	That's	when	I	noticed	she	was	shaking,	too.

308
6.20	

309
                                               Sea	 Change



It	felt	 like	we	had	been	walking	forever,	as	if	the	bridge	in	front	of	us	only	got
longer	the	closer	we	got.	The	farther	we	went,	the	less	we	saw.	The	air	became
brighter	and	heavier	and	wetter,	until	suddenly	my	feet	came	to	the	edge	of	the
weathered	planks	--	and	what	appeared	to	be	an	impenetrable	wall	of	fog.
    "Is	 this	the	Great	Barrier?"	I	 squatted	down,	touching	the	place	where	the
wood	ended.	My	hand	felt	nothing.	No	invisible	Caster	stairwell.	Nothing.
    "Wait,	 what	if	this	is	like	a	dangerous	force	field	or	some	kind	of	poisonous
smoke?"	Link	pulled	out	his	shears	and	gently	pushed	them	into	the	mist,	then
yanked	them	back,	perfectly	intact.	"Or	maybe	not.	Still,	pretty	creepy.	How	do
we	know	if	we	go	through	that	we're	going	to	be	able	to	come	back?"	As	usual,
Link	was	only	saying	what	the	rest	of	us	were	thinking.
    I	 stood	at	the	end	of	the	bridge,	facing	the	nothingness.	"I'm	going	through."
    Liv	 looked	insulted.	"You	can	barely	walk.	Why	you?"
    Because	this	whole	 thing	 is	my	 fault.	 Because	Lena	was	my	 girlfriend.
Because	I	might	be	a	Wayward,	whatever	that	is.
    I	 looked	away	and	found	myself	looking	at	Lucille,	her	claws	digging	into
Ridley's	shirt.	Lucille	 Ball	 was	no	fan	 of	the	 water.	"Ouch!"	Ridley	 put	her
down.	"Stupid	cat."
    Lucille	 took	a	few	 deliberate	steps	across	the	wood,	turning	to	look	at	me.
She	cocked	her	head.
    With	 a	flick	of	her	tail,	she	took	off	and	was	gone.
    "Because."	Turns	out,	I	 couldn't	explain.	Liv	 shook	her	head,	and	without
waiting	for	anyone	else,	I	followed	Lucille	into	the	clouds.




I	was	in	the	Great	Barrier,	between	universes,	and	for	one	second	I	didn't	feel
like	a	Caster	or	a	Mortal.	All	I	felt	was	magic.
    I	 could	feel	it	and	hear	it	and	smell	it,	the	air	thick	with	sound	and	salt	and
water.	The	 shore	at	the	 end	of	  the	bridge	 was	pulling	 at	 me,	and	 I	 was
overwhelmed	with	an	unbearable	sense	of	longing.	I	wanted	to	be	there	with
Lena.	More	than	that,	I	just	wanted	to	be	there.	I	didn't	seem	to	have	a	reason	or
logic	for	it,	apart	from	the	intensity	of	the	longing	itself.

310
    I	 wanted	to	be	there	more	than	anything	else.
    I	 didn't	want	to	choose	one	world.	I	wanted	to	be	part	of	both.	I	didn't	want	to
see	only	one	side	of	the	sky.	I	wanted	to	see	it	all.
    I	 hesitated.	Then	I	took	a	single	step	and	walked	out	of	the	fog	and	into	the
unknown.

311
6.20	

312
                                          Out	   of	  the	  Light



Cold	air	hit	me,	sending	goose	bumps	up	my	arms.
    By	 the	time	I	opened	my	eyes,	the	brightness	and	the	fog	had	disappeared.
All	I	 could	see	was	a	blur	of	moonlight	pouring	into	a	hole	in	the	jagged	cave	in
the	distance.	The	full	moon	was	clear	and	luminous.
    I	 wondered	if	I	was	looking	at	the	Seventeenth	Moon.
    I	 closed	my	eyes	and	tried	to	experience	the	intense	rush	I'd	felt	the	moment
before,	when	I	was	between	worlds.
    It	 was	there,	behind	everything	else.	The	feeling.	The	electricity	of	the	air,	as
if	this	side	of	the	world	was	full	of	life	I	couldn't	see	but	could	sense	all	around
me.
    "Come	on."	Ridley	was	behind	me,	pulling	Link,	whose	eyes	were	squeezed
shut.	Ridley	let	go	of	his	hand.	"You	can	open	your	eyes	now,	Super	Stud."
    Liv	 appeared	after	them,	breathless.	"That	was	brilliant."	She	came	up	beside
me,	barely	a	golden	hair	loose	from	her	braids.	She	watched	the	waves	crash
against	the	rocks	in	front	of	us,	her	eyes	sparkling.	"Do	you	think	we're	--"
    I	 answered	before	she	had	a	chance	to	finish.	"We've	crossed	into	the	Great
Barrier."
    Which	meant	Lena	was	here	somewhere,	and	so	was	Sarafine.
    And	who	knows	what	else.


Lucille	was	sitting	on	a	rock,	casually	licking	her	paw.	I	saw	something	next	to
her,	snagged	between	two	rocks.
    It	 was	Lena's	necklace.
    "She's	here."	I	bent	down	to	pick	it	up,	my	hand	shaking	uncontrollably.	I	had
never	seen	her	without	it,	not	once.	The	silver	button	was	shining	through	the
sand,	the	wire	star	caught	in	the	loop	where	she	had	wrapped	the	red	string.
These	weren't	just	her	memories.	They	were	our	memories,	everything	we	had
shared	since	we	 met.	 The	 evidence	 of	 every	 happy	 moment	she'd	 ever
experienced	in	her	life.	Tossed	aside	like	all	the	other	lost	bits	of	broken	shells
and	tangled	seaweed	that	washed	up	on	the	beach.
    If	 it	was	some	kind	of	sign,	it	wasn't	good.
    "Did	 you	find	something,	Short	Straw?"

313
     Reluctantly,	I	 opened	my	hand	and	held	it	out	for	 them	to	see.	Ridley	gasped.
Liv	didn't	 recognize	the	necklace.	"What	is	it?"
     Link	 looked	at	the	ground.	"It's	Lena's	necklace."
     "Maybe	she	lost	it,"	 Liv	 said	innocently.
     "No!"	  Ridley's	 voice	 was	rising.	 "Lena	 never	 took	 it	 off.	 Not	 once	 in	 her
whole	life.	 She	couldn't	 have	lost	it.	 She	would've	noticed	 the	second	it	slipped
off."
     Liv	 shrugged.	"Maybe	she	noticed.	Maybe	she	didn't	care."
     Ridley	 lunged	 at	Liv,	 Link	  holding	 her	back	 by	her	 waist.	"Don't	  say	that!
You	don't	know	 anything!	Tell	 her,	Short	Straw."
     But	even	I	didn't	 know	anymore.


As	we	 picked	our	 way	along	 the	shore,	we	 approached	a	rocky	 line	of	 uneven
coastal	caves.	Tidewater	pooled	in	their	sandy	floors,	and	jagged	rock	walls	 kept
everything	in	 shadow.	The	pathway	 between	the	rocks	seemed	to	be	leading	us
toward	a	particular	 cave.	 The	ocean	crashed	around	us,	and	 I	felt	 like	 it	 could
wash	us	away	in	a	second.
     There	was	real	power	 here.	The	rock	was	humming	 under	my	feet,	 and	even
the	light	of	the	moon	seemed	alive	with	it.
     I	 jumped	from	 one	rock	 to	the	 next	until	 I	 was	high	 enough	to	see	past	the
rocky	outcroppings	 of	 the	coastal	caves.	The	others	climbed	 after	me,	trying	 to
keep	up.
     "There."	 I	 pointed	at	 a	large	 cavern,	just	 beyond	the	caves	surrounding	 us.
The	moon	was	shining	 directly	above	it,	 illuminating	  an	enormous	jagged	crack
in	the	ceiling.
     And	something	else.
     In	 the	moonlight,	  I	could	 barely	 make	out	 figures	 moving	 in	 the	shadows.
Hunting's	Blood	pack.	There	was	no	mistaking	 them.
     No	one	said	anything.	This	 wasn't	a	mystery	to	solve	anymore.	It	was	quickly
becoming	reality.	  It	 was	 a	cave	 most	 likely	  filled	  with	 Dark	 Casters,	 Blood
Incubuses,	and	a	Cataclyst.
     All	 we	had	was	each	other	and	the	Arclight.
     The	realization	 hit	 Link	 hard.	"Face	it.	 The	 four	of	 us	are	dead."	He	 looked
down	at	Lucille,	 who	was	licking	 her	paws.	"With	 one	dead	cat."
     He	had	a	point.	 From	 what	we	could	 see,	there	was	only	one	way	 in	 or	out.
The	entrance	to	the	cave	was	heavily	guarded,	and	what	waited	inside	was	likely
to	be	an	even	more	formidable	threat.
     "He's	right,	 Ethan.	 My	 uncle's	probably	 in	there	 with	 his	boys.	Without	  my

314
powers,	we're	not	going	to	 survive	the	Blood	 pack	again.	We're	useless	Mortals.
All	 we	had	going	 for	 us	was	that	 stupid	shiny	 stone."	Ridley	 kicked	 at	the	wet
sand,	as	hopeless	as	ever.
     "Not	 useless,	Rid."	Link	sighed.	"Just	Mortals.	 You'll	 get	used	to	it."
     "Shoot	me	if	 I	do."
     Liv	 stared	out	at	the	sea.	"Maybe	this	is	as	far	as	we	can	go.	Even	if	we	could
get	past	the	Blood	 pack,	to	take	 on	Sarafine	would	 be	..."	 Liv	 didn't	 finish,	 but
we	all	knew	what	she	was	thinking.
     A	death	wish.	Insanity.	 Suicide.
     I	looked	out	 into	the	wind,	the	darkness,	and	the	night.
     Where	are	you,	L?
     I	  could	 see	 the	 moonlight	  pouring	  into	  the	 cave.	 Lena	  was	 out	 there
somewhere	waiting	  for	 me.	 She	didn't	 answer,	 but	 that	 didn't	 stop	 me	 from
reaching	for	her.
     I'm	coming.
     "Maybe	 Liv's	right,	 and	we	should	think	about	goin'	back.	Gettin'	 some	help."
I	noticed	Link's	 breathing	was	labored.	He	had	been	trying	 to	hide	it,	 but	he	was
still	in	 pain.
     I	 had	to	 own	up	 to	 what	I	 was	doing	 to	 my	 friends,	the	 people	who	 cared
about	me.	"We	can't	go	back.	I	mean,	I	can't."
     The	Seventeenth	Moon	 wasn't	 going	to	 wait,	 and	Lena	 was	running	 out	 of
time.	The	 Arclight	 brought	 me	here	for	 a	reason.	I	 thought	about	 what	Marian
said	at	my	mother's	grave	when	she	gave	it	to	me.
     In	Light	 there	is	Dark,	and	in	 Dark	there	is	Light.
     It	 was	 something	 my	 mom	 used	to	 say.	 I	 pulled	 the	 Arclight	  out	 of	 my
pocket.	 It	  was	 turning	  a	 brilliant	  green,	 incredibly	   bright.	 Something	  was
happening.	As	I	 turned	it	over	 and	over	in	 my	hands,	I	remembered	everything.
It	was	all	there,	looking	 back	at	me	from	the	surface	of	the	stone.
     Sketches	of	Ravenwood	and	Macon's	family	 tree,	spread	across	my	mother's
table	in	the	archive.
     I	stared	at	the	Arclight,	  seeing	things	for	the	first	 time.	 As	I	did,	 images	rose
to	the	surface	of	my	mind,	and	the	stone.
     Marian	   handing	 me	  my	 mother's	  most	  treasured	 possession,	 standing
between	the	graves	of	two	people	who	finally	found	a	way	to	be	together.
     Maybe	Ridley	 was	right.	All	 we	had	going	for	 us	was	this	stupid	shiny	stone.
     Then	a	ring,	twisting	 on	a	finger.
     Mortals	alone	were	no	match	for	 Dark	power.
     A	picture	of	my	mother,	in	 the	shadows.
     Could	the	answer	have	been	in	my	pocket	all	along?

315
     And	a	pair	 of	black	eyes	that	reflected	back	my	own.
     We	weren't	alone.	We	never	were.	The	 visions	had	laid	it	 all	out	for	 me	from
the	beginning.	The	images	vanished	as	suddenly	as	they	had	appeared,	replaced
by	words,	the	second	I	thought	them.
     In	the	Arc	there	is	power,	 and	in	the	power	there	is	Night.
     "The	 Arclight	  --	 it's	 not	what	 we	 thought."	 My	 voice	 echoed	off	  the	rock
walls	surrounding	us.
     Liv	 was	surprised.	"What	are	you	talking	about?"
     "It's	not	 a	compass.	It	never	was."
     I	held	it	 up	so	they	could	all	 see.	As	we	watched,	the	Arclight	 shone,	brighter
and	brighter,	until	 it	 was	eclipsed	 in	a	perfect	 circle	 of	light.	 Like	 a	tiny	 star.	 I
could	no	longer	see	the	stone	within	the	light.
     "What	is	 it	doing?"	Liv	 breathed.
     The	Arclight,	  which	I	 took	so	innocently	 from	 Marian	 at	my	mother's	grave,
wasn't	an	object	of	power,	not	for	me.
     It	was	for	 Macon.
     I	held	 the	Arclight	 up	higher.	In	 the	iridescent	moonlight	 of	 the	shallow	tidal
cave,	the	dark	water	 around	my	 feet	glittered.	 Even	 the	tiniest	 flecks	of	 quartz
studded	in	the	rock	walls	 caught	the	light.	 In	the	darkness,	the	sphere	seemed	to
ignite.	I	could	 see	the	glow	of	the	round,	pearlized	surface	revealing	the	swirling
colors	of	 a	hidden	 interior.	 Violet	 churned	 into	 somber	greens,	then	burst	 into
vibrant	 yellows,	  which	  deepened	into	  oranges	 and	 reds.	 In	 that	  second,	I
understood.
     I	wasn't	a	Keeper,	or	a	Caster,	or	a	Seer.
     I	wasn't	 like	 Marian	or	 my	mother.	 It	wasn't	 for	me	to	 keep	the	lore	and	the
history	or	 protect	the	books	and	the	secrets	that	made	up	so	much	 of	the	Caster
world.	 I	wasn't	like	 Liv,	  charting	the	uncharted,	measuring	 the	immeasurable.	I
wasn't	Amma.	It	 wasn't	for	me	to	 see	what	no	one	else	could	or	to	communicate
with	the	 Greats.	More	than	anything,	 I	was	nothing	 like	 Lena.	I	couldn't	 eclipse
the	moon,	 bring	 down	the	 skies,	or	 kick	 up	 the	earth.	I	 could	 never	 convince
anyone	to	jump	off	a	bridge,	like	 Ridley	could.	 And	I	was	nothing	 like	Macon.
     In	the	back	of	 my	mind,	 I	had	been	searching	for	how	 I	fit	 into	 the	story,	my
story	with	Lena.	Hoping	 I	could	fit	 into	 it	at	all.
     But	my	 story	had	found	its	way	to	 me	through	all	of	 them.	Now,	at	the	end	of
what	seemed	like	a	lifetime	in	 the	darkness	and	confusion	of	the	Tunnels,	I	knew
what	to	do.	I	knew	my	 part.
     Marian	was	right.	 I	was	the	Wayward.	It	 was	my	job	to	find	 what	was	lost.
     Who	was	lost.
     I	 rolled	the	 Arclight	 to	 my	 fingertips	 and	released	it.	The	 stone	hung	in	 the

316
air.
     "What	the	--"	 Link	 staggered	closer.
     I	 pulled	 the	 folded	 yellowed	 page	out	 of	 my	 back	 pocket.	The	 one	 I	 had
ripped	from	my	 mother's	journal	and	carried	all	this	way,	 without	 a	reason.	Or	so
I	thought.
     The	Arclight	 cast	a	silver	light	 around	the	cave	as	it	hovered.	I	stepped	closer
to	it	  and	held	 up	 the	paper	 so	I	  could	 speak	the	 Cast	from	 the	 page	of	  my
mother's	journal,	even	though	it	was	in	Latin.	 I	pronounced	the	words	carefully.


          "In	 Luce	Caecae	Caligines	sunt,
          Et	in	Caliginibus,	 Lux.
          In	Arcu	 imperium	est,
          Et	in	imperio,	 Nox."


     "Of	 course,"	Liv	 whispered,	moving	 closer	to	the	light.	"The	 Cast.	Ob	Lucem
Libertas.	Freedom	in	Light."	 Liv	 looked	at	me.	"Finish	 it."
     I	turned	the	paper	over.	There	was	nothing	on	the	other	side.
     "That's	all	there	is."
     Liv's	 eyes	widened.	"You	can't	leave	it	undone.	It's	incredibly	 dangerous.	The
power	of	 an	Arclight,	 let	 alone	a	Ravenwood	Arclight,	  it	 could	kill	  us.	It	could
kill	 ..."
     "You	 have	to	do	it."
     "I	 can't,	Ethan.	You	know	I	 can't."
     "Liv.	 Lena's	going	 to	die	--	 you,	me,	Link,	  Ridley	--	 we	all	 are.	We've	come
as	far	 as	Mortals	 can	go.	 We	 can't	do	 the	 rest	alone."	 I	 put	 my	 hand	on	 her
shoulder.
     "Ethan."	 She	whispered	my	 name,	just	my	 name,	but	I	 heard	the	words	 she
couldn't	say	almost	as	clearly	as	I	heard	Lena's	voice	when	we	 Kelted.	Liv	 and	I
had	a	connection	all	our	own.	It	wasn't	magic.	 It	was	something	very	human,	and
very	real.	Liv	 might	 not	like	 what	 had	unfolded	between	us,	but	she	understood
it.	She	 understood	me,	and	a	 part	of	 me	 believed	she	always	 would.	 I	 wished
things	could	 have	been	different,	 that	Liv	 could	 have	everything	 she	wanted	at
the	end	of	 all	this.	 The	things	 that	had	nothing	 to	do	 with	 lost	stars	and	Caster
skies.	But	 Liv	 wasn't	where	 my	road	 was	taking	 me.	She	was	 part	of	 the	path
itself.
     She	looked	past	me	to	the	Arclight,	 still	 glowing	in	 front	of	 us.	Her	silhouette
was	framed	in	light	 so	bright	 it	looked	 like	 she	was	standing	in	front	 of	the	sun.

317
She	reached	for	the	Arclight,	  and	I	 remembered	my	 dream,	the	dream	of	 Lena
reaching	out	to	me	from	the	darkness.
     Two	 girls	 who	 were	 as	different	 as	the	 sun	and	the	 moon.	Without	  one,	I
could	never	have	found	my	way	back	to	the	other.
     In	Light	 there	is	Dark,	and	in	Dark	 there	is	Light.
     Liv	 touched	the	Arclight	 with	a	single	finger	 and	began	to	speak.


          "In	 Illo	 qui	Vinctus	est,
          Libertas	Patefacietur.
          Spirate	denuo,	Caligines.
          E	Luce	exi."


     She	was	crying,	watching	 the	ball	of	 light	as	tears	streaked	down	the	sides	of
her	face.	She	forced	out	 every	word,	 as	if	 they	were	 being	etched	into	 her,	but
she	didn't	stop.


          "In	 the	One	who	is	Bound
          Freedom	will	 be	Found.
          Live	 again,	Darkness,
          Come	out	of	the	Light."


     Liv's	 voice	 faltered.	 She	closed	her	 eyes	and	spoke	the	 final	 words	 slowly
into	the	night	between	us.
     "Come	out.	Come	--"
     The	words	broke	off.	 She	held	her	hand	out	to	me,	and	I	 took	it.	 Link	 limped
over	to	us,	and	Ridley	 clutched	his	 arm	on	the	other	side.	Liv's	 entire	 body	was
shaking.	With	 every	word,	 she	was	falling	 farther	from	 her	sacred	duty	 and	her
dream.	She	had	taken	a	side.	She	had	 Cast	herself	into	 the	story	 that	was	only
hers	to	Keep.	 When	 this	was	 over,	 if	 we	survived,	 Liv	  would	 no	 longer	be	 a
Keeper-in-Training.	 Her	 sacrifice	 was	her	gift,	 the	 one	thing	 that	gave	her	 life
meaning.
     I	couldn't	 imagine	how	that	would	 feel.
     We	became	four	voices.	There	was	no	turning	back.
     "E	Luce	exi!	 Come	out	of	the	Light!"

318
The	blast	was	so	cataclysmic,	the	rock	beneath	my	feet	shot	into	the	wall	 behind
me.	All	 four	of	 us	were	thrown	 to	the	ground.	I	 could	taste	the	wet	sand	and	the
saltwater	in	 my	mouth,	 but	 I	knew.	 My	 mom	 had	tried	 to	tell	 me,	but	 I	 hadn't
been	able	to	hear.
     In	the	cave,	framed	by	 rock	and	moss	and	sea	and	sand,	was	a	being	made	of
nothing	more	 than	 a	mist	 of	 shadow	and	light.	  At	 first,	 I	 could	 see	the	rocks
behind	it,	 as	if	 it	was	 an	apparition.	 The	water	washed	through	 it,	 and	it	 didn't
touch	the	ground.
     Then	the	light	 stretched	into	 a	shape,	the	shape	into	a	 form,	the	 form	 into	a
man.	His	hands	became	hands,	his	body	became	a	body,	and	his	face,	a	face.
     Macon's	face.
     I	heard	my	mother's	words.	He's	with	 you	now.
     Macon	opened	his	eyes	and	looked	at	me.	Only	you	can	redeem	him.
     He	was	dressed	in	the	burnt	 clothes	from	 the	night	 he	died.	Only	 something
was	different.
     His	eyes	were	green.
     Caster	green.
     "It's	good	to	see	you,	Mr.	 Wate."

319
6.20	

320
                                          Flesh	    and	  Blood



Macon!"
    It	 was	all	I	could	do	not	to	fling	my	arms	around	him.	He,	on	the	other	hand,
looked	at	me	calmly,	brushing	off	some	of	the	burnt	grit	from	his	dinner	jacket.
His	 eyes	were	unsettling.	I	  was	used	to	 the	 glassy	black	 eyes	of	 Macon
Ravenwood	the	Incubus,	the	eyes	that	regarded	you	with	nothing	but	your	own
reflection.	Now	he	was	 standing	in	front	 of	me,	as	green-eyed	as	any	Light
Caster.	Ridley	stared,	but	didn't	utter	a	sound.	It	wasn't	often	you	saw	Ridley
speechless.
    "Much	 obliged,	Mr.	Wate.	Much	obliged."	Macon	rolled	his	neck	back	and
forth,	uncoiling	his	arms,	as	if	he	was	waking	up	from	a	long	nap.
    I	 bent	down	and	picked	up	the	Arclight,	lying	in	the	sandy	dirt.	"I	was	right.
You	were	in	the	Arclight	all	along."	I	thought	about	how	many	times	I'd	held	it
in	my	hand	and	relied	on	it	to	guide	me.	How	familiar	the	warmth	of	the	stone
had	felt.
    Link	 was	having	trouble	coming	to	grips	with	the	idea	that	Macon	was	alive,
too.	Without	thinking,	he	reached	out	to	touch	him.	Macon's	hand	flew	up	and
grabbed	Link's	arm.	 Link	 flinched.	 "So	 sorry,	Mr.	  Lincoln.	 I'm	 afraid	 my
reflexes	are	a	bit	--	reflexive.	I	haven't	gotten	out	much	lately."
    Link	 rubbed	his	arm.	"You	 didn't	have	to	 do	that,	Mr.	 Ravenwood.	I	just
wanted,	you	know,	I	thought	you	were	--"
    "What?	A	Sheer?	A	Vex,	perhaps?"
    Link	 shivered.	"You	tell	me,	sir."
    Macon	extended	his	arm.	"Go	ahead,	then.	Be	my	guest."
    Link	 stuck	out	his	hand	tentatively,	as	if	he	was	about	to	hold	it	over	a	candle
on	a	birthday	dare.	His	finger	came	within	a	millimeter	of	Macon's	ragged	jacket
and	stopped.
    Macon	 sighed,	rolling	his	eyes,	and	tapped	Link's	hand	against	his	chest.
"See?	Flesh	and	blood.	Something	we	have	in	common	now,	Mr.	Lincoln."
    "Uncle	 Macon?"	Ridley	crept	up	 to	him,	 finally	 ready	to	face	him.	 "Is	 it
really	you?"
    He	looked	deep	into	her	blue	eyes.	"You've	lost	your	powers."
    She	nodded,	her	eyes	brimming	with	tears.	"So	have	you."
    "Some	of	 them,	yes,	but	I	suspect	I've	gained	others."	He	reached	for	her

321
hand,	but	she	pulled	away.	"It's	impossible	 to	tell.	I'm	 still	 in	the	midst	 of	it."	 He
smiled.	"Sort	of	like	 being	a	teenager.	Twice."
     "But	 your	eyes	are	green."
     Macon	 shook	his	 head,	flexing	  his	hands.	"True.	 My	  life	 as	an	Incubus	 is
over,	but	the	Transition	 is	not	 complete.	Although	 my	 eyes	are	those	of	a	Light
Caster,	I	can	still	feel	Darkness	within	 me.	It	has	not	been	fully	exorcised,	yet."
     "I'm	 not	Transitioning.	 I'm	nothing,	 a	Mortal."	 She	said	the	word	like	it	 was	a
curse,	and	the	sadness	in	her	voice	was	real.	"I	don't	have	a	place	in	the	Order	of
Things	anymore."
     "You're	 alive."
     "I	 don't	feel	like	myself.	 I'm	powerless."
     Macon	weighed	 this	in	his	mind,	 as	if	he	was	trying	 to	determine	her	 present
state	as	much	as	she	was.	"You	may	be	in	the	midst	of	a	Transition	of	 your	own,
unless	this	is	one	of	my	sister's	more	impressive	tricks."
     Ridley's	eyes	lit	up.	"Does	 that	mean	my	powers	might	come	back?"
     Macon	 studied	her	 blue	eyes.	"I	 think	 Sarafine	 is	too	 cruel	 for	 that.	I	 only
meant	that	you	 might	 not	 be	 fully	 Mortal	  yet.	 Darkness	does	not	 leave	us	 as
easily	as	we	 would	 hope."	 Macon	pulled	 her	 awkwardly	 to	 his	chest,	 and	she
buried	her	 face	in	 his	jacket,	 like	 a	twelve-year-old.	  "It's	 not	 easy	to	be	Light
when	you've	been	Dark.	It's	almost	too	much	to	ask	of	anyone."
     I	 tried	to	 quiet	the	torrent	 of	 questions	racing	through	 my	 mind,	and	settled
for	the	first.	"How?"
     Macon	 turned	  from	  Ridley,	 his	  green	 eyes	burning	  into	  me	 with	  their
newfound	light.	 "Could	 you	 be	more	specific,	 Mr.	Wate?	 How	am	 I	not	 resting
in	 twenty-seven	  thousand	 distinct	  fragments	 of	  ash	 in	  an	 urn	  within	  the
Ravenwood	family	 vault?	How	am	I	 not	rotting	 under	a	lemon	tree	in	the	sodden
prestige	of	 His	 Garden	 of	 Perpetual	 Peace?	How	 did	 I	 come	 to	 find	 myself
imprisoned	in	a	small	crystalline	 ball	in	your	 grimy	pocket?"
     "Two,"	 I	said	without	 thinking.
     "I	 beg	your	pardon?"
     "There	are	two	lemon	trees	over	your	grave."
     "How	  very	 generous.	 One	 would	  have	 sufficed."	  Macon	 smiled	 tiredly,
which	  was	  pretty	  remarkable,	  considering	  he'd	 spent	  four	  months	  in	  a
supernatural	prison	the	size	of	an	egg.	"Or	 are	you	perhaps	wondering	 how	is	 it
that	I	died	 and	you	lived?	 Because	I	have	to	tell	 you,	as	far	as	hows	go,	that's	a
story	your	neighbors	on	Cotton	Bend	would	 be	talking	about	for	a	lifetime."
     "Except	you	didn't,	 sir.	Die,	I	 mean."
     "You	 are	correct,	Mr.	Wate.	 I	am,	and	have	always	been,	very	much	alive.	In
a	manner	of	speaking."

322
     Liv	  stepped	forward	  tentatively.	  Even	 though	 she	would	  probably	 never
become	a	Keeper	now,	there	was	still	a	Keeper	inside	her	seeking	answers.	"Mr.
Ravenwood,	may	I	ask	you	a	question,	sir?"
     Macon	 tilted	 his	head	slightly.	  "Who	 might	 you	be,	 dear?	I	imagine	 it	 was
your	voice	I	heard	calling	 me	from	the	Arclight."
     Liv	 blushed.	"It	 was,	sir.	My	 name	is	Olivia	 Durand,	 and	I	was	training	 with
Professor	Ashcroft.	Before	..."	Her	 voice	dwindled.
     "Before	you	 Cast	the	Ob	Lucem	Libertas?"
     Liv	 nodded,	ashamed.	Macon	looked	 pained,	then	 smiled	at	her.	 "Then	you
gave	up	a	great	deal	to	save	me,	Miss	Olivia	Durand.	I	 am	in	your	debt,	and,	as	I
always	repay	my	 debts,	I	 would	 be	honored	to	 answer	a	question.	 At	 the	very
least."	Even	after	being	trapped	all	those	months,	Macon	was	still	a	gentleman.
     "Obviously,	 I	 know	how	you	 got	out	of	 the	Arclight,	 but	how	did	 you	get	in?
It's	 impossible	 for	  an	Incubus	  to	 imprison	 himself,	  especially	 when,	 by	  all
accounts,	you	  were	 dead."	 Liv	  was	 right.	 He	  couldn't	 have	 done	 it	  alone.
Someone	had	to	have	helped	him,	and	the	minute	 the	ball	 released	him,	I	 knew
who	it	was.
     It	was	the	one	person	we	both	loved	as	much	as	Lena,	even	in	death.
     My	  mother	 --	 who	 had	 loved	  books	 and	old	  things,	 nonconformity	  and
history	and	complexity.	 Who	 had	loved	Macon	so	much	 she	walked	away	when
he	asked	her	to,	even	though	she	couldn't	bear	to	leave	him.	 Even	though	a	part
of	her	never	had.
     "It	 was	her,	wasn't	it?"
     Macon	  nodded.	 "Your	  mother	 was	  the	 only	  one	 who	 knew	  about	 the
Arclight.	 I	gave	it	 to	her.	Any	Incubus	 would	have	killed	 her	to	destroy	it.	 It	was
our	secret,	one	of	our	last."
     "Did	 you	see	her?"	I	looked	out	at	the	sea,	blinking	hard.
     Macon's	expression	changed.	I	could	see	the	pain	in	his	face.	"Yes."
     "Did	 she	seem	..."	What?	Happy?	Dead?	Herself?
     "Beautiful	 as	ever,	your	mother.	Beautiful	 as	the	day	she	left	us."
     "I	 saw	her,	too."	 I	thought	about	Bonaventure	 Cemetery	and	felt	the	familiar
knot	in	my	throat.
     "But	 how	is	that	possible?"	 Liv	 wasn't	trying	 to	challenge	him,	but	 she	didn't
understand.	None	of	us	did.
     Macon's	face	was	full	  of	grief.	 It	 wasn't	any	easier	for	 him	to	 talk	about	 my
mom	than	 it	 was	for	 me.	 "I	 think	  you'll	 find	 the	 impossible	 is	possible	 more
often	than	we	 think,	 particularly	 in	 the	Caster	world.	 But	 if	 you	 would	 care	to
take	one	last	trip	with	 me,	I	 can	show	you."	 He	opened	his	hand	to	me,	offering
Liv	 the	 other.	Ridley	  stepped	forward	 and	closed	 her	hand	 around	mine,	 and

323
hesitantly	Link	 limped	over,	completing	 the	circle.
     Macon	looked	 over	at	me,	and	before	I	could	read	his	expression,	the	air	was
filled	 with	smoke	--

    Macon	 tried	 to	hold	on,	 but	he	was	blacking	 out.	He	could	see	the	ebony	sky
    above	 him,	streaked	with	 orange	flames.	 He	couldn't	 see	Hunting	as	 he	fed,
    but	 he	could	 feel	his	 brother's	 teeth	in	 his	shoulder.	 When	Hunting	 had	his
    fill,	  he	let	Macon's	body	drop	to	the	ground.
        When	Macon	 opened	his	eyes	again,	Lena's	 grandmother,	Emmaline,	 was
    kneeling	 over	him.	 He	could	feel	 the	heat	of	her	healing	 power	as	it	 coursed
    through	 his	 body.	Ethan	 was	there,	too.	 Macon	tried	 to	 speak,	but	he	didn't
    know	 if	they	could	 hear	him.	 Find	Lena,	 that's	what	he	wanted	to	 say.	Ethan
    must	have	heard	him,	because	he	took	off	into	the	smoke	and	fire.
        The	 boy	was	 so	much	like	 Amarie,	 so	 stubborn	and	 fearless.	He	 was	so
    much	 like	 his	mother,	 loyal	 and	 honest,	and	bound	 for	 the	heartbreak	 that
    came	 from	 loving	 a	Caster.	 Macon	 was	still	  thinking	 about	Jane	 when	his
    mind	 faded.


    When	 Macon	 opened	 his	 eyes	again,	  the	fire	  was	 gone.	 The	smoke,	 the
    roaring	  of	flames	and	ammunition	 --	 it	was	all	 gone.	He	 felt	himself	 drifting
    in	 the	darkness.	It	wasn't	 like	Traveling.	 This	void	 had	weight.	It	 was	pulling
    him	 through.	 Yet	when	he	reached	out,	he	could	 see	that	his	hand	was	hazy,
    only	 partially	 materialized.
        He	 was	dead.
        Lena	 must	have	made	the	Choice.	She	had	chosen	to	go	Light.	Even	in	 the
    darkness,	knowing	 the	fate	of	 an	Incubus	in	 the	Otherworld,	 a	sense	of	calm
    washed	over	him.	It	 was	finished.
        "Not	 yet.	Not	for	you."
        Macon	  turned,	 recognizing	 her	  voice	 immediately.	 Lila	  Jane.	She	 was
    luminous	 in	 the	abyss,	shimmering	 and	beautiful.	 "Janie.	 There's	so	much	 I
    have	to	tell	 you."
        Jane	shook	her	head,	her	brown	hair	 falling	 over	her	shoulder.	 "There's	no
    time."
        "There's	 nothing	but	time."
        Jane	stretched	out	her	hand,	her	fingers	 glimmering.	"Take	my	hand."
        As	 soon	as	Macon	 touched	 her,	the	 darkness	began	to	 bleed	into	 colors
    and	 light.	 He	could	see	images,	familiar	 shapes	and	forms	swimming	around
    him,	 but	 he	 couldn't	 anchor	 them.	Then	 he	realized	 where	 they	were.	 The

324
    archive,	 Jane's	special	place.
        "Jane,	  what's	 happening?"	 He	 saw	 her	 reach	 out,	 but	  everything	 was
    blurry	 and	unclear.	 Then	he	heard	the	words,	the	words	he	had	taught	her.
        "In	 these	walls	with	 no	time	or	space,	I	Bind	your	 body	and	from	this	Earth
    erase."
        There	 was	something	in	her	 hand.	The	Arclight.	 "Jane,	 don't	do	 it!	 I	want
    to	 be	here	with	you."
        She	was	floating	 before	him,	 already	beginning	 to	fade.	 "I	 promised	if	the
    time	 came,	I	would	 use	it.	I'm	 keeping	my	promise.	You	 can't	die.	They	need
    you."	 She	was	gone	now,	a	voice,	nothing	else.	"My	son	needs	you."
        Macon	 tried	to	tell	 her	everything	he	had	failed	 to	say	in	life,	 but	it	was	too
    late.	 He	could	feel	the	pull	 of	the	Arclight	 already,	 impossible	to	break.	As	he
    spun	into	 the	abyss,	he	heard	her	seal	his	fate.


          "Comprehende,	Liga,	Cruci	 Fige.
          Capture,	Cage,	and	Crucify."




Macon	dropped	my	hand,	and	the	vision	released	us.	I	held	it	in	my	mind,	 unable
to	let	her	go.	My	 mom	had	saved	him,	using	the	weapon	Macon	had	given	her	to
use	against	him.	 She	had	given	 up	the	 chance	for	 them	to	 finally	 be	 together,
because	of	me.	Had	she	known	he	was	our	only	chance?
     When	I	 opened	my	 eyes,	Liv	 was	crying,	 and	 Ridley	 was	trying	 to	pretend
she	wasn't.	"Oh,	please.	Enough	with	the	drama."	A	tear	leaked	onto	her	cheek.
     Liv	 wiped	her	eyes,	sniffling.	 "I	 had	no	idea	a	Sheer	was	capable	of	anything
like	that."
     "You	 would	 be	surprised	what	we	are	capable	of	when	the	situation	warrants
it."	Macon	 clapped	his	hand	on	my	shoulder.	"Isn't	that	right,	Mr.	 Wate?"
     I	knew	 he	was	trying	to	thank	me.	But	 as	I	looked	around	our	broken	circle,	 I
didn't	feel	like	 I	 deserved	thanks.	Ridley	had	lost	her	 powers,	Link	 was	wincing
in	pain,	and	Liv	 had	destroyed	her	future.	"I	didn't	do	anything."
     Macon's	hand	tightened	on	my	 shoulder,	forcing	 me	to	face	him.	 "You	 made
yourself	 see	what	 most	 would	  have	overlooked.	  You	 brought	 me	 here;	 you
brought	me	back.	You	accepted	your	fate	as	a	Wayward	and	found	the	way	here.
None	of	that	could	 have	been	easy."	He	looked	around	the	cave	at	Ridley,	 Link,
and	Liv.	 His	eyes	lingered	a	moment	 on	Liv,	 and	then	his	eyes	locked	on	 mine.
"For	anyone."

325
     Including	 Lena.
     I	almost	 couldn't	stand	to	tell	 him,	but	 I	wasn't	sure	if	 he	knew.	"Lena	 thinks
she	killed	you."
     Macon	 didn't	speak	for	 a	 second,	but	when	he	 did,	his	 voice	 was	even	and
controlled.	"Why	 would	she	think	 that?"
     "Sarafine	stabbed	me	that	night,	but	you	 died.	Amma	told	 me.	But	Lena	can't
forgive	herself,	 and	it's	...	changed	her."	I	 wasn't	making	sense,	but	there	was	so
much	Macon	needed	to	know.	 "I	think	 she	may	have	made	a	choice	in	her	heart
without	realizing	 it."
     "She	didn't."	 Macon	dismissed	me.
     "It	  was	The	 Book	 of	 Moons,	Mr.	  Ravenwood."	 Liv	  couldn't	 help	 herself.
"Lena	was	desperate	to	save	Ethan,	and	she	used	the	Book.	It	made	a	trade,	your
life	for	 his.	Lena	had	no	way	of	 knowing	what	 would	happen.	The	Book	can't	be
properly	controlled,	 which	is	 why	it's	 not	meant	to	be	kept	in	Caster	hands."	Liv
sounded	even	more	like	a	Caster	librarian	than	usual.
     Macon	tilted	 his	head	slightly.	"I	 see.	Olivia?"
     "Yes,	sir?"
     "With	  all	 due	respect,	 we've	 no	time	 for	  a	Keeper.	 This	 day	 will	  require
certain	actions	best	left	unkept.	At	the	very	least,	untold.	Do	 you	understand?"
     Liv	 nodded.	Her	expression	said	she	understood	more	than	he	knew.
     "She's	not	a	Keeper,	not	 anymore."	Liv	  had	saved	his	life	 and	destroyed	her
own	in	the	process.	She	deserved	Macon's	respect,	at	the	very	least.
     "Not	 likely,	 after	this,"	she	sighed.
     I	listened	to	 the	waves	crashing,	wishing	they	could	 carry	my	thoughts	 out	to
sea	with	them.	"Everything's	changed."
     Macon's	eyes	flickered	again	to	Liv,	 then	returned	to	me.	"Nothing's	 changed.
Nothing	important.	 It	could,	but	it	 hasn't	yet."
     Link	  cleared	his	 throat.	 "But	 what	 can	we	 do?	 I	 mean,	look	 at	 us."	 Link
paused.	"They've	got	a	whole	army	 a	Incubuses	and	who	knows	what	else	down
there."
     Macon	took	 stock	of	 us.	"What	 do	we	 have?	A	powerless	Siren,	 a	renegade
Keeper,	a	 lost	 Wayward,	 and	...	 you,	 Mr.	 Lincoln.	  A	 motley	  but	 resourceful
crew,	indeed."	Lucille	 meowed.	"And	 yes,	you,	Ms.	Ball."
     I	realized	what	a	train	wreck	 we	were,	hammered,	dirty,	and	exhausted.
     "Yet,	 somehow	you	made	it	this	 far.	And	 you	released	me	from	the	Arclight,
which	was	no	small	feat."
     "Are	 you	sayin'	you	 think	we	can	take	them?"	 Link	 had	the	same	look	on	his
face	 as	 the	 one	 he	  had	 when	 Earl	  Petty	 started	 a	  fight	  with	  the	 whole
Summerville	High	 football	 team.

326
     "I'm	 saying	 we	don't	 have	time	 to	stand	 here	and	chat,	as	much	 as	I	 enjoy
your	fine	company.	I	 have	more	than	a	few	things	to	take	care	of,	my	niece	being
first	and	foremost."	Macon	 turned	to	me.	"Wayward,	show	us	the	way."
     Macon	took	a	step	toward	the	mouth	of	 the	cave,	and	his	legs	collapsed	under
him.	A	 cloud	of	 dust	rose	where	he	fell.	I	 looked	at	him,	 sitting	in	 the	dirt	 in	his
charred	dinner	  jacket.	 He	 hadn't	 recovered	 from	  whatever	 happened	in	  the
Arclight.	 I	hadn't	exactly	called	in	 the	Marines.	We	needed	a	plan	B.

327
6.20	

328
                                              Army	    of	 One



Macon	was	insistent.	He	was	in	no	condition	to	go	anywhere,	but	he	knew	we
didn't	have	a	lot	of	time,	and	he	was	determined	to	go	with	us.	I	didn't	argue,
because	even	a	weakened	Macon	Ravenwood	was	more	resourceful	than	four
powerless	Mortals.	I	hoped.
    I	 knew	where	we	had	to	 go.	The	moonlight	was	still	 pouring	through	the
ceiling	of	the	coastal	cave	in	the	distance.	By	the	time	Liv	and	I	helped	Macon
navigate	the	shoreline	leading	to	the	moonlit	cave,	one	painstaking	step	at	a
time,	he	had	finished	asking	me	his	questions	and	I	was	asking	him	mine.	"Why
would	Sarafine	call	up	the	Seventeenth	Moon	now?"
    "The	sooner	Lena	is	Claimed,	the	sooner	the	Dark	Casters	will	have	secured
their	fate.	Lena	is	growing	stronger	every	day.	They	know	the	longer	they	wait,
the	more	likely	she	is	to	make	up	her	own	mind.	If	they	know	the	circumstances
surrounding	my	 demise,	I	 imagine	they	 want	to	 take	 advantage	of	Lena's
vulnerable	state."
    I	 remembered	when	Hunting	told	me	that	Lena	killed	Macon.	"They	know."
    "It's	 of	the	utmost	importance	that	you	tell	me	everything."
    Ridley	fell	 into	step	alongside	Macon.	"Ever	since	Lena's	birthday,	Sarafine's
been	summoning	power	from	the	Dark	Fire	to	become	powerful	enough	to	raise
the	Seventeenth	Moon."
    "You	 mean	that	crazy	bonfire	she	started	back	in	the	woods?"	The	way	Link
said	it,	I	was	pretty	sure	he	imagined	a	trash	can	burning	by	the	lake	at	night.
    Ridley	 shook	her	head.	"That	wasn't	the	Dark	Fire.	It	was	a	manifestation,
like	Sarafine.	She	created	it."
    Liv	 nodded.	"Ridley's	right.	The	Dark	Fire	is	the	source	of	all	magical	power.
If	 Casters	channel	their	collective	energy	back	 into	 the	source,	it	 becomes
exponentially	more	powerful.	A	sort	of	supernatural	atomic	bomb."
    "You	 mean	it's	gonna	blow	up?"	Link	didn't	look	as	sure	about	hunting	down
Sarafine	now.
    Ridley	 rolled	her	eyes.	"It	won't	blow	up,	Genius.	But	the	Dark	Fire	can	do
some	serious	damage."
    I	 looked	up	at	the	full	moon	and	the	beam	of	moonlight	creating	a	direct	path
into	the	cavern.	The	moon	wasn't	feeding	the	fire.	The	power	of	the	Dark	Fire
was	being	channeled	into	the	moon.	That's	how	Sarafine	called	the	moon	out	of

329
time.
     Macon	 was	 watching	 Ridley	  carefully.	 "Why	  would	 Lena	 agree	 to	 come
here?"
     "I	 convinced	her,	me	and	this	guy	John."
     "Who	 is	John,	and	how	does	he	fit	into	all	this?"
     Ridley	  was	biting	  her	 purple	 nails.	 "He's	 an	 Incubus.	 I	  mean,	a	 hybrid,
anyway.	Part	Incubus	and	part	Caster,	and	he's	really	powerful.	He	was	obsessed
with	the	Great	Barrier	and	how	everything	 would	be	perfect	if	 we	got	here."
     "Did	 this	boy	know	 Sarafine	would	be	here?"
     "No.	  He's	 a	 true	  believer.	 Thinks	  the	 Great	  Barrier	 will	   solve	 all	  his
problems,	like	it's	some	kind	of	 Caster	Utopia."	She	rolled	her	eyes.
     I	could	 see	the	anger	in	Macon's	eyes.	The	green	reflected	 his	emotions	in	 a
way	the	 black	never	had.	 "How	 is	 it	that	 you	and	 a	boy	who	 isn't	 even	a	full-
blooded	Incubus	were	able	to	talk	Lena	into	something	so	absurd?"
     Ridley	 looked	 away.	"It	  wasn't	hard.	 Lena	was	 in	 a	bad	place.	 I	 think	 she
believed	there	was	nowhere	else	for	 her	to	go."	 It	 was	hard	to	look	 at	the	 blue-
eyed	Ridley	without	 wondering	how	 she	felt	about	the	Dark	Caster	she	was	only
a	few	days	ago.
     "Even	 if	  Lena	 felt	  responsible	 for	 my	  death,	why	  would	  she	think	  she
belonged	with	the	two	 of	you,	a	Dark	 Caster	and	a	Demon?"	Macon	didn't	say	it
with	spite,	but	I	 could	tell	the	words	stung	Ridley.
     "Lena	hates	herself	and	thinks	she's	going	Dark."	 Ridley	 glanced	at	me.	"She
wanted	to	go	to	 a	place	where	she	wouldn't	hurt	 anyone.	John	promised	he'd	be
there	for	her	when	no	one	else	would."
     "I	  would	 have	 been	there	 for	 her."	 My	  voice	 echoed	 off	 the	 rock	 walls
surrounding	us.
     Ridley	 looked	right	at	me.	"Even	if	 she	went	Dark?"
     It	 all	made	sense.	Lena	was	guilt-ridden	  and	tormented,	and	John	was	there
with	all	 the	answers,	in	ways	I	couldn't	be.
     I	 thought	about	 how	long	 he	and	Lena	 had	been	alone	together,	how	 many
nights,	how	 many	dark	 Tunnels.	John	wasn't	 a	Mortal.	 Her	 touch	wouldn't	 kill
him	with	 its	 intensity.	 John	and	Lena	 could	do	 anything	they	 wanted	--	 all	 the
things	Lena	and	I	could	never	do.	An	 image	crept	into	my	mind,	 the	two	of	 them
curled	up	together	in	the	darkness.	The	way	Liv	and	I	had	been	in	Savannah.
     "There's	 something	else."	 I	 had	to	 tell	 him.	 "Sarafine	 didn't	 do	 this	 alone.
Abraham	has	been	helping	her."
     Something	passed	across	Macon's	face,	but	I	couldn't	pin	it	down.	 "Abraham.
That's	no	surprise."
     "The	visions	 have	changed,	too.	When	I	was	in	them,	it	seemed	like	Abraham

330
could	see	me."
     Macon	lost	his	footing,	 nearly	tripping	 me.	"Are	 you	certain?"
     I	nodded.	"He	said	my	name."
     Macon	 looked	at	 me	the	way	 he	had	the	 night	of	 the	 winter	 formal,	 Lena's
first	dance.	As	if	 he	felt	 sorry	for	 me,	the	things	 I	had	to	do,	 the	responsibilities
that	fell	to	me.	He	never	understood	I	didn't	care.
     Macon	kept	talking,	 and	I	tried	 to	focus.	"I	 had	no	idea	things	had	progressed
so	 quickly.	   You	  must	 exercise	  extreme	 caution,	  Ethan.	 If	   Abraham	  has
established	a	connection	with	you,	then	he	can	see	you	as	clearly	as	you	can	see
him."
     "You	 mean,	outside	of	the	visions?"	The	idea	of	Abraham	watching	 my	every
move	wasn't	a	comforting	thought.
     "At	 this	point,	I	 don't	have	an	answer.	But	until	I	do,	be	careful."
     "I'll	  get	right	 on	that.	After	  we	fight	 an	army	 of	 Incubuses	to	rescue	Lena."
The	more	we	talked	about	it,	the	more	impossible	it	felt.
     Macon	 whipped	 around	 to	 face	 Ridley.	  "Is	 this	  boy	 John	 involved	 with
Abraham?"
     "I	 don't	know.	Abraham's	the	one	who	convinced	 Sarafine	she	could	raise	the
Seventeenth	Moon."	Ridley	looked	miserable	and	exhausted	and	filthy.
     "Ridley,	 I	need	you	to	tell	me	everything	 you	know."
     "I	 wasn't	that	 high	on	 the	food	 chain,	Uncle	 Macon.	 I	never	 even	met	him.
Everything	 I	know	 came	from	 Sarafine."	It	 was	hard	 to	believe	 Ridley	 was	the
same	girl	who	almost	convinced	 my	father	to	 jump	off	 a	balcony.	She	looked	so
sad	and	broken.
     "Sir?"	 Liv's	 voice	 was	tentative.	"Something's	 been	bothering	me	ever	since
we	met	John	Breed.	We	have	thousands	of	Caster	and	Incubus	family	trees	in	the
Lunae	Libri,	 hundreds	of	 years	of	history.	 How	 is	it	 that	this	 one	person	comes
along	out	of	nowhere,	and	there's	no	record	of	him?	Of	John	Breed,	I	mean."
     "I	 was	wondering	 precisely	 the	 same	thing."	 Macon	 started	walking	 again,
leaning	heavily	to	one	side.	"But	he's	not	an	Incubus."
     "Not	 strictly	speaking,"	 Liv	answered.
     "He's	as	strong	as	one."	I	kicked	at	the	rocks	under	my	feet.
     "Whatever.	I	 could	take	him."	Link	 shrugged.
     Ridley	 fell	into	 step	next	to	us.	"He	doesn't	feed,	Uncle	M.	 I	would	 have	seen
it."
     "Interesting."
     Liv	 nodded.	"Very."
     "Olivia,	  if	 you	don't	 mind	--"	 He	 held	out	 his	arm	 to	her.	"Have	 there	been
any	cases	of	hybrids	on	your	side	of	the	Atlantic?"

331
     Liv	   slipped	  her	 shoulder	  underneath	 Macon's	  arm,	  taking	  my	   place.
"Hybrids?	I	 should	hope	not...."
     As	 Liv	  continued	 along	 the	rocks	 with	  Macon,	 I	 lagged	behind.	 I	 pulled
Lena's	necklace	out	of	 my	pocket.	 I	let	 the	charms	roll	 around	in	 my	palm,	 but
they	were	tangled	and	meaningless	without	her.	The	necklace	was	heavier	than	I
imagined,	or	maybe	it	was	the	weight	of	my	 conscience.




We	stood	on	a	cliff	 above	the	entrance	to	the	cave,	surveying	the	scene.	The	sea
cave	was	huge,	formed	completely	 from	 black	volcanic	 rock.	The	 moon	was	so
low,	 it	 looked	 like	  it	 could	 drop	 right	  out	 of	 the	 sky.	 A	 pack	 of	 Incubuses
guarded	the	mouth	of	 the	cave	as	waves	crashed	on	the	 black	rocks	 in	front	 of
them,	sending	shallow	rushes	of	water	across	their	boots.
     The	moonlight	 wasn't	 the	only	 thing	attracted	 to	the	cave.	A	 host	of	 Vexes,
swirling	 black	shadows,	flowed	up	 from	the	water	and	down	 from	the	sky.	 They
were	cycling	through	 the	cave's	entrance	and	the	opening	in	the	ceiling,	forming
some	kind	of	 supernatural	waterwheel.	 I	watched	 as	one	Vex	 rose	up	from	 the
water,	a	whirling	 shadow	reflected	perfectly	in	the	sea	below.
     Macon	 pointed	 to	their	 ghostly	  forms.	 "Sarafine	is	 using	 them	 to	fuel	 the
Dark	Fire."
     An	 army.	 What	chance	did	 we	 have?	It	 was	worse	than	 I	 thought,	and	 the
possibility	 of	saving	Lena	more	hopeless.	At	 least	we	had	Macon.	"What	 are	we
going	to	do?"
     "I'm	 going	 to	 try	 to	help	 you	get	 inside,	but	 from	 there	you'll	  have	to	 find
Lena.	You	are	the	Wayward,	after	all."	 Help	us	get	inside?	Was	he	joking?
     "You're	 making	it	sound	like	 you	aren't	going	with	 us."
     Macon	 slid	  down	 the	 rock	  until	 he	 was	 sitting	  on	 the	 overhang.	 "That
assumption	is	correct."
     I	 didn't	 try	to	 hide	 my	anger.	"Are	  you	kidding?	 You	 said	 it	yourself.	 You
think	 we're	gonna	 save	Lena	without	  you	 --	 a	Siren	 who's	lost	 her	 powers,	a
Mortal	 who	  never	 had	 any,	 a	librarian,	  and	 me?	 Against	 a	 pack	 of	 Blood
Incubuses	and	enough	Vexes	 to	take	 down	the	 Air	 Force?	Seriously?	 Tell	 me
you	have	some	kind	of	a	plan."
     Macon	looked	 up	at	 the	moon.	"I	 am	 going	to	 help	you,	 but	it	 will	 be	from
here.	Trust	me,	Mr.	Wate.	This	is	the	way	it	 has	to	be."
     I	 stood	there	 staring	 at	him.	 He	 was	serious.	 He	 was	going	 to	 send	us	in
alone.	"If	that	was	supposed	to	be	reassuring,	it	wasn't."

332
     "There	is	 only	one	battle	 that	awaits	down	there,	and	it	 doesn't	belong	to	me
or	 to	 your	 friends.	 It's	  yours,	 son.	You're	  a	 Wayward,	 a	 Mortal	  with	 great
purpose.	You've	 been	 fighting	 as	 long	 as	I've	 known	  you	--	  the	self-serving
ladies	of	the	DAR,	  the	Disciplinary	 Committee,	 the	Sixteenth	Moon,	 even	your
friends.	I	have	no	doubt	you	will	 find	 a	way."
     I	 had	 been	fighting	  all	 year,	 but	 it	 didn't	 make	 me	 feel	 any	 better.	 Mrs.
Lincoln	 might	look	 like	 she	could	suck	the	life	 right	out	of	 you,	but	 she	couldn't
actually	do	it.	What	 waited	below	us	was	a	different	story.
     Macon	drew	 something	out	of	his	pocket	 and	pressed	it	into	my	hand.	"Here.
This	is	all	I	 have,	as	my	recent	trip	was	rather	unexpected,	and	I	didn't	have	time
to	pack."	I	stared	down	at	the	small	square	of	gold.	 It	was	a	miniature	book,	held
shut	with	a	clasp.	I	 pressed	on	it,	and	it	 sprang	open.	Inside,	there	was	a	picture
of	my	mother,	the	girl	 from	the	visions.	His	 Lila	 Jane.
     He	looked	away.	"It	 happened	to	be	in	my	pocket,	after	 all	this	time.	 Imagine
that."	But	the	charm	 was	worn	and	scratched,	and	I	knew	without	 a	doubt	it	 was
in	his	pocket	today	because	it	was	every	day,	as	it	 had	been	for	who	knows	how
many	years.	"I	 believe	 you'll	 find	 this	 is	an	 object	of	 power	 for	you,	 Ethan.	It
always	has	been	for	me.	Let's	not	forget,	our	Lila	 Jane	was	a	strong	woman.	She
saved	my	life,	even	from	the	grave."
     I	recognized	 the	look	on	my	 mother's	face	in	 the	photo.	It	 was	one	I	thought
she	saved	for	me.	It	was	the	look	she	gave	me	the	first	time	 I	read	the	road	signs
out	loud	 through	 the	car	 window,	 before	she	 realized	I	 could	 read.	It	 was	the
look	she	gave	 me	when	I	 had	eaten	one	 of	Amma's	 buttermilk	  pies	by	 myself
and	slept	in	 her	bed	with	 a	stomachache	as	fierce	 as	Amma	herself.	 It	 was	the
look	 she	saved	for	 my	 first	 day	 of	 school,	my	 first	 basketball	 game,	my	 first
crush.
     And	 here	it	 was	again,	 staring	out	 from	 inside	the	 tiny	 book.	She	wouldn't
abandon	me.	And	Macon	wouldn't	 either.	Maybe	he	did	 have	some	kind	of	plan.
He	 had	 cheated	death.	 I	  pushed	the	 book	  into	 my	  pocket,	 next	 to	  Lena's
necklace.
     "Wait	 a	second."	Link	 walked	 over.	"I'm	 glad	 you	have	that	 little	 gold	book
and	all,	but	you	said	the	whole	 Blood	 pack	was	gonna	be	in	there,	plus	Vampire
Boy,	and	Lena's	mom,	 and	the	Emperor,	 or	whoever	this	 Abraham	guy	 is.	And
last	time	I	 checked,	Han	 Solo	wasn't	around.	So	 don't	you	 think	 we	need	more
than	a	little	book?"
     Ridley	 was	nodding	behind	him.	"Link's	 right.	 You	may	be	able	to	save	Lena,
but	not	unless	you	can	get	to	her."
     Link	 tried	 to	 bend	down	 next	to	 Macon.	 "Mr.	 Ravenwood,	 can't	you	 come
with	us	and	take	out	a	couple	a	guys	for	us?"

333
     Macon	 lifted	 an	eyebrow.	This	 was	the	first	 real	 conversation	he'd	ever	had
with	Link.	 "Unfortunately,	 son,	my	incarceration	 has	weakened	me...."
     "He's	 Transitioning,	 Link.	 He	 can't	possibly	 go	down	 there.	He's	incredibly
vulnerable."	Liv	 was	still	 holding	Macon	up,	for	 the	most	part.
     "Olivia	  is	 right.	  Incubuses	possess	incredible	 strength	 and	 speed.	I'm	  no
match	for	any	of	them	in	my	 present	state."
     "Luckily,	  I	am."	 The	voice	came	out	of	 nowhere,	and	she	ripped	through	the
darkness	even	faster.	She	was	wearing	 a	long	black	 coat	with	 a	 high	neck	 and
wrecked	black	boots.	Her	brown	hair	was	blowing	 in	the	wind.
     I	  recognized	 the	  Succubus	 from	  the	 funeral	  right	  away.	 It	  was	  Leah
Ravenwood,	Macon's	sister.	Macon	 was	as	shocked	as	the	rest	of	us	to	 see	her.
"Leah?
     She	slid	her	arm	across	his	back,	supporting	 him,	looking	 deep	into	his	 eyes.
"Green,	eh?	 That	 will	  take	some	 getting	 used	to."	  She	laid	 her	 head	on	 his
shoulder,	the	way	Lena	used	to.
     "How	 did	you	find	 us?"
     She	laughed.	"You're	 the	 talk	of	 the	Tunnels.	 Word	 on	the	 street	is	my	 big
brother's	taking	on	Abraham.	And	I	 heard	he	isn't	too	pleased	with	you."
     Macon's	sister	--	 the	one	Arelia	 took	 to	New	 Orleans	when	she	left	Macon's
father.	The	Sisters	had	mentioned	her.
     "Dark	 and	Light	will	 be	what	they	are."
     Link	 caught	 my	 eye	from	  behind	them,	 and	I	 knew	 the	 question.	 He	was
waiting	 for	  me	to	  make	the	 call.	 Fight	  or	 flight.	  It	 wasn't	 clear	 what	 Leah
Ravenwood	wanted	from	 us	or	why	 she	was	here.	But	 if	 she	was	like	 Hunting,
and	she	fed	on	blood	instead	of	dreams,	we	had	to	get	away	fast.	I	looked	at	Liv.
She	shook	her	head,	almost	imperceptibly.	She	wasn't	sure	either.
     Macon	 smiled	 one	of	 his	rare	 smiles.	"Now,	  what	are	 you	doing	 here,	my
dear?"
     "I'm	 here	 to	 even	the	 odds.	You	  know	 I	 love	 a	 good	family	  feud."	 Leah
smiled.	 She	 fluttered	 her	 wrist,	  and	 a	 long	  staff,	 made	 of	 polished	  wood,
appeared	in	her	hand.	"And	I	carry	a	big	stick."
     Macon	 was	 at	  a	 loss.	 I	 couldn't	  decide	 whether	 he	 looked	  relieved	 or
concerned.	Either	way,	 he	was	stunned.	"Why	 now?	You	 don't	 usually	concern
yourself	with	 Caster	affairs."
     Leah	reached	into	her	pocket	and	took	out	a	rubber	band,	pulling	her	hair	into
a	ponytail.	"This	 isn't	just	a	Caster	battle,	not	anymore.	If	 the	Order	is	destroyed,
we	may	be	destroyed	with	it."
     Macon	gave	her	 a	meaningful	 look.	I	 recognized	it	 as	his	not	 in	front	 of	the
children	expression.	"The	Order	of	 Things	has	stood	since	the	beginning	of	time.

334
It	will	 take	more	than	a	Cataclyst	to	bring	about	its	destruction."
     She	smiled	and	swung	her	staff.	"And	it's	 about	time	someone	taught	Hunting
some	manners.	My	  motives	 are	 pure,	like	  the	 heart	of	  a	Succubus."	 Macon
laughed	at	the	thought.	From	where	I	was	standing,	it	didn't	sound	so	funny.
     Dark	or	 Light	 --	Leah	Ravenwood	could	go	 either	way,	but	it	 didn't	matter	to
me.	"We	need	to	find	Lena."
     Leah	picked	up	her	stick.	"I	 was	waiting	for	 you	to	say	that."
     Link	 cleared	his	throat.	 "Um,	 I	don't	 wanna	be	rude,	ma'am.	But	 Ethan	says
Hunting's	down	there	with	 his	Blood	 pack.	Don't	get	me	wrong,	 you	seem	pretty
badass	and	all,	but	you're	still	just	a	girl	with	 a	stick."
     "This"	 --	 in	 a	split	 second,	Leah	extended	the	 rod	straight	 out,	inches	 from
Link's	 nose	 --"is	  a	Succubine	 Staff,	  not	 a	 stick.	 And	 I'm	  not	 a	 girl.	  I'm	 a
Succubus.	When	it	 comes	to	our	kind,	 the	 females	have	the	advantage.	We	are
quicker,	stronger,	 and	more	clever	 than	our	 male	counterparts.	Think	 of	 me	as
the	praying	mantis	of	the	supernatural	world."
     "Aren't	 those	 the	bugs	 that	bite	 off	  the	heads	of	 the	 males?"	Link	  looked
skeptical.
     "Yes.	Then	they	eat	them."


Whatever	reservations	Macon	may	have	had	about	Leah,	he	seemed	relieved	she
was	going	with	 us.	But	he	did	 have	some	last	minute	advice.	"Larkin	 has	grown
up	since	you	 last	 saw	him,	 Leah.	He's	 a	powerful	 Illusionist.	  Be	 careful.	And
according	to	 Olivia,	 our	 brother	keeps	his	 mindless	hounds	with	  him,	a	 Blood
pack."
     "Don't	 worry,	  big	brother.	 I	 have	a	 pet	of	 my	 own."	 She	looked	 up	 at	the
ledge	above	us.	Some	kind	 of	 wild	 mountain	 lion,	 about	the	 size	of	 a	German
shepherd,	lounged	on	the	rocks,	 its	tail	 hanging	 over	the	side.	 "Bade!"	 The	cat
leaped	to	its	 feet	 and	opened	its	 jaws,	flashing	 rows	 of	 razor-sharp	teeth,	 and
jumped	down	beside	her.	"I'm	 sure	Bade	can't	wait	 to	play	 with	 Hunting's	pups.
You	know	what	 they	say	about	cats	and	dogs."
     Ridley	 whispered	to	 Liv.	 "Bade	is	 the	voodoo	 god	of	 wind	and	 storms.	Not
one	you	wanna	screw	with."	It	 reminded	me	of	Lena,	which	 made	me	feel	a	little
better	about	the	hundred	and	fifty	pound	cat	staring	down	at	me.
     "Stalk	and	ambush	is	her	specialty."	Leah	rubbed	the	cat	behind	its	ears.
     At	 the	sight	of	 the	wild	 cat,	Lucille	 ran	over	and	swatted	her	playfully.	  Bade
nudged	Lucille	 with	 her	 muzzle.	Leah	 bent	down	 and	picked	 her	up.	 "Lucille,
how's	my	sweet	girl?"
     "How	 do	you	know	my	 great-aunt's	cat?"

335
    "I	 was	there	when	Lucille	was	born.	She	was	my	mamma's	cat.	My	mother
gave	Lucille	to	your	Aunt	Prue	so	she	could	find	her	way	around	the	Tunnels."
Lucille	rolled	around	between	Bade's	paws.
    I	 hadn't	been	so	sure	about	Leah,	but	Lucille	had	never	let	me	down.	She	was
a	good	judge	of	character,	even	if	she	was	a	cat.
    A	 Caster	cat.	I	should	have	known.
    Leah	tucked	the	staff	under	her	belt,	and	I	knew	the	time	for	talk	was	over.
"Ready?"
    Macon	reached	out	his	hand,	and	I	took	it.	 For	a	 second,	I	could	feel	the
power	in	his	grip,	as	if	we	were	in	some	kind	of	Caster	conversation	I	couldn't
comprehend.	Then	he	let	go,	and	I	turned	toward	the	cave,	wondering	if	I	would
ever	see	him	again.
    I	 led	 the	way	 and,	motley	or	not,	 my	friends	 were	right	behind	me.	My
friends,	a	Succubus,	and	a	mountain	lion	named	after	a	volatile	voodoo	god.	I
only	hoped	it	was	enough.

336
6.20	

337
                                                 Dark	    Fire



When	 we	reached	the	base	of	the	cliff,	we	hid	behind	a	rock	formation	a	few
yards	from	the	cave.	Two	Incubuses	were	guarding	the	entrance,	talking	in	low
tones.	I	recognized	the	scarred	one	from	Macon's	funeral.	"Great."	Two	Blood
Incubuses,	and	we	weren't	even	inside.	I	knew	the	rest	of	the	pack	couldn't	be	far
away.
    "Leave	them	to	me,	but	you	may	not	 want	to	watch."	Leah	signaled	Bade,
who	loped	to	her	side.
    The	staff	flashed	through	the	air	like	lightning.	The	two	Incubuses	never	saw
it	coming.	Leah	had	the	first	Incubus	on	the	ground	in	seconds.	Bade	lunged,
catching	the	other	by	the	throat	and	pinning	him.	Leah	rose,	wiping	her	mouth
on	her	sleeve,	and	spat,	a	bloody	spot	marking	the	sand.	"Old	blood,	seventy,	a
hundred	years.	I	can	taste	it."
    Link's	mouth	hung	open.	"Is	she	expecting	us	to	do	that?"
    Leah	bent	at	the	neck	of	the	second	Incubus	for	barely	a	minute	before	she
was	waving	us	on.	"Go."
    I	 didn't	move.	"What	do	we	--	what	do	I	do?"
    "Fight."


The	entrance	to	the	cave	was	so	bright,	the	sun	could	have	been	shining	inside.
"I	can't	do	this."
    Link	 looked	into	the	cave	nervously.	"What	are	you	talkin'	about,	man?"
    I	  looked	at	 my	 friends.	"I	 think	 you	 guys	should	 go	back.	This	 is	 too
dangerous.	I	shouldn't	have	dragged	you	into	this."
    "Nobody	 dragged	me	anywhere.	I	came	to	--"	Link	looked	at	Ridley,	then
turned	away	awkwardly.	"To	get	away	from	it	all."
    Ridley	 flipped	her	muddy	hair	dramatically.	"Well,	 I	 certainly	didn't	come
here	because	of	you,	Short	Straw.	Don't	flatter	 yourself.	As	 much	as	I	 like
hanging	out	with	you	dorks,	I'm	 here	to	help	my	cousin."	She	looked	at	Liv.
"What's	your	excuse?"
    Liv's	 voice	was	quiet.	"Do	you	believe	in	destiny?"
    We	all	 looked	at	Liv	like	she	was	crazy,	but	she	didn't	care.	"Well,	I	do.	I've
been	watching	the	Caster	sky	for	 as	long	 as	I	 can	remember,	and	when	it

338
changed,	I	saw	 it.	 The	Southern	 Star,	the	 Seventeenth	Moon,	 my	selenometer
that	everyone	at	home	teased	me	about	--	this	 is	my	 destiny.	I	 was	supposed	to
be	here.	Even	if	...	no	matter	what."
     "I	 get	it,"	 said	Link.	 "Even	 if	 it	 wrecks	everything,	 even	if	 you	know	 you're
gonna	get	busted,	sometimes	you	gotta	do	it	anyway."
     "Something	like	 that."
     Link	 tried	to	crack	his	knuckles.	"So	 what's	the	plan?"
     I	looked	 at	my	best	friend,	who	had	shared	his	Twinkie	 with	 me	on	the	bus	in
second	grade.	Was	 I	 really	  going	 to	 let	 him	 follow	  me	 into	  a	cave	 to	 die?
"There's	 no	 plan.	 You	 can't	 come	 with	  me.	 I'm	  the	 Wayward.	 This	  is	 my
responsibility,	not	yours."
     Ridley	 rolled	  her	eyes.	 "Obviously	 the	 whole	 Wayward	  thing	 hasn't	been
explained	to	you	properly.	 You	don't	 have	any	superpowers.	You	can't	leap	over
tall	 buildings	 in	 a	 single	 bound	 or	fight	  Dark	 Casters	with	  your	 magic	 cat."
Lucille	 peeked	out	from	behind	 my	leg.	"Basically,	  you're	a	glorified	 tour	 guide
who's	no	 better	equipped	 to	face	 a	bunch	 of	 Dark	 Casters	than	Mary	 P.	 over
here."
     "Aquaman,"	 coughed	Link,	winking	 at	me.
     Liv	  had	been	quiet	 until	  now.	 "She's	not	 wrong.	 Ethan,	 you	 can't	do	 this
alone."
     I	knew	 what	they	were	doing	 --	or	 more	like	not	 doing.	Leaving.	 I	shook	my
head.	"You	guys	are	idiots."
     Link	 grinned.	"I'd	 have	gone	with	'brave	as	hell,'	myself."




We	stayed	 pressed	against	the	cavern	 walls,	 following	  the	moonlight	  pouring
through	 the	crack	 in	  the	ceiling.	  As	 we	 rounded	 a	 corner,	the	 rays	 became
impossibly	bright,	 and	I	 could	 see	the	pyre	below	us.	It	 rose	from	 the	center	of
the	cave,	golden	flames	encircling	 it	and	licking	 up	the	pyramid	 of	broken	 trees.
There	was	 a	stone	 slab,	which	  almost	 resembled	some	kind	  of	 Mayan	 altar,
balanced	on	 top	 of	 the	 pyre	 as	if	  suspended	from	 invisible	  wires.	 A	  set	of
weathered	stone	stairs	 led	 up	 to	 the	altar.	 The	 snaking	 circle	 worn	 by	 Dark
Casters	was	painted	on	the	cave	wall	behind	it.
     Sarafine's	body	was	lying	on	top	 of	the	altar,	just	as	it	had	been	when	she	had
appeared	in	the	woods.	Nothing	else	was	the	same.	Moonlight	 streamed	through
the	roof	and	hit	 her	body,	radiating	 outward	in	 all	 directions	as	if	 refracted	by	a
prism.	It	 was	like	 she	was	holding	 light	  from	 the	moon	she	was	 calling	 out	of

339
time	--	 Lena's	 Seventeenth	Moon.	 Even	Sarafine's	 golden	dress	looked	 like	 it
was	stitched	together	from	a	thousand	shining	metallic	scales.
     Liv	 breathed.	"I've	never	seen	anything	like	it."
     Sarafine	seemed	to	be	 in	 some	kind	 of	trance.	 Her	body	 rose	a	few	 inches
above	the	stone,	the	folds	of	her	dress	cascading	down	like	water,	past	the	edges
of	the	stone	altar.	She	was	amassing	some	serious	power.
     Larkin	 was	at	the	base	of	the	pyre.	I	watched	as	he	moved	closer	to	the	stone
stairs.	Closer	to	--
     Lena.
     She	lay	collapsed,	her	 hands	extended	toward	the	flames,	her	eyes	shut.	Her
head	was	in	John	Breed's	lap,	and	she	looked	unconscious.	He	looked	different	--
blank.	Like	he	was	in	a	trance	of	his	own.
     Lena	was	shaking.	Even	from	here,	I	 could	feel	the	biting	 cold	radiating	from
the	fire.	 She	must	have	been	freezing.	A	 circle	 of	 Dark	 Casters	surrounded	the
pyre.	I	 didn't	 recognize	 them,	but	 I	 could	 tell	 they	were	 Dark	 by	their	 crazed
yellow	eyes.
     Lena!	Can	you	hear	me?
     Sarafine's	eyes	flashed	open.	The	Casters	began	to	chant.
     "Liv,	 what's	happening?"	I	whispered.
     "They're	calling	 a	Claiming	 Moon."
     I	 didn't	  need	 to	 understand	 what	 they	  were	 saying	 to	  know	 what	  was
happening.	Sarafine	was	calling	 the	Seventeenth	Moon	so	Lena	could	 make	her
choice	while	  she	was	under	 the	influence	  of	 some	sort	 of	 Dark	 Cast.	Or	 the
weight	of	her	guilt,	 a	Dark	Cast	of	its	own.
     "What	are	they	doing?"
     "Sarafine	 is	using	 all	her	 power	 to	channel	the	 Dark	 Fire's	energy,	and	 her
own,	 into	 the	 moon."	 Liv	  was	 fixated	 on	 the	 scene	as	if	  she	was	 trying	 to
memorize	every	detail,	evil	 or	not.	It	 was	the	Keeper	in	her,	compelled	to	 record
history	in	the	making.
     Vexes	 whipped	 around	the	 cavern,	threatening	 to	 bring	 down	 the	walls	 --
spiraling,	gaining	 strength	and	mass.	"We	need	to	get	down	 there."	Liv	 nodded,
and	Link	grabbed	Ridley's	hand.
     We	made	our	way	 down	the	side	of	 the	cavern,	keeping	to	the	shadows	until
we	reached	the	wet,	sandy	cave	 floor.	 I	realized	 the	chanting	had	stopped.	The
Casters	were	silently	transfixed,	 watching	Sarafine	and	the	pyre,	 as	if	they	were
all	under	the	same	mind-numbing	spell.
     "Now	 what?"	Link	 looked	pale.
     A	 figure	 stepped	into	the	 center	of	 the	circle.	 I	 didn't	 have	to	guess	who	 it
was,	because	he	 was	wearing	  the	same	 Sunday	suit	 and	 string	 tie	 from	  the

340
visions.	His	white	 summer	suit	made	him	look	even	more	out	of	place	among	the
Dark	Casters	and	the	helix	of	Vexes.
     It	 was	Abraham,	 the	 only	 Incubus	powerful	  enough	to	 summon	this	 many
Vexes	from	below.	 Larkin	 and	Hunting	 stood	behind	him,	 and	every	Incubus	in
the	cavern	fell	to	one	knee.	Abraham	 raised	his	hands	up	toward	the	vortex.	"It's
time."
     Lena!	Wake	up!
     The	flames	 surrounding	 the	 pyre	surged	higher.	 In	 front	 of	 the	 pyre,	 John
Breed	gently	lifted	 Lena	to	wake	her	up.
     L!	Run!
     Lena	looked	around,	disoriented.	She	didn't	react	to	my	 voice.	I	wasn't	sure	if
she	could	hear	anything.	 Her	 movements	were	unsteady,	as	if	 she	didn't	 know
where	she	was.
     Abraham	 reached	out	toward	 John	and	lifted	  his	hand	 slowly.	 John	jerked,
then	picked	Lena	up	in	his	arms,	rising	as	if	being	pulled	 by	a	string.
     Lena!
     Lena's	head	fell	 to	 the	side,	her	eyes	closing	 again.	John	carried	 her	up	 the
stairs.	The	cocky	attitude	was	gone.	He	looked	like	a	zombie.
     Ridley	 pushed	her	way	 closer.	"Lena's	 totally	 disoriented.	 She	doesn't	even
know	what's	happening.	It's	an	effect	of	the	fire."
     "Why	  would	 they	  want	 her	 to	 be	 passed	out?	Doesn't	 Lena	 have	 to	 be
conscious	to	Claim	herself?"	I	thought	that	was	a	given.
     Ridley	 stared	at	the	fire.	 Her	voice	 was	uncharacteristically	 serious,	and	she
was	avoiding	my	 eyes.	"The	Claiming	 requires	volition.	 She'll	 have	to	make	the
Choice."	Ridley	 sounded	strange.	"Unless	..."
     "Unless	what?"	I	 didn't	have	time	to	try	 to	interpret	Ridley.
     "Unless	she	already	has."	 By	leaving	 us	behind.	 By	taking	 off	 the	necklace.
By	running	off	 with	 John	Breed.
     "She	hasn't,"	I	 said	automatically.	I	 knew	Lena.	There	was	a	reason	for	all	 of
it,	everything.	"She	hasn't."
     Ridley	 looked	at	me.	"I	hope	you're	right."
     John	reached	the	top	of	the	altar,	Larkin	 following	 behind	 him.	Larkin	 bound
Sarafine	and	Lena	together	under	the	light	of	the	Seventeenth	Moon.
     I	felt	 my	heart	pounding.	"I	 have	to	get	Lena.	Can	you	help	me?"
     Link	 grabbed	two	chunks	of	 rock,	big	enough	to	do	some	damage	if	he	could
get	close	enough	to	 use	them.	 Liv	 flipped	 through	 her	 notebook.	Even	 Ridley
unwrapped	a	lollipop	and	shrugged.	"You	 never	know."
     I	 heard	another	voice	behind	 me.	"You	 aren't	gonna	 be	able	to	get	 up	there
unless	you're	 fixin'	  to	take	 care	a	 all	 those	Vexes	 on	 your	 own.	 And	 I	 don't

341
remember	teachin'	you	how	to	do	that."	I	smiled	 before	I	turned	around.
     It	 was	Amma,	 and	 this	 time	she	 had	brought	 some	of	 the	living	  with	 her.
Arelia	and	Twyla	 stood	nearby,	and	together	the	three	old	women	looked	like	the
Three	Fates.	Relief	 washed	over	me,	and	 I	realized	 part	of	 me	had	 thought	I'd
never	see	Amma	again.	I	crushed	her	in	a	hug,	which	she	returned,	straightening
her	hat.	That's	when	I	saw	Gramma's	old-fashioned	lace-up	boots,	as	she	stepped
out	from	behind	Arelia.
     Make	that	Four	Fates.
     "Ma'am."	 I	nodded	to	Gramma.	She	nodded	back,	as	if	she	was	about	to	offer
me	tea	on	the	 veranda	at	Ravenwood.	 Then	I	 panicked,	because	we	weren't	 at
Ravenwood.	And	 Amma	 and	Arelia	  and	Twyla	 weren't	 the	Three	 Fates.	They
were	three	ancient,	brittle-boned	 Southern	ladies	who	 were	probably	 about	two
hundred	and	fifty	 years	old	between	them	--	wearing	support	hose.	And	Gramma
wasn't	much	younger.	These	Four	Fates,	in	particular,	had	no	business	being	on	a
battlefield.
     Come	to	think	of	 it,	neither	did	 this	one	Wate.
     I	 slipped	free	 from	 Amma's	grip.	 "What	 are	 you	doing	 here?	How	 did	 you
find	us?"
     "What	 am	I	doin'	 here?"	Amma	sniffed.	 "My	 family	  came	to	the	Sea	Islands
from	Barbados	before	you	were	a	thought	in	the	Good	Lord's	 mind.	I	know	 these
islands	like	my	kitchen."
     "This	 is	a	Caster	island,	Amma.	Not	one	of	the	Sea	Islands."
     "'Course	it	is.	Where	else	would	 you	hide	an	island	you	can't	see?"
     Arelia	 put	 her	hand	on	Amma's	 shoulder.	"She's	 right.	 The	Great	Barrier	 is
hidden	among	the	Sea	Islands.	Amarie	 may	 not	be	a	Caster,	but	 she	shares	the
gift	of	 Sight	with	my	 sister	and	I."
     Amma	 shook	her	head	so	hard	I	thought	 it	 was	going	to	 fly	 off.	 "You	 didn't
really	think	 I	was	gonna	let	 you	wade	knee-deep	in	quicksand	on	 your	own,	 did
you?"	I	threw	my	 arms	around	her	and	hugged	her	again.
     "How	 did	 you	 know	 where	to	 find	 us,	 ma'am?	We	had	 trouble	 findin'	 this
place	ourselves."	Link	  was	always	 a	step	ahead	or	 a	step	behind.	 The	four	 of
them	looked	at	him	like	 he	was	a	fool.
     "Bustin'	 open	that	 ball	 a	trouble	 the	way	 you	 boys	did?	 With	 a	spell	 older
than	my	 mamma's	mamma?	 Might	 as	well	  have	dialed	 up	the	 Greater	Gatlin
Emergency	Phone	 Tree."	 Amma	  took	 a	 step	toward	 Link,	  who	  took	 a	 step
backward,	out	of	 pointing	 range.	She	didn't	 let	 go	of	 me,	though.	 That's	how	 I
knew	what	 she	was	 really	 saying:	 I	 love	 you	and	 I	 couldn't	 be	prouder.	 And
you'll	be	grounded	for	a	month	when	we	get	home.
     Ridley	 leaned	closer	to	Link.	"Think	 about	it.	 A	Necromancer,	a	Diviner,	 and

342
a	Seer.	We	didn't	stand	a	chance."
     Amma,	 Arelia,	 Gramma,	and	Twyla	  turned	to	Ridley	 as	soon	 as	she	spoke.
She	reddened,	lowering	her	eyes	respectfully.	"I	can't	believe	you're	here,	Auntie
Twyla."	 She	swallowed.	"Gramma."
     Gramma	held	Ridley	 by	the	chin	 and	stared	into	her	bright	blue	eyes.	"So	it's
true."	She	broke	into	 a	smile.	 "Welcome	back,	 child."	 She	kissed	Ridley	 on	the
cheek.
     Amma	looked	 smug.	"Told	you.	It	 was	in	the	cards."
     Arelia	 nodded.	"And	the	stars."
     Twyla	 scoffed,	 dropping	 her	voice	 to	 a	low	 whisper.	 "Cards	only	 show	 da
surface	a	things.	What	 we	have	 here,	this	is	 cut	deep,	past	da	bone	and	 out	da
other	side."	A	shadow	crossed	over	her	face.
     I	looked	at	Twyla.	 "What?"	 But	she	smiled,	and	the	shadow	was	gone.
     "You	 need	some	help	from	 La	 Bas."	Twyla	  waved	her	hand	back	 and	forth
over	her	head.	Back	to	the	business	at	hand.
     "The	Otherworld,"	 Arelia	 translated.
     Amma	 knelt	down,	 unwrapping	 a	cloth	 filled	 with	 small	 bones	and	charms.
She	might	as	well	 have	 been	a	doctor	preparing	 her	surgical	 tools.	"Callin'	  the
sorta	help	we	need's	my	specialty."
     Arelia	 took	out	a	rattle,	and	Twyla	 sat	down	and	got	comfortable.	 Who	knew
what	she	was	going	to	 have	to	raise.	Amma	 spread	out	her	bones	and	struggled
with	 one	 of	  her	 mason	jars.	 "South	  Carolina	 graveyard	 dirt.	  Best	 there	 is.
Brought	it	 from	home."	 I	took	 the	jar	from	 her	and	opened	it,	thinking	 about	the
night	I	 followed	  her	into	 the	swamp.	 "We	 can	take	care	a	those	 Vexes.	Won't
stop	Sarafine	or	Melchizedek's	 good-for-nothin'	  brother,	but	it'll	  cut	off	 some	a
her	power."
     Gramma	 looked	 up	 at	 the	 dark	 cyclone	  of	 Vexes	 fueling	  the	 fire.	 "My
goodness,	you	weren't	exaggerating,	Amarie.	There	are	a	lot	of	 them."	I	 saw	her
eyes	move	from	  Sarafine's	motionless	 body	 to	Lena,	 in	 the	 distance,	and	the
lines	in	her	brow	deepened.	Ridley	let	go	of	her	hand,	but	didn't	leave	her	side.
     Link	 let	out	 a	sigh	of	 relief.	"Man,	 I'm	 goin'	 back	to	church	next	 Sunday	for
sure."	I	didn't	say	anything,	but	what	I	 was	thinking	wasn't	that	far	 off.
     Amma	 looked	 up	 from	 the	 dirt	 she	was	 spreading	below	 her	 feet.	"We're
gonna	send	them	back	down	where	they	belong."
     Gramma	adjusted	her	jacket.	"Then	I'll	 deal	with	my	 daughter."
     Amma,	 Arelia,	 and	 Twyla	 sat	 cross-legged	on	 the	damp	 rocks	 and	joined
hands.	"First	things	first.	Let's	get	rid	 a	those	Vexes."
     Gramma	stepped	back	 and	gave	 them	some	 room.	"That	 would	  be	lovely,
Amarie."

343
     The	 three	women	 closed	 their	 eyes.	Amma's	 voice	  was	strong	 and	 clear,
despite	the	 whirring	  of	 the	 vortex	 and	the	 humming	  of	 Dark	 magic.	 "Uncle
Abner,	 Aunt	 Delilah,	  Aunt	 Ivy,	  Grandmamma	Sulla,	 we	 are	 in	 need	a	 your
intercession	once	more.	 I	 call	 you	 now	to	 this	 place.	Find	 your	 way	 into	 this
world	and	banish	the	ones	that	don't	belong."
     Twyla's	eyed	rolled	 back	in	her	head,	and	she	began	to	chant.


          "Les	lois,	my	 spirits,	my	guides,
          Tear	apart	the	Bridge
          That	carries	these	shadows	from	your	world	into	 the	next."


     Twyla	 raised	her	arms	above	her	head.	"Encore!"
     "Again,"	 Arelia	 spoke	the	word	in	English.


          "Les	lois,	my	 spirits,	my	guides,
          Tear	apart	the	Bridge
          That	carries	these	shadows	from	your	world	into	 the	next."


     Twyla	 continued	to	chant,	mixing	 her	French-Creole	with	Amma	 and	Arelia's
English.	Their	 voices	overlapped	like	 a	chorus.	Through	the	 crack	in	the	cavern
ceiling,	the	sky	 darkened	around	the	ray	of	moonlight,	 as	if	 they	had	summoned
a	thundercloud	 to	 bring	 on	 a	storm	 all	 their	 own.	 But	 they	 weren't	 calling	 a
thundercloud.	They	 were	creating	a	 different	 kind	 of	vortex,	 darkness	spiraling
above	them	like	a	perfectly	 formed	tornado	 touching	down	 in	the	center	of	 their
circle.	 For	a	 second,	I	 thought	 the	enormous	 spiral	 was	only	 going	 to	 get	 us
killed	faster,	attracting	every	Vex	 and	Incubus	within	 sight	of	it.
     I	 should	 have	known	 better	 than	 to	doubt	 the	 three	of	 them.	 The	 ghostly
figures	of	the	Greats	began	to	emerge:	Uncle	Abner,	Aunt	Delilah,	 Aunt	 Ivy,	and
Sulla	the	Prophet.	They	were	forming	 from	 the	sand	and	dirt,	 their	bodies	being
woven	from	it	 bit	by	bit.
     Our	Three	Fates	kept	spinning.


          "Tear	apart	the	Bridge
          That	carries	these	shadows	from	your	world	into	 the	next."

344
     Within	 seconds,	there	were	more	 spirits	 from	 the	Otherworld,	 Sheers.	They
were	being	 born	 from	 the	spiraling	 earth,	 like	 butterflies	 from	 a	 cocoon.	The
Greats	and	the	spirits	attracted	the	Vexes,	causing	the	shadowy	creatures	to	rush
toward	them	with	the	horrible	 scream	I	remembered	from	the	Tunnels.
     The	Greats	began	to	 grow.	 Sulla	 was	so	big,	 her	rows	 of	 necklaces	looked
like	 ropes.	 All	  Uncle	 Abner	  needed	was	 a	 thunderbolt	 and	 a	 toga,	 and	 he
could've	been	Zeus	looming	above	us.	The	Vexes	shot	out	from	the	flames	of	the
Dark	 Fire,	black	 streaks	tearing	 across	the	 sky.	Just	 as	quickly,	 the	 shrieking
streaks	disappeared.	The	Greats	inhaled	them,	as	Twyla	had	seemed	to	inhale	the
Sheers	that	night	in	the	cemetery.
     Sulla	 the	Prophet	glided	 forward,	 her	heavily	 ringed	 fingers	 pointing	 at	the
last	of	the	Vexes,	turning	and	screaming	in	the	wind.	"Tear	 apart	the	Bridge!"
     The	Vexes	were	gone,	leaving	 nothing	except	a	dark	 cloud	overhead	and	the
Greats,	Sulla	in	the	forefront.	She	was	shimmering	in	 the	moonlight	as	she	spoke
her	final	words.	"Blood	 is	always	Blood.	 Even	time	cannot	Bind	it."
     The	Greats	 disappeared,	and	the	dark	 cloud	 dissipated.	Only	 the	 billowing
smoke	from	 the	Dark	 Fire	 remained.	The	 pyre	 was	still	 burning,	 and	Sarafine
and	Lena	were	still	tied	to	the	slab.
     The	vortex	of	 Vexes	was	gone,	and	something	else	had	changed.	We	were	no
longer	silently	 watching,	waiting	 for	an	opportunity	 to	make	our	move.	The	 eyes
of	every	 Incubus	 and	Dark	 Caster	in	 the	 cave	were	 on	us,	 canines	bared	and
yellow	eyes	blazing.
     We	had	joined	the	party,	whether	we	liked	 it	or	not.

345
	6.20	

346
                                         Seventeen	     Moons



The	Blood	Incubuses	reacted	first,	dematerializing	one	by	one,	and	reappearing
in	pack	formation.	I	recognized	Scarface,	the	Incubus	from	Macon's	funeral.	He
was	in	the	front,	his	black	eyes	calculating.	Hunting	was	predictably	nowhere	in
sight,	too	important	for	simple	slaughter.	But	Larkin	was	standing	in	front	 of
them,	a	black	snake	coiled	around	his	arm.	Second	in	command.
    They	surrounded	us	in	seconds,	and	there	was	nowhere	to	go.	The	pack	was
in	front	of	us,	and	the	cave	wall	behind	us.	Amma	pushed	her	way	between	the
Incubuses	and	me,	as	if	she	planned	to	fight	them	off	with	her	bare	hands.	She
didn't	get	the	chance.
    "Amma!"	 I	called	out,	but	it	was	too	late.
    Larkin	 was	standing	inches	from	her	tiny	frame,	wielding	a	knife	that	didn't
look	anything	like	an	illusion.	"You're	a	real	pain	in	the	ass	for	an	old	lady,	you
know	that?	Always	poking	around	where	you	don't	belong	and	callin'	up	your
dead	relatives.	About	time	you	joined	them."
    Amma	didn't	 move.	"Larkin	Ravenwood,	you're	gonna	be	ten	kinds	a	sorry
when	you	try	to	find	your	way	outta	this	world	and	into	the	next."
    "Promise?"	I	could	see	the	muscles	in	Larkin's	shoulder	move	as	he	pulled
back	his	arm,	preparing	to	lunge	at	Amma.
    Before	he	could	strike,	Twyla	threw	her	hand	open,	and	white	particles	flew
through	the	air.	Larkin	cried	out,	dropping	the	knife	and	rubbing	his	eyes	with
the	back	of	his	hands.
    "Ethan,	watch	out!"	I	could	hear	Link's	voice,	but	everything	was	happening
in	slow	motion.	I	 saw	the	pack	coming	at	me,	and	I	heard	something	else.	A
humming	sound	that	started	low	and	rose	slowly,	like	the	crest	of	a	wave.	A
green	light	flew	up	in	front	of	us.	It	was	the	same	pure	light	the	Arclight	emitted
when	it	spun	in	the	air	in	front	of	us,	right	before	we	released	Macon.
    It	 had	to	be	Macon.
    The	 hum	 grew	louder,	 and	the	light	  surged	forward,	hurling	 the	Blood
Incubuses	backward.	I	looked	around	to	see	if	everyone	was	all	right.
    Link	 was	bent	over,	with	his	hands	on	his	knees	like	he	was	going	to	puke.
"That	was	close."	Ridley	patted	his	back	a	little	too	hard	and	turned	to	Twyla.
    "What	did	you	throw	at	Larkin?	Some	kind	of	Charged	Matter?"
    Twyla	 smiled,	rubbing	the	beads	on	one	of	the	thirty	or	forty	necklaces	she

347
wore.	"Don't	need	Charged	Matta,	cher."
     "Then	what	was	it?"
     "Sel	 manje."	 She	spoke	 the	words	 in	 her	 thick	  Creole	accent,	 but	 Ridley
didn't	understand.
     Arelia	 smiled.	"Salt."
     Amma	 whacked	me	on	the	arm.	"Told	  you	salt	could	 keep	away	evil	 spirits.
Evil	boys,	too."
     "We	have	to	move.	There	isn't	much	 time."	Gramma	rushed	toward	the	stairs,
carrying	her	cane	in	her	hand.	"Ethan,	come	with	 me."	I	 followed	 Gramma	up	to
the	altar,	 the	 smoke	 from	  the	fire	  creating	 a	 thick	 haze	 around	 me.	It	  was
intoxicating	 and	suffocating	at	the	same	time.
     We	reached	the	top	of	the	stairs.	Gramma	 held	her	cane	out	toward	Sarafine,
and	immediately	  it	 began	to	 glow	 with	  golden	 light.	 I	 felt	  a	wave	 of	 relief.
Gramma	was	an	Empath.	 She	had	no	powers	 of	 her	own,	 except	the	ability	  to
use	the	powers	of	 others.	And	 the	 power	she	was	 taking	 now	belonged	 to	the
most	dangerous	woman	in	the	room	--	her	daughter	Sarafine.
     The	 one	 channeling	 the	energy	 of	 the	 Dark	 Fire	  to	 call	 the	 Seventeenth
Moon.
     "Ethan,	get	Lena!"	 Gramma	called.	 She	was	in	some	sort	of	 psychic	holding
pattern	with	Sarafine.
     It	 was	all	I	 needed	to	hear.	I	 grabbed	for	the	 ropes,	loosening	the	knots	that
bound	Lena	 and	 her	 mother	 together.	 Lena	 was	barely	  conscious,	her	 body
resting	on	the	freezing	stone.	I	 touched	her.	Her	skin	was	ice	 cold,	and	I	felt	 the
choking	grip	of	 the	Dark	Fire	as	my	body	started	going	numb.
     "Lena,	wake	 up.	It's	me."	 I	shook	 her,	and	her	head	rolled	from	 side	to	 side,
her	face	red	from	 the	icy	 rock.	 I	 lifted	 Lena's	body,	wrapping	 my	 arms	around
her,	giving	her	what	little	 warmth	I	 had.
     Her	 eyes	opened.	She	 was	trying	  to	 speak.	I	 held	 her	 face	 in	 my	 hands.
"Ethan	--"	Her	 lids	were	heavy,	and	her	eyes	shut	again.	"Get	out	of	here."
     "No."	 I	kissed	her	as	I	held	her	in	 my	arms.	No	matter	 what	happened,	it	was
worth	this	one	moment.	Holding	 her	again.
     I'm	not	going	 anywhere	without	you.
     I	heard	Link	 scream.	One	Incubus	had	escaped	the	powerful	wall	of	light	 that
was	holding	the	 rest	of	them	at	 bay.	John	Breed	was	behind	Link,	  with	 his	arm
around	Link's	 neck,	 canines	bared.	John	 still	 had	the	 same	glazed	expression,
like	he	was	on	autopilot.	I	 wondered	if	it	 was	an	effect	of	the	intoxicating	 fumes.
Ridley	turned	 and	threw	 herself	onto	John's	back,	 tackling	 him.	She	must	 have
taken	him	by	surprise,	because	Ridley	wasn't	strong	enough	to	take	him	down	on
her	own.	The	three	of	them	fell	to	the	ground,	grappling	 for	the	upper	hand.

348
    I	 couldn't	see	more	than	that,	but	it	was	enough	to	make	me	realize	we	were
in	serious	trouble.	I	didn't	 know	how	long	 the	supernatural	field	would	hold,
especially	if	Macon	was	the	one	generating	it.
    Lena	had	to	end	this.
    I	 looked	down	at	her.	Her	eyes	were	open,	but	she	looked	past	me,	as	if	she
couldn't	see	me.
    Lena.	You	can't	give	up	now.	Not	when	--
    Don't	say	it.
    It's	your	Claiming	Moon.
    It's	not.	It's	her	Claiming	Moon.
    It	 doesn't	matter.	It's	your	Seventeenth	Moon,	L.
    She	stared	up	at	me,	her	eyes	empty.
    Sarafine	raised	it.	I	didn't	ask	for	any	of	this.
    You	have	to	choose,	or	everyone	we	care	about	could	get	killed	here	tonight.
    She	looked	away	from	me.
    What	if	I'm	not	ready?
    You	can't	run	from	this,	Lena.	Not	anymore.
    You	don't	get	it.	It's	not	a	choice.	It's	a	curse.	If	I	go	Light,	Ridley	and	half	my
family	will	 die.	If	I	 go	Dark,	Gramma,	Aunt	Del,	my	cousins	--	they'll	all	 die.
What	kind	of	choice	is	that?
    I	 held	her	tighter,	wishing	there	was	a	way	I	could	give	her	my	strength	or
absorb	her	pain.
    "It's	 a	choice	only	you	can	make."	I	pulled	Lena	to	her	feet.	"Look	at	what's
happening.	People	you	love	are	fighting	for	their	lives	right	now.	You	can	stop
it.	Only	you."
    "I	 don't	know	if	I	can."
    "Why	 not?"	I	was	shouting.
    "Because	I	don't	know	what	I	am."
    I	 looked	into	her	eyes,	and	they	had	changed	again.	One	was	perfectly	green,
and	one	was	perfectly	gold.
    "Look	 at	me,	Ethan.	Am	I	Dark,	or	am	I	Light?"
    I	 looked	at	her,	and	I	knew	what	she	was.	The	girl	I	loved.	The	girl	I	would
always	love.
    Instinctively,	I	 grabbed	the	gold	book	in	my	pocket.	It	was	warm,	as	if	some
part	of	my	 mother	was	alive	within	 it.	 I	 pressed	the	book	into	Lena's	hand,
feeling	the	warmth	spread	into	her	body.	I	willed	her	to	feel	it	--	the	kind	of	love
within	the	book,	the	kind	of	love	that	never	died.
    "I	 know	what	you	are,	Lena.	I	know	your	heart.	You	can	trust	me.	You	can
trust	yourself."

349
     Lena	held	the	tiny	 book	in	her	hand.	It	wasn't	enough.	"What	 if	you're	wrong,
Ethan?	How	can	you	know?"
     "I	 know	because	I	know	you."
     I	let	 go	of	her	hand.	I	couldn't	 bear	to	think	of	 anything	happening	to	her,	but
I	couldn't	 stop	it	from	 coming.	"Lena,	 you	have	to	do	 it.	There's	no	other	way.	 I
wish	there	was,	but	there	isn't."
     We	looked	 out	over	the	cavern.	Ridley	 looked	up,	and	for	 a	second	I	thought
she	saw	us.
     Lena	looked	at	me.	"I	 can't	let	Ridley	 die.	I	 swear	she's	trying	to	change.	I've
already	lost	too	much."
     I	already	 lost	Uncle	Macon.
     "It	 was	my	fault."	 She	clung	to	me,	sobbing.
     I	wanted	to	tell	 her	he	was	alive,	but	I	 remembered	what	Macon	said.	He	was
still	 Transitioning.	 There	was	a	 possibility	 he	still	 had	 Darkness	within	 him.	 If
Lena	knew	he	 was	alive	 and	there	was	a	chance	she	could	 lose	him	 again,	she
would	never	choose	to	go	Light.	She	wasn't	capable	of	killing	 him	a	second	time.
     The	moon	 was	directly	  over	Lena's	 head.	Soon	the	Claiming	  would	 begin.
There	was	only	 one	decision	left	 to	make,	 and	I	was	afraid	 she	wasn't	going	 to
make	it.
     Ridley	 appeared	at	the	top	of	 the	steps,	breathless.	She	hugged	Lena,	taking
her	from	 me.	She	rubbed	her	face	against	Lena's	 wet	cheek.	They	 were	sisters,
for	 better	or	 worse.	They	 always	 had	been.	"Lena,	 listen	 to	 me.	You	  have	to
choose."	Lena	looked	away,	pained.	Ridley	grabbed	the	side	of	her	cousin's	face,
forcing	 Lena	to	 look	at	 her.	Lena	noticed	 right	 away.	"What	 happened	to	your
eyes?"
     "It	  doesn't	matter.	 You	 need	 to	 listen	 to	 me.	Have	 I	  ever	done	 anything
noble?	Have	I	 ever	let	you	 sit	in	 the	front	 seat	of	the	car	 a	single	time?	 Have	I
ever	once	saved	you	the	last	piece	of	cake,	in	 sixteen	years?	Ever	let	you	try	 on
my	shoes?"
     "I	 always	hated	your	shoes."	A	tear	rolled	down	Lena's	cheek.
     "You	 loved	my	shoes."	Ridley	 smiled	and	wiped	Lena's	face	with	her	scraped
and	bloody	hand.
     "I	 don't	care	what	 you	say.	I'm	 not	doing	 it."	 Their	 eyes	were	fixed	 on	each
other.
     "I	 don't	have	a	selfless	bone	in	my	body,	Lena,	and	I'm	telling	you	to	 do	it."
     "No."
     "Trust	 me.	 It's	  better	this	  way.	 If	 I	  still	  have	some	 Darkness	 inside	 me
somewhere,	you'll	be	doing	me	a	favor.	I	 don't	want	to	be	Dark	anymore,	but	 I'm
not	cut	out	to	be	a	Mortal.	I'm	 a	Siren."

350
     I	could	see	the	recognition	in	 Lena's	eyes.	"But	if	you're	a	Mortal,	 you	won't	 -
-"
     Ridley	 shook	her	 head.	"There's	no	way	 to	 know.	Once	 there's	Darkness	in
your	blood,	you	know	 ..."	Her	voice	broke	off.
     I	remembered	what	 Macon	said.	Darkness	does	not	 leave	us	as	easily	as	we
would	hope.
     Ridley	 hugged	Lena	tight.	"Come	 on,	what	am	 I	going	 to	do	with	 seventy	or
eighty	more	years?	Can	you	really	see	me	hanging	around	Gat-dung,	making	out
with	Link	 in	 the	back	of	the	Beater?	Trying	 to	figure	 out	how	 the	stove	works?"
She	looked	 away,	her	 voice	 faltering.	 "Can't	 even	 get	decent	 Chinese	in	 that
crappy	town."
     Lena	held	 tight	to	 Ridley's	 hand,	and	Ridley	 squeezed	it,	then	gently	 pulled
her	hand	away,	one	finger	at	a	time,	and	placed	Lena's	hand	in	mine.
     "Take	 care	of	 her	for	 me,	Short	 Straw."	 Ridley	 disappeared	back	down	the
steps	before	I	could	say	a	word.
     I'm	scared,	Ethan.
     I'm	right	 here,	L.	I'm	not	 going	anywhere.	You	can	make	it	through	this.
     Ethan	--
     You	can,	L.	Claim	 yourself.	No	 one	has	to	show	you	the	way.	You	know	your
own	way.
     Then	another	voice	 joined	mine,	 from	 a	great	distance	and	also	from	 within
me.
     My	 mother.
     Together	we	told	 Lena,	in	the	one	stolen	moment	 we	had,	not	what	to	do	 but
that	she	could	do	it.
     Claim	yourself,	 I	said.
     Claim	yourself,	 my	mother	said.
     I	am	myself,	Lena	said.	I	am.
     Blinding	 light	  surged	from	 the	moon,	 like	 a	sonic	boom,	 shaking	the	 rocks
loose	from	the	walls.	 I	couldn't	 see	anything	but	the	moonlight.	 I	felt	 Lena's	fear
and	her	pain,	pouring	over	me	like	a	wave.	Every	loss,	every	mistake,	was	seared
into	 her	 soul,	 creating	 a	 different	 kind	  of	 tattoo.	 One	 made	 from	 rage	 and
abandonment,	heartbreak	and	tears.
     Moonlight	 flooded	the	cave,	pure	and	blinding.	 For	a	minute,	I	couldn't	 see	or
hear	anything.	Then	 I	looked	 over	at	 Lena,	tears	running	 down	her	 cheeks	and
shining	in	her	eyes,	which	were	now	their	 true	colors.
     One	green,	one	gold.
     She	 flung	 her	 head	 back	 to	 face	 the	 moon.	 Her	  body	 twisted,	 her	 feet
hovering	 above	the	 stone.	Below	 her,	 the	 fighting	 stopped.	 No	 one	spoke	 or

351
moved.	 Every	 Caster	 and	 Demon	 in	  the	 room	 seemed	 to	 know	  what	 was
happening,	that	their	fates	hung	in	 the	balance.	Above	her,	 the	brightness	of	the
moon	began	to	 vibrate,	the	 light	 pulling,	 until	  the	whole	 cave	was	one	ball	 of
light.
     The	moon	 continued	to	swell.	 Like	 a	moment	 from	 a	dream,	the	moon	split
into	 two	  halves,	 dividing	  in	  the	 sky	 directly	  over	 where	 Lena	  stood.	 The
moonlight	 behind	 her	 seemed	to	 form	  a	giant,	 luminous	  butterfly,	 with	  two
brilliant,	 glowing	 wings.	One	green,	one	gold.
     A	cracking	 sound	echoed	across	the	cave,	and	Lena	screamed.
     The	 light	 disappeared.	The	 Dark	 Fire	disappeared.	There	 was	no	 altar,	 no
pyre,	and	we	were	back	on	the	ground.
     The	air	was	perfectly	still.	 I	 thought	it	was	over,	but	I	was	wrong.
     Lightning	 sliced	 through	 the	air,	 splitting	 into	 two	 distinct	 paths,	hitting	 its
targets	simultaneously.
     Larkin.
     His	 face	 twisted	 in	 terror	 as	his	 body	 seized,	then	 started	to	 blacken.	 He
seemed	to	be	burning	from	 the	 inside	out.	 Black	cracks	 crawled	along	 his	skin
until	he	turned	to	dust,	blowing	 across	the	cave	floor.
     The	second	bolt	traveled	in	the	opposite	direction,	hitting	 Twyla.
     Her	eyes	rolled	 back	in	her	head.	Her	body	 fell	 to	the	ground,	as	if	 her	spirit
had	stepped	out	and	tossed	it	aside.	But	she	didn't	turn	to	dust.	Her	lifeless	 body
lay	 on	the	 ground	 as	Twyla	  rose	 above	it,	 shimmering	  and	fading	  until	 she
became	translucent.
     Then	the	 haze	began	to	settle,	 the	particles	 rearranging	until	 Twyla	  looked
more	as	she	had	in	life.	Whatever	she	had	left	behind	in	 this	life,	 it	was	finished.
If	she	had	business	here	again,	it	 would	 be	because	she	chose	to.	Twyla	wasn't
tethered	to	this	 world.	 She	was	free.	 And	 she	looked	 peaceful,	as	if	 she	knew
something	we	didn't.
     As	 she	rose	up	through	 the	crack	 in	the	 cave	ceiling	 toward	 the	moon,	 she
stopped.	For	a	second,	I	wasn't	sure	what	was	happening	as	she	hovered	there.
     Good-bye,	cher.
     I	 don't	know	 if	 she	really	 said	it,	 or	 if	 I	 imagined	 it,	but	 she	reached	out	a
luminous	hand	and	smiled.	I	 lifted	 my	own	 hand	toward	the	sky	and	watched	as
Twyla	faded	into	 the	moonlight.
     A	 single	star	appeared	in	 the	Caster	sky	--	 a	sky	I	 could	 see,	but	only	 for	a
second.	The	Southern	Star.	It	had	found	its	rightful	place,	back	in	the	sky.
     Lena	had	made	her	choice.
     She	had	Claimed	herself.
     Even	if	I	 wasn't	sure	what	that	meant,	she	was	still	with	me.	I	hadn't	lost	her.

352
Claim	yourself.
My	mom	would	be	proud	of	us.

353
	6.21	

354
                                      Darkness	      and	  Light



Lena	stood	straight	and	tall,	a	dark	silhouette	against	the	moon.	She	didn't	cry,
and	she	wasn't	screaming.	Her	feet	had	settled	on	the	ground,	on	either	side	of
the	giant	crack	that	now	marked	the	cave,	splitting	it	almost	entirely	in	two.
    "What	just	happened?"	Liv	was	looking	at	Amma	and	Arelia	for	answers.
    I	 followed	Lena's	eyes	across	the	great	expanse	of	rocks	and	understood	her
silence.	She	was	in	shock,	staring	at	one	familiar	face.
    "It	 appears	Abraham	has	been	interfering	with	the	Order	of	Things."	Macon
stood	in	the	cave	entrance	framed	by	light	from	a	moon	that	was	beginning	to
stitch	itself	back	together.	Leah	and	Bade	were	at	his	side.	I	wasn't	sure	how
long	he'd	been	standing	there,	but	I	could	tell	from	the	look	on	his	face	he	had
seen	everything.	He	walked	slowly,	 still	 adjusting	to	the	 feeling	of	 his	feet
touching	the	ground.	Bade	kept	pace	with	him,	and	Leah	kept	one	hand	on	his
arm.
    Lena	softened	at	the	sound	of	his	voice,	a	voice	from	the	grave.	I	heard	the
thought,	barely	a	whisper.	She	was	afraid	to	even	think	it.
    Uncle	Macon?
    Her	face	went	white.	I	remembered	how	I	felt	when	I	saw	my	mother	at	the
cemetery.
    "An	 impressive	little	trick	you	and	Sarafine	managed	to	pull	off,	Grandfather.
I'll	 give	 you	 that.	Calling	 a	 Claiming	 Moon	 out	of	 time?	 You've	outdone
yourself,	really."	Macon's	voice	echoed	in	the	cavern.	The	air	was	so	still,	so
quiet,	you	  couldn't	 hear	anything	 except	 the	low	  churning	 of	 the	 tides.
"Naturally,	when	I	 heard	you	 were	coming,	I	 had	to	 make	an	appearance."
Macon	waited,	as	if	he	was	expecting	an	answer.	But	when	he	didn't	get	one,	he
snapped.	"Abraham!	I	see	your	hand	in	this."
    The	 cave	began	to	shake.	Rocks	fell	from	the	jagged	crack	in	the	ceiling,
beating	down	onto	the	floor.	It	felt	like	the	whole	cavern	was	about	to	collapse.
The	sky	above	grew	darker.	The	green-eyed	Macon	--	the	Light	Caster,	if	that's
what	he	truly	was	--	seemed	even	more	powerful	than	the	Incubus	he	was	before.
    A	 rumbling	laugh	echoed	off	the	rock	walls.	Down	on	the	watery	cave	floor,
where	the	moon	no	longer	shone,	Abraham	stepped	out	of	the	shadows.	With	his
white	beard	and	matching	white	suit,	he	looked	like	a	harmless	old	man	instead
of	the	Darkest	of	Blood	Incubuses.	Hunting	stayed	at	his	side.

355
     Abraham	stood	over	 Sarafine,	whose	body	was	lying	 on	the	ground.	She	had
turned	completely	white,	covered	in	 a	thick	layer	of	frost,	 an	icy	cocoon.
     "You	 call	 on	me,	 boy?"	The	 old	man	 laughed	again,	sharp	and	quick.	 "Ah,
the	hubris	of	 youth.	In	 a	hundred	years,	you	will	  learn	your	place,	Grandson."	 I
tried	to	 mentally	 calculate	 the	generations	 between	them	 --	 four,	 maybe	even
five.
     "I	  am	 well	  aware	 of	 my	  place,	 Grandfather.	 Unfortunately,	  and	 this	  is
exceptionally	awkward,	 I	believe	I'll	 be	the	one	to	send	you	back	to	yours."
     Abraham	 smoothed	his	beard	 deliberately.	 "Little	  Macon	Ravenwood.	 You
were	always	such	a	lost	boy.	 This	is	 your	doing,	 not	mine.	 Blood	is	 Blood,	just
as	Dark	is	Dark.	 You	 should	have	remembered	where	your	 allegiances	lie."	 He
paused,	looking	at	Leah.	"You	 would	 have	done	well	 to	remember	that,	too,	my
dear.	But	then,	you	were	raised	by	a	Caster."	He	shuddered.
     I	 could	see	the	anger	 in	Leah's	face,	 but	I	 could	 also	see	the	fear.	 She	was
willing	  to	try	 her	 luck	 with	 the	 Blood	 pack,	 but	she	 didn't	 want	 to	challenge
Abraham.
     Abraham	looked	at	Hunting.	 "On	the	subject	of	lost	boys,	where	is	John?"
     "Long	 gone.	Coward."
     Abraham	whipped	 around	to	face	Hunting.	 "John	 isn't	capable	of	cowardice.
It's	not	in	his	nature.	And	 his	life	 means	more	to	me	than	yours.	So	I	suggest	you
find	him."
     Hunting	 lowered	his	 eyes	and	nodded.	I	couldn't	 help	but	 wonder	why	 John
Breed	was	so	important	to	Abraham,	who	didn't	seem	to	care	about	anyone.
     Macon	watched	Abraham	 carefully.	 "It's	 touching	to	 see	how	concerned	you
are	about	your	 boy.	I	 certainly	 hope	you	 find	 him.	I	 know	 how	 painful	 it	 is	to
lose	a	child."
     The	cavern	started	to	shake	again,	and	rocks	fell	around	our	feet.	"What	 have
you	done	with	John?"	In	 his	rage,	Abraham	seemed	less	like	a	harmless	old	man
and	more	like	the	Demon	he	truly	was.
     "What	 have	I	done	with	 him?	 I	 think	the	 question	is	what	 have	you	done	to
him?"	 Abraham's	black	 eyes	 narrowed,	but	 Macon	 only	 smiled.	 "An	  Incubus
who	can	walk	 in	the	sunlight	 and	retain	his	strength	without	 feeding	 ...	it	 would
require	a	very	 specific	 coupling	 to	produce	those	qualities	 in	 a	child.	 Wouldn't
you	agree?	Scientifically	speaking,	you	would	 need	Mortal	qualities,	 yet	this	boy
John	possesses	the	gifts	of	a	Caster.	He	can't	have	three	parents,	which	means	his
mother	was	--"
     Leah	gasped.	"An	 Evo."	 Every	 Caster	in	the	room	 reacted	to	the	 word.	The
surprise	spread	like	 a	 ripple,	 a	 new	kind	  of	 coldness	in	 the	air.	 Only	  Amma
looked	 impassive.	  She	 folded	  her	 arms	 and	  fixed	  her	 eyes	 on	  Abraham

356
Ravenwood	as	if	  he	was	 just	 another	chicken	 she	was	 planning	 on	plucking,
skinning,	and	boiling	 in	her	banged-up	pot.
     I	tried	 to	remember	what	 Lena	told	 me	about	Evos.	They	 were	metamorphs,
with	the	ability	 to	mirror	 human	form.	They	 didn't	just	step	inside	a	Mortal	 body,
like	Sarafine.	Evos	could	actually	 become	Mortals	for	short	periods	of	time.
     Macon	 smiled.	  "Precisely.	 A	  Caster	that	  can	take	 on	 human	 form	  long
enough	to	conceive	a	 child,	with	 all	 the	DNA	  of	 a	Mortal	 and	a	Caster	on	one
side	and	an	Incubus	on	the	other.	You	have	been	busy,	haven't	you,	Grandfather?
I	didn't	realize	you	were	matchmaking	 in	your	spare	time."
     Abraham's	eyes	grew	 blacker.	"You	  are	the	one	who	 muddied	the	 Order	of
Things.	First,	 with	 your	infatuation	 with	 a	 Mortal,	 and	then	by	 turning	on	 your
own	kind	to	 protect	this	girl."	 Abraham	shook	his	head,	as	if	Macon	 was	nothing
more	than	an	 impetuous	boy.	 "And	  where	has	it	 left	 us?	Now	 the	 Duchannes
child	has	cleaved	the	moon.	Do	you	know	 what	this	means?	The	threat	she	poses
to	all	of	us?"
     "The	fate	of	 my	niece	is	none	of	 your	concern.	You	 seem	to	have	your	hands
full	 enough	with	 your	 own	 science	experiment	of	 a	 child.	 Although,	 I	 have	to
wonder	what	you're	doing	with	 him."	 Macon's	green	eyes	glowed	as	he	spoke.
     "Be	 careful	 who	you	 speak	to	 that	way."	 Hunting	 took	 a	 step	forward,	 but
Abraham	put	 up	his	 hand,	and	Hunting	 stopped.	"Killed	  you	once,	 I'll	 kill	 you
twice."
     Macon	 shook	 his	head.	 "Nursery	 rhymes,	 Hunting?	 If	 you	 are	 planning	 a
career	as	Grandfather's	minion,	you're	going	 to	have	to	 work	on	 your	delivery."
Macon	sighed.	 "Now	 then,	 tuck	 your	 tail	 between	your	 legs	 and	follow	  your
master	home	like	a	good	dog."	Hunting's	expression	hardened.
     Macon	 turned	to	 Abraham.	 "And	 Grandfather,	 as	much	as	I	 would	 love	 to
compare	lab	notes,	I	think	it's	time	you	leave."
     The	 old	 man	laughed.	 A	 cold	 wind	 began	to	 circle	 around	 him,	 whistling
between	the	rocks.	"You	think	 you	can	order	me	around	like	an	errand	boy?	You
will	 not	 call	 my	 name,	Macon	 Ravenwood.	 You	 will	 cry	 my	 name.	You	 will
bleed	my	name."	 The	wind	 grew	around	him,	 blowing	 his	 string	tie	 awkwardly
across	his	body.	"And	when	you	die,	my	 name	will	 still	be	feared,	and	yours	will
be	forgotten."
     Macon	 looked	 him	 in	 the	 eye,	without	  the	 slightest	 hint	 of	 fear.	 "As	 my
mathematically	gifted	 brother	 clarified,	 I've	 already	died	 once.	You're	 going	to
have	to	come	up	with	 something	 new,	old	man.	 It's	getting	 tiresome.	Allow	 me
to	see	you	out."
     Macon	fluttered	 his	fingers,	 and	I	 heard	a	ripping	sound	as	the	night	 opened
behind	Abraham.	The	old	 man	hesitated,	then	smiled.	"My	 age	must	be	catching

357
up	with	 me.	I	almost	forgot	 to	collect	 my	things	 before	I	leave."	 He	reached	out
his	hand,	and	something	emerged	from	behind	one	of	 the	crevices	in	the	rock.	It
vanished,	reappearing	in	his	hand.	I	held	my	breath	for	a	second	when	I	saw	it.
     The	Book	of	Moons.
     The	Book	 we	 believed	 had	burned	to	 ash,	in	 the	 fields	 of	Greenbrier.	 The
Book	that	was	a	curse	all	its	own.
     Macon's	 face	darkened,	and	 he	held	 out	 his	hand.	 "That	 doesn't	belong	 to
you,	 Grandfather."	 The	 Book	 twitched	  in	 Abraham's	 hand,	 but	 the	darkness
surrounding	him	 deepened,	and	the	old	 man	 shrugged	with	 a	smile.	 A	 second
ripping	sound	 echoed	across	the	cavern	as	he	disappeared,	taking	the	Book	and
Hunting	 and	Sarafine	 with	 him.	 By	 the	 time	 the	echo	 died,	the	 shallow	 tides
washed	away	even	the	imprint	of	Sarafine's	body	in	the	sand.
     At	 the	sound	of	the	rip,	 Lena	started	to	run.	By	 the	time	Abraham	 was	gone,
she	was	across	the	rocky	cave	floor	and	halfway	to	Macon.	He	leaned	against	the
rough	wall	 until	 Lena	 threw	herself	 into	 his	chest,	and	Macon	 swayed	as	if	 he
was	going	to	fall.
     "You're	 dead."	Lena	spoke	into	his	dirty,	ripped	shirt.
     "No,	 sweetheart.	I'm	very	 much	alive."	 He	 drew	her	face	 up	to	look	 at	him.
"Look	at	me.	I'm	 still	here."
     "Your	 eyes.	They're	green."	She	touched	his	face,	shocked.
     "And	 yours	 are	not."	 He	touched	 her	cheek,	sadly.	 "But	 they	are	 beautiful.
Both	the	green	and	the	gold."
     Lena	shook	her	head	in	disbelief.	 "I	 killed	 you.	I	used	the	Book,	 and	it	killed
you."
     Macon	 stroked	 her	 hair.	 "Lila	  Jane	saved	me	 before	 I	 crossed	over.	 She
imprisoned	me	in	an	Arclight,	  and	Ethan	released	me.	It	wasn't	your	fault,	 Lena.
You	didn't	 know	 what	would	 happen."	Lena	 began	to	sob.	He	stroked	 her	wild
black	curls,	whispering,	"Shh.	 It's	all	right	 now.	It's	over."
     He	was	lying.	 I	 could	see	it	in	 his	eyes.	The	black	pools	that	 kept	his	secrets
were	gone.	I	 didn't	 understand	everything	Abraham	 had	said,	 but	I	 knew	 there
was	truth	in	 it.	 Whatever	 had	happened	when	Lena	Claimed	 herself	 wasn't	the
solution	to	our	problems,	but	a	new	problem	all	 its	own.
     Lena	pulled	 away	from	 Macon.	"Uncle	 Macon,	 I	didn't	 know	this	 was	going
to	happen.	One	 minute	 I	 was	thinking	  about	 Dark	 and	Light	  --	 about	what	 I
really	wanted.	But	all	 I	could	think	 about	was	that	I	don't	belong	anywhere.	After
everything	I've	been	through,	I'm	not	Light	 or	Dark.	 I'm	both."
     "It's	all	 right,	Lena."	 He	reached	out	for	her,	but	she	stood	on	her	own.
     "It's	 not."	  She	shook	 her	head.	 "Look	  what	I've	  done.	Auntie	  Twyla	 and
Ridley	are	gone,	and	Larkin	..."

358
     Macon	 looked	at	 Lena	as	if	  he	was	seeing	her	 for	 the	first	 time.	 "You	 did
what	you	had	to	do.	You	 Claimed	yourself.	 You	didn't	 pick	a	place	in	the	Order.
You	changed	it."
     Her	voice	was	hesitant.	"What	does	it	mean?"
     "It	 means	you	are	yourself	--	powerful	 and	unique	--	 like	 the	Great	Barrier,	a
place	where	there	is	no	Dark	or	 Light,	 only	magic.	 But	unlike	 the	Great	Barrier,
you	 are	both	 Light	  and	 Dark.	 Like	  me.	 And	 after	 what	 I	 saw	 tonight,	  like
Ridley."
     "But	  what	 happened	to	 the	 moon?"	 Lena	 looked	 at	 Gramma,	 but	 it	 was
Amma	who	spoke	up,	from	the	rocky	 ledge.
     "You	 split	 it,	child.	 Melchizedek's	 right,	 the	Order	a	Things	 is	broken.	Can't
say	what'll	 happen	now."	  The	way	 she	said	 broken	made	 it	 clear	that	 broken
wasn't	something	we	wanted	the	Order	to	be.
     "I	 don't	understand.	You're	all	 here,	but	so	were	Hunting	and	Abraham.	 How
is	that	possible?	The	curse	--"	Lena	faltered.
     "You	 possess	both	Light	and	Darkness,	a	possibility	the	curse	did	not	account
for.	 None	 of	  us	did."	  There	 was	 pain	 in	 Gramma's	 voice.	  She	was	 hiding
something,	and	I	sensed	things	were	more	 complicated	than	she	was	letting	 on.
"I'm	just	glad	 you're	all	right."
     The	sound	of	 water	splashing	echoed	through	the	cavern.	I	 turned	in	 time	to
see	Ridley's	blond	and	pink	 hair	whip	 around	the	corner.	 Link	 was	right	 behind
her.
     "Guess	I	really	 am	a	Mortal."	 Ridley	 said	it	with	 her	usual	brand	of	 sarcasm,
but	she	looked	relieved.	"You	 always	have	to	be	different,	 don't	you?	Way	 to	go
and	screw	things	up	again,	Cuz."
     I	heard	Lena's	breath	catch,	and	for	a	second	she	didn't	move.
     It	 was	all	too	 much.	Macon	was	alive,	 when	Lena	 believed	she'd	killed	 him.
She	had	Claimed	herself	 and	remained	both	 Dark	 and	Light.	 As	 far	as	I	 could
tell,	she	had	broken	the	moon.	I	knew	Lena	would	 fall	 apart	moments	from	now.
When	she	did,	I	would	be	there	to	carry	her	home.
     Lena	grabbed	Ridley	and	Macon,	 practically	 strangling	them	in	her	own	 kind
of	Caster	circle,	 seeming	neither	 Light	 nor	Dark.	 Just	very	 tired,	but	 no	longer
very	alone.

359
	6.22	

360
                                     The	  Way	   Back	   Home



I	 couldn't	sleep	anymore.	I	had	crashed	hard	last	night,	on	the	familiar	pine-
board	floor	of	Lena's	room.	We	had	both	passed	out,	still	wearing	our	clothes.
Twenty-four	hours	later,	it	was	weird	to	be	in	my	own	room,	in	a	bed	again,	after
sleeping	between	tree	roots	on	muddy	forest	floors.	I	had	seen	too	much.	I	got	up
and	shut	my	window,	in	spite	of	the	heat.	There	were	too	many	things	out	there
to	be	afraid	of,	too	many	to	fight.
    It	 was	a	wonder	anyone	in	Gatlin	slept	at	all.
    Lucille	 didn't	have	that	problem.	She	was	kneading	a	pile	of	dirty	clothes	in
the	corner,	fluffing	up	her	bed	for	the	night.	That	cat	could	sleep	anywhere.
    Not	 me.	I	flipped	 over.	I	was	having	a	hard	time	getting	comfortable	with
comfortable.
    Me,	too.
    I	 smiled.	Floorboards	creaked,	and	my	door	swung	open.	Lena	was	standing
in	my	doorway,	in	my	faded	Silver	Surfer	T-shirt.	I	could	see	the	tip	of	pajama
shorts	underneath.	Her	hair	was	wet	and	she	was	wearing	it	down	again,	the	way
I	liked	it	best.
    "This	is	a	dream,	right?"
    Lena	closed	the	door	behind	her,	the	slightest	twinkle	in	her	gold	and	green
eyes.	"Do	you	mean	your	kind	of	dream	or	mine?"	She	pulled	up	the	covers	and
climbed	in	next	to	me.	She	smelled	like	lemons	and	rosemary	and	soap.	It	had
been	a	long	road	for	both	of	us.	She	tucked	her	head	under	my	chin	and	leaned
against	me.	I	could	feel	her	questions	and	her	fears,	beneath	the	covers	with	us.
    What	is	it,	L?
    She	burrowed	deeper	into	my	chest.
    Do	 you	think	you'll	ever	be	able	to	forgive	me?	I	know	things	won't	be	the
same	--
    I	 tightened	my	arms	around	her,	remembering	all	the	times	it	felt	like	I'd	lost
her	forever.	Those	moments	wound	themselves	around	me,	threatening	to	crush
me	under	their	weight.	There	was	no	way	I	could	be	without	her.	Forgiving	her
wasn't	a	question.
    Things	will	be	different.	Better.
    But	I'm	not	Light,	Ethan.	I'm	something	else.	I'm	...	complicated.
    I	 reached	under	the	covers	and	brought	her	hand	to	my	mouth.	I	kissed	her

361
palm	where	the	swirling	 black	 patterns	hadn't	disappeared.	It	almost	looked	like
Sharpie,	but	I	knew	it	would	 never	fade.
     "I	 know	what	you	are,	and	I	love	you.	Nothing	 can	change	that."
     "I	 wish	I	could	go	back.	I	 wish	..."
     I	 pressed	my	 forehead	against	 hers.	"Don't.	  You're	 you.	 You	 chose	to	 be
yourself."
     "It's	 scary.	My	whole	 life,	I've	 grown	up	with	 Dark	and	Light.	 It	 feels	strange
not	to	fit	in	 anywhere."	She	flopped	onto	her	back.	"What	if	 I'm	not	anything?"
     "What	if	 that's	the	wrong	question?"
     She	smiled.	"Yeah?	What's	the	right	one?"
     "You're	 you.	Who	 is	that?	Who	 does	she	want	to	be?	And	how	 can	I	get	her
to	kiss	me?"
     She	raised	herself	on	her	arms	and	leaned	over	my	face,	letting	her	hair	tickle
me.	Her	lips	touched	mine,	 and	it	was	back	--	the	electricity,	 the	current	 that	ran
between	us.	I	had	missed	it,	even	as	it	burned	my	lips.
     But	something	else	was	missing.
     I	 leaned	over	 and	opened	the	drawer	 of	 my	 nightstand,	reaching	 inside.	 "I
think	 this	 belongs	 to	 you."	 I	 let	 the	 chain	 fall	  into	 her	 hand,	her	 memories
spilling	 between	her	fingers	--	the	silver	 button	she	had	fastened	on	a	paper	clip,
the	red	string,	the	tiny	Sharpie	I	gave	her	on	the	water	tower.
     She	stared	into	her	hand,	stunned.
     "I	 added	a	 couple	of	 things."	 I	 untangled	 the	charms	 so	she	could	 see	the
silver	 sparrow	 from	  Macon's	 funeral.	 It	  meant	something	  so	different	  now.
"Amma	 says	sparrows	can	 travel	 a	long	 way	 and	always	 find	 their	 way	 back
home.	Like	you	did."
     "Only	 because	you	came	to	get	me."
     "I	 had	help.	That's	why	I	gave	you	this."
     I	held	 up	the	tag	from	Lucille's	  collar	--	 the	one	I	carried	in	 my	pocket	while
we	were	 searching	 for	 Lena	 and	I	  was	watching	  her	through	 Lucille's	  eyes.
Lucille	 looked	at	me	calmly,	yawning	 from	the	corner	of	the	room.
     "It's	 a	conduit	 that	 allows	Mortals	 to	 connect	with	  a	Caster	animal.	 Macon
explained	it	to	me	this	morning."
     "You	 had	it	all	this	time?"
     "Yeah.	Aunt	 Prue	gave	it	to	me.	It	works	as	long	as	you	have	the	tag."
     "Wait?	 How	did	your	 aunt	end	up	with	a	Caster	cat?"
     "Arelia	  gave	 Lucille	  to	 my	  aunt	so	 she	 could	 find	  her	 way	 around	 the
Tunnels."
     Lena	started	to	 untangle	the	chain,	 untying	 the	knots	 that	had	formed	 since
she	lost	it.	"I	 can't	believe	you	found	it.	 When	I	left	 it	 behind,	I	never	thought	I'd

362
see	it	again."
     She	hadn't	lost	it.	She	had	taken	it	off.	 I	resisted	the	urge	to	ask	her	why.	 "Of
course	I	found	it.	It's	got	everything	 I've	ever	given	you	on	it."
     Lena	closed	her	hand	around	it	and	looked	away.	"Not	everything."
     I	 knew	what	 she	was	thinking	 about	--	 my	mother's	 ring.	She	had	 taken	off
the	ring,	too,	but	I	hadn't	found	it.
     Not	 until	 this	morning,	 when	 I	 discovered	it	 lying	 on	 my	desk,	 as	if	 it	had
always	been	 there.	I	 reached	into	  the	drawer	 again	 and	opened	Lena's	 hand,
pressing	the	ring	into	it.	When	she	felt	the	cool	metal,	 she	looked	up	at	me.
     You	found	it?
     No.	My	mom	must	have.	It	was	sitting	on	my	desk	when	I	woke	up.
     She	doesn't	hate	me?
     It	 was	a	 question	only	 a	Caster	 girl	 would	 ask.	Had	 the	ghost	 of	my	 dead
mother	forgiven	 her?	 I	knew	 the	 answer.	I	 found	the	 ring	 lying	 inside	 a	book
Lena	loaned	 me,	 Pablo	 Neruda's	 Book	of	  Questions,	the	 chain	 serving	 as	 a
bookmark	under	the	lines	"Is	it	 true	that	amber	contains	/	the	tears	of	the	sirens?"
     My	  mother	 had	 been	more	 of	  an	Emily	  Dickinson	  fan,	 but	  Lena	 loved
Neruda.	 It	 was	 like	  the	 sprig	  of	  rosemary	 I	 found	  in	 my	  mom's	 favorite
cookbook	last	Christmas	 --	something	of	 my	mother's	 and	something	of	 Lena's,
together,	as	if	that	was	always	how	it	was	intended	to	be.
     I	 answered	Lena	by	fastening	the	chain	 around	her	neck,	where	 it	belonged.
She	touched	it	 and	stared	into	 my	brown	 eyes	with	 her	green	and	 gold	ones.	I
knew	she	was	still	  the	girl	 I	 loved,	no	 matter	what	 color	 her	eyes	were.	There
was	no	one	color	that	could	 paint	Lena	Duchannes.	She	was	a	red	sweater	and	a
blue	sky,	 a	gray	wind	 and	a	 silver	 sparrow,	a	black	 curl	 escaping	from	 behind
her	ear.
     Now	that	we	were	together,	it	 felt	like	 home	again.
     Lena	leaned	into	me,	grazing	my	 lips	gently	 at	first.	Then	she	kissed	me	with
an	intensity	that	 sent	heat	buzzing	up	 my	spine.	I	 felt	 her	find	 her	way	 back	to
me,	to	our	curves	and	our	corners,	the	places	our	bodies	fit	together	so	naturally.
     "Okay,	 this	is	definitely	 my	dream."	I	 smiled,	running	 my	fingers	through	her
incredible	mess	of	black	hair.
     I	wouldn't	 be	so	sure	about	that.
     She	ran	her	hands	across	my	chest	as	I	breathed	her	in.	My	 mouth	wandered
down	her	shoulder,	and	I	pulled	her	closer	until	 I	could	feel	her	hipbones	digging
gently	into	 my	 skin.	 It	had	 been	so	long,	and	 I	had	 missed	her	so	much	 --	the
taste	of	her,	the	smell	of	her.	 I	held	her	face	in	 my	hands,	kissing	her	even	more
deeply,	and	my	heart	began	to	race.	I	had	to	stop	and	catch	my	breath.
     She	looked	into	my	 eyes,	leaning	back	on	my	pillow,	 careful	not	to	touch	me.

363
     Is	it	any	better?	Are	 you	--	am	I	hurting	 you?
     No.	It's	better.
     I	looked	at	the	wall	 and	counted	silently,	steadying	my	heart.
     You're	lying.
     I	slid	 my	arms	around	her,	but	she	wouldn't	look	at	me.
     We'll	never	really	 be	able	to	be	together,	Ethan.
     We're	together	now.
     I	 ran	my	 fingers	 lightly	  down	 her	 arms,	watching	 goose	bumps	 spring	 up
under	my	touch.
     You're	sixteen,	and	I'll	 be	seventeen	in	two	weeks.	We	have	time.
     Actually,	 in	Caster	 years,	I'm	already	 seventeen.	Count	the	moons.	I'm	older
than	you	now.
     She	smiled	a	little,	and	I	crushed	her	in	my	arms.
     Seventeen.	Whatever.	Maybe	by	eighteen	we'll	figure	it	out,	L.
     L.
     I	sat	up	in	bed,	staring	at	her.
     You	know,	don't	you?
     What?
     Your	real	name.	Now	that	you're	 Claimed,	you	know	it,	right?
     She	tilted	 her	head	to	 the	side,	with	 a	 half-smile.	 I	 grabbed	her	up	into	 my
arms,	my	face	hovering	just	above	hers.
     What	is	it?	Don't	 you	think	I	 should	know?
     Haven't	you	 figured	it	 out	yet,	 Ethan?	My	 name	is	Lena.	It's	 the	name	I	had
when	we	met.	It's	the	only	name	I'll	ever	have.
     She	knew	 it,	 but	she	wasn't	 going	 to	tell	 me.	 I	 understood	why.	 Lena	 was
Claiming	 herself	 again.	Deciding	  who	 she	was	going	 to	 be.	 Binding	 us	 back
together	with	  the	 things	 we	 had	 shared.	I	 was	 relieved,	 because	she	 would
always	be	Lena	to	me.
     The	girl	 I	met	in	my	dreams.
     I	 pulled	 the	 cover	 up	 over	 our	 heads.	Though	 none	 of	 my	 dreams	 went
remotely	like	this,	 in	a	matter	of	minutes,	we	were	both	sound	asleep.

364
	6.22	

365
                                                New	   Blood



For	once	I	wasn't	dreaming.	It	was	Lucille's	hissing	that	woke	me	up.	I	rolled
over,	Lena	curled	up	next	to	me.	It	was	still	hard	to	believe	she	was	here	and	she
was	safe.	It	was	the	thing	I	had	wanted	most	in	the	world,	and	now	I	had	it.	How
often	did	that	happen?	The	waning	moon	outside	my	bedroom	window	was	so
bright,	I	could	see	her	eyelashes	touching	her	cheek	as	she	slept.
    Lucille	  leaped	off	 the	bottom	 of	 my	 bed,	and	something	moved	in	 the
shadows.
    A	 silhouette.
    Someone	was	standing	in	front	of	my	window.	It	could	only	be	one	person,
who	wasn't	actually	a	person	at	all.	I	bolted	upright	in	bed.	Macon	was	standing
in	my	room,	and	Lena	was	under	the	covers	in	my	bed.	Weakened	or	not,	he	was
going	to	kill	me.
    "Ethan?"	I	 recognized	his	voice	the	second	I	heard	it,	even	though	he	was
trying	to	be	quiet.	It	wasn't	Macon.	It	was	Link.
    "What	 the	hell	 are	you	doing	in	 my	 room	in	 the	middle	of	 the	night?"	I
hissed,	trying	not	to	wake	Lena.
    "I'm	 in	trouble,	man.	You	gotta	help	me."	Then	he	noticed	Lena	curled	into	a
ball	next	to	me.	"Oh,	jeez.	I	didn't	know	you	were	--	you	know."
    "Sleeping?"
    "At	  least	someone	can."	He	was	pacing,	full	of	 nervous	energy,	even	for
Link.	His	arm	was	in	a	cast,	and	it	was	swinging	erratically.	Even	with	only	the
dim	light	from	the	window,	I	could	see	his	face	was	sweaty	and	pale.	He	looked
sick,	worse	than	sick.
    "What's	up	with	you,	man?	How	did	you	get	in	here?"
    Link	 sat	down	in	the	old	chair	by	my	desk,	then	stood	up	again.	His	T-shirt
had	a	hot	dog	on	it	and	said	BITE	ME.	He'd	had	it	since	we	were	in	eighth	grade.
"You	wouldn't	believe	me	if	I	told	you."
    The	 window	was	 open	behind	him,	the	curtains	blowing	 inside	as	if	 the
breeze	was	being	drawn	into	my	room.	My	stomach	was	beginning	to	twist	into
a	familiar	knot.	"Try	me."
    "Remember	when	Vampire	Boy	grabbed	me	on	Hell	Night?"	He	was	talking
about	the	night	of	the	Seventeenth	Moon,	which	would	always	be	Hell	Night	to
him.	It	was	also	the	title	of	the	horror	movie	that	scared	the	crap	out	of	him	when

366
he	was	ten.
     "Yeah?"
     Link	 was	pacing	again.	"You	know	 he	could've	killed	 me,	right?"
     I	wasn't	 sure	I	wanted	to	 hear	where	this	was	going.	 "But	 he	didn't,	and	he's
probably	 dead,	like	 Larkin."	  John	disappeared	that	 night,	 but	 no	one	 actually
knew	what	happened	to	him.
     "Yeah,	well,	 if	 he	is,	he	left	a	partin'	gift.	 Two	actually."	 Link	 leaned	over	my
bed.	Instinctively	 I	jumped	back,	bumping	into	 Lena.
     "What's	going	 on?"	She	was	half	asleep,	her	voice	deep	and	gravelly.
     "Relax,	 man."	 Link	 reached	past	me	 and	switched	 on	the	 light	 next	 to	my
bed.	"What	does	it	look	like	 to	you?"
     My	 eyes	adjusted	to	the	dim	 light,	 and	I	saw	two	 small	puncture	 wounds	on
Link's	pasty	neck,	the	distinct	mark	made	by	two	 evenly	set	canines.
     "He	bit	 you?"	 I	jerked	away	 from	him,	 pulling	 Lena	off	 the	bed	and	pushing
her	against	the	wall	behind	me.
     "So	I'm	 right?	Holy	 crap."	Link	 sat	down	on	my	bed,	dropping	his	head	in	his
hands.	He	looked	miserable.	"Am	  I	gonna	turn	 into	one	 a	those	bloodsuckers?"
He	was	staring	at	Lena,	waiting	for	her	to	confirm	 what	he	already	knew.
     "Technically,	  yes.	 You're	 probably	  already	 Turning,	  but	 it	 doesn't	 mean
you're	going	to	be	a	Blood	Incubus.	You	 can	fight	it,	 like	Uncle	 Macon,	and	feed
on	dreams	and	memories	instead	of	blood."	She	pushed	her	way	out	from	behind
me.	"Relax,	 Ethan.	He's	 not	going	 to	 attack	us,	like	  a	vampire	 in	one	 of	 your
lame	Mortal	horror	 movies	where	all	witches	wear	black	hats."
     "At	 least	I	look	good	in	 hats."	Link	sighed.	"And	 black."
     She	sat	down	next	to	him	on	the	edge	of	my	bed.	"He's	still	 Link."
     "You	 sure	about	that?"	The	more	I	checked	him	out,	the	worse	he	looked.
     "Yeah,	I	 gotta	know	 this	sorta	stuff."	 Link	 was	shaking	his	head,	defeated.	It
was	pretty	 obvious	he	 had	been	hoping	 Lena	was	 going	 to	tell	 him	 there	was
some	other	explanation.	"Holy	 crap,	my	 mom's	gonna	throw	me	 outta	the	house
when	she	finds	out.	I'm	gonna	have	to	live	in	the	Beater."
     "It'll	  be	okay,	man."	 It	was	a	 lie,	but	 what	else	could	I	 say?	Lena	was	right.
Link	 was	still	 my	best	friend.	 He	had	followed	 me	 into	the	Tunnels,	 which	was
the	reason	he	was	sitting	here	now	with	two	holes	in	his	neck.
     Link	 ran	his	hands	over	his	hair	 nervously.	"Dude,	 my	mom's	a	Baptist.	 You
think	she's	gonna	let	me	stay	in	the	house	when	she	finds	out	I'm	 a	Demon?	She
doesn't	even	like	Methodists."
     "Maybe	 she	won't	 notice."	  I	 knew	it	  was	a	stupid	 thing	 to	 say,	but	 I	 was
trying.
     "Sure.	Maybe	 she	won't	 notice	if	  I	never	 go	out	 durin'	 the	day	because	my

367
skin'll	fry	 off."	 Link	 rubbed	his	pale	arms	as	if	he	could	already	feel	his	skin
beginning	to	peel.
    "Not	  necessarily."	Lena	was	working	 something	out	in	 her	mind.	 "John
wasn't	your	average	Incubus.	He	was	a	hybrid.	Uncle	M	is	still	trying	to	figure
out	what	Abraham	was	doing	with	him."
    I	 remembered	what	Macon	said	about	hybrids	when	he	was	arguing	with
Abraham	at	the	Great	Barrier,	which	already	seemed	like	a	lifetime	ago.	But	I
didn't	want	to	think	about	John	Breed	at	all.	I	couldn't	forget	seeing	him	with	his
hands	all	over	Lena.
    At	 least	Lena	didn't	notice.	"His	 mother	was	an	Evo.	They	 can	Morph	--
transmutate	into	virtually	any	species,	even	Mortals.	That's	why	John	could	walk
around	during	the	day,	while	other	Incubuses	have	to	avoid	sunlight."
    "Yeah?	So	I'm	what,	like,	a	quarter	bloodsucker?"
    Lena	nodded.	"Probably.	I	mean,	I	can't	be	certain	of	anything."
    Link	 shook	his	head.	"That's	why	I	wasn't	sure	at	first.	I	was	out	all	day	and
nothin'	happened.	Figured	it	meant	I	was	in	the	clear."
    "Why	 didn't	you	say	something	right	away?"	It	was	a	stupid	question.	Who
would	want	 to	tell	 their	 friends	they	 were	Transforming	into	 some	kind	of
Demon?
    "I	 didn't	 realize	he	bit	me.	Just	thought	I	got	worked	over	in	the	fight,	but
then	I	started	feelin'	weird	and	saw	the	marks."
    "You'll	 have	to	be	careful,	man.	We	don't	know	much	about	John	Breed.	If
he's	some	kind	of	hybrid,	who	knows	what	you	can	do?"
    Lena	cleared	her	throat.	"Actually,	I	knew	him	pretty	well."	Link	and	I	turned
and	looked	at	her	at	the	same	time.	She	twisted	her	necklace	nervously.	"I	mean,
not	that	well.	But	we	were	in	the	Tunnels	together	for	a	long	time."
    "And?"	I	 could	feel	my	blood	rising.
    "He	 was	really	strong,	and	he	had	some	kind	of	weird	magnetism	that	drove
girls	crazy	everywhere	we	went."
    "Girls	 like	you?"	I	couldn't	help	myself.
    "Shut	up."	She	nudged	me	with	her	shoulder.
    "This	 is	startin'	to	 sound	better	already."	Link	cracked	a	smile,	in	spite	of
himself.
    Lena	was	going	down	the	list	 of	John's	attributes	in	her	mind,	a	list	I	 was
hoping	wasn't	too	long.	"He	could	see	and	hear	and	smell	things	I	couldn't."
    Link	 inhaled	deeply,	then	coughed.	"Dude,	you	really	need	a	shower."
    "You've	got	superpowers	now,	and	that's	the	best	you	can	do?"	I	shoved	him.
He	shoved	me	back,	and	I	flew	off	the	bed	onto	the	floor.
    "What	the	hell?"	I	was	used	to	being	the	one	throwing	him	on	the	ground.

368
     Link	 looked	at	his	hands,	nodding	with	 satisfaction.	"That's	right,	 fists	a	fury.
Like	I	 always	said."
     Lena	 picked	 up	Lucille,	  who	 had	 backed	herself	 into	 a	corner.	 "And	  you
should	be	able	to	Travel.	 You	know,	 materialize	 wherever	you	want.	You	 won't
need	to	use	the	window,	even	though	Uncle	Macon	says	it's	more	civilized."
     "I	  can	 walk	  through	  walls,	  like	  a	  superhero?"	 Link	  was	 cheering	  up
considerably.
     "You'll	 probably	 have	a	great	time,	except	..."	Lena	took	 a	breath	and	tried	to
act	casual.	"You	 won't	 really	 eat	anymore.	And	 assuming	you	 plan	to	 be	more
like	 Uncle	 Macon	 than	Hunting,	  you'll	 have	 to	 feed	off	  people's	dreams	and
memories	to	sustain	 yourself.	Uncle	 Macon	 called	it	 eavesdropping.	But	 you'll
have	plenty	of	time	because	you	won't	sleep	anymore."
     "I	 can't	eat?	What	am	I	gonna	tell	my	mom?"
     Lena	shrugged.	"Tell	her	you've	become	a	vegetarian."
     "A	 vegetarian?	Are	 you	 insane?	That's	worse	than	 bein'	a	quarter	 Demon!"
Link	stopped	pacing.	"Did	 you	hear	that?"
     "Hear	what?"
     He	walked	over	 to	the	open	window	and	leaned	out.	"Seriously?"	 There	were
a	few	banging	sounds	on	the	side	of	the	house,	and	Link	 hoisted	Ridley	 through
my	window.	 I	 looked	away	 dutifully,	 since	 most	of	Ridley's	 underwear	showed
at	one	point	or	 another	during	the	climb	 over	 the	windowsill.	 It	 wasn't	the	most
graceful	entrance.
     Apparently,	 Ridley	 had	 cleaned	up	 and	gone	back	 to	looking	  like	 a	Siren,
whether	she	was	actually	one	or	not.	She	pulled	her	skirt	down	and	shook	out	her
blond	and	pink	 streaked	hair.	"Let	 me	get	this	straight.	 The	party's	here,	but	I'm
supposed	to	stay	in	my	cell	with	the	dog?"
     Lena	sighed.	"You	mean	my	bedroom?"
     "Whatever.	 I	don't	 need	the	three	of	you	 hanging	out	together,	talking	 about
me.	I	have	enough	problems	as	it	 is.	Uncle	Macon	 and	my	mom	 have	decided	I
should	go	back	to	school,	since	apparently	I'm	not	a	danger	to	anyone	anymore."
It	looked	like	 she	was	about	to	burst	into	tears.
     "But	 you're	not."	Link	 pulled	out	my	 desk	chair	for	her.
     "I'm	 plenty	dangerous."	She	ignored	 him,	flopping	 down	 on	my	 bed.	"You'll
see."	Link	 grinned.	He	hoped	so,	that	 much	was	clear.	"They	 can't	make	me	go
to	that	backwoods	dump	you	call	a	school."
     "Nobody	 was	talking	 about	you,	 Ridley."	 Lena	sat	down	on	 the	bed,	next	to
her	cousin.
     Link	 went	back	to	pacing.	"We	were	talkin'	 about	me."
     "What	 about	 you?"	 He	 looked	 away,	 but	 Ridley	  must	 have	already	 seen

369
something	because	she	was	across	the	room	in	a	second.	She	grabbed	the	side	of
Link's	face.	"Look	 at	me."
     "What	for?"
     Ridley	 zeroed	in	on	him	like	a	Sybil.	 "Look	 at	me."
     As	Link	  turned,	his	 pale,	sweaty	skin	 caught	what	little	  light	 the	moon	cast
into	the	room.	But	it	 was	enough	light	to	see	the	puncture	marks.
     Ridley	 was	still	holding	 his	face,	but	her	hand	was	shaking.	Link	put	his	hand
on	her	wrist.	"Rid	 --"
     "Did	 he	 do	this	 to	 you?"	 Her	eyes	 narrowed.	Even	 though	they	 were	 blue
now,	instead	of	 gold,	and	she	couldn't	 convince	 anyone	to	jump	 off	 a	cliff,	 she
looked	like	she	could	throw	 someone	off	one.	It	was	easy	to	imagine	her	sticking
up	for	Lena	at	school	when	they	were	kids.
     Link	 took	 her	hand	and	pulled	 her	toward	 him,	 slinging	 his	arm	 around	her
shoulders.	"It's	no	biggie.	 Maybe	 I'll	 get	some	homework	 done	once	in	a	while,
now	that	I	don't	need	any	sleep."	Link	cracked	a	smile,	but	Ridley	 didn't.
     "This	 isn't	a	joke.	 John	is	probably	 the	most	 powerful	 Incubus	in	 the	Caster
world,	 aside	from	Abraham	 himself.	 If	 Abraham	was	looking	 for	 him,	 there's	a
reason."	I	 could	 see	her	 biting	  her	lip,	  staring	 out	into	  the	trees	 outside	my
window.
     "You	 worry	too	much,	 Babe."
     Ridley	 shrugged	off	Link's	arm.	"Don't	 call	 me	Babe."
     I	 leaned	back	 against	my	 headboard,	watching	 the	two	 of	 them.	 Now	 that
Ridley	was	a	Mortal	 and	Link	 was	an	Incubus,	she	would	still	 be	the	one	girl	 he
couldn't	have	--	 and	probably	the	only	 one	he	wanted.	Junior	 year	was	going	to
be	interesting.
     An	Incubus	at	Jackson	High.
     Link,	 the	strongest	guy	 in	 school,	driving	 Savannah	Snow	crazy	 every	time
he	walked	 into	 the	room	 without	 a	 single	lick	  from	 one	of	 Ridley's	 lollipops.
And	 Ridley,	 the	ex-Siren,	 who	 I	 was	pretty	 sure	would	  find	 her	way	 back	 to
trouble,	with	 or	without	 the	 lollipops.	 Two	 months	until	 September,	and	for	the
first	time	in	 my	life,	 I	could	hardly	 wait	for	 the	first	day	of	school.
     Link	 wasn't	the	only	one	of	us	who	couldn't	 sleep	that	night.

370
	6.28	

371
                                                       Sunrise



Can't	 you	dig	any	faster?"
     Link	 and	I	glared	at	Ridley	from	 where	we	stood,	a	few	feet	down	in	 Macon's
grave.	The	one	he'd	never	spent	a	minute	in.	I	was	already	dripping,	 and	the	sun
wasn't	even	up	yet.	Link,	with	 his	newfound	strength,	had	yet	to	break	a	sweat.
     "No,	 we	can't.	And	yes,	I	 know	you're	totally	 grateful	 we're	doin'	this	 instead
a	you,	Babe."	Link	waved	his	 shovel	at	Ridley.
     "Why	  does	the	 long	 way	 have	 to	 take	so	 long?"	 Ridley	  looked	 at	 Lena,
disgusted.	"Why	are	Mortals	so	sweaty	and	boring?"
     "You're	 a	Mortal	 now.	 You	 tell	 me."	I	 tossed	a	shovelful	 of	 dirt	in	 Ridley's
direction.
     "Don't	 you	have	 a	Cast	for	this	 sort	of	 thing?"	 Ridley	 flopped	down	 next	to
Lena,	who	sat	cross-legged	beside	the	grave,	looking	through	 an	old	book	about
Incubuses.
     "How	  did	  you	 guys	 manage	 to	 get	  that	 book	 out	  of	 the	 Lunae	  Libri,
anyway?"	Link	  was	hoping	 Lena	could	 find	 out	something	 about	hybrids.	 "It's
not	a	bank	holiday."	We'd	 gotten	in	enough	trouble	in	 the	Lunae	Libri	 during	the
past	year.
     Ridley	 shot	 Link	 a	 look	 that	 probably	 would've	 brought	 him	 to	 his	 knees
when	she	was	still	a	Siren.	"He	has	a	lot	of	pull	with	 the	librarian,	 Genius."
     As	soon	as	she	said	it,	the	book	Lena	was	holding	 caught	fire.	 "Oh,	no!"	 She
yanked	her	 hands	back	before	 they	 were	burnt.	 Ridley	  stomped	on	 the	book.
Lena	sighed.	"I'm	sorry.	It	 just	happens."
     "She	meant	Marian,"	I	 said	defensively.
     I	avoided	 her	eyes	and	busied	myself	with	 my	 shovel.	Lena	and	I	 were	back
to	being,	well,	us.	There	wasn't	a	second	I	didn't	think	 about	the	proximity	 of	 her
hand	to	my	hand,	her	face	to	mine.	There	wasn't	a	moment	when	we	were	awake
that	I	 could	bear	to	 have	her	voice	 out	of	 my	head,	after	 I'd	lost	 it	 for	 so	long.
She	was	the	last	person	I	 spoke	to	at	night	 and	the	first	 person	I	 reached	for	in
the	morning.	 After	  everything	 we	had	 been	through,	 I	would've	  traded	places
with	Boo	if	 I	could.	 That's	how	badly	I	never	wanted	to	let	her	out	of	 my	sight.
     Amma	 had	even	started	setting	a	place	for	Lena	at	the	table.	At	 Ravenwood,
Aunt	Del	 kept	a	pillow	  and	a	comforter	folded	 next	to	 the	downstairs	couch	for
me.	Nobody	 said	 a	word	 about	 curfews	 or	 rules	or	 seeing	too	 much	 of	 each

372
other.	Nobody	  expected	us	 to	 trust	 the	world	  with	 each	 other	 if	 we	 weren't
together.
     The	summer	had	gone	 beyond	that.	You	 couldn't	 un-happen	things.	Liv	 had
happened.	John	and	Abraham	 had	happened.	Twyla	  and	Larkin,	  Sarafine	and
Hunting	--	 they	weren't	 people	I	could	 just	forget.	 School	would	 be	the	same	if
you	ignored	 the	fact	that	 my	best	friend	 was	an	Incubus	 and	the	second	hottest
girl	  in	 school	  was	 a	  declawed	 Siren.	 General	  Lee	 and	 Principal	  Harper,
Savannah	Snow	and	Emily	Asher,	they	would	never	change.
     Lena	and	I	would	never	be	the	same.
     Link	 and	Ridley	were	so	supernaturally	altered,	they	weren't	even	in	the	same
universe.
     Liv	 was	hidden	 in	the	 library,	 happy	to	 be	safely	tucked	 away	in	 the	stacks
for	a	while.	 I	 had	only	 seen	her	once	since	the	night	 of	 the	Seventeenth	Moon.
She	was	no	longer	training	to	be	a	Keeper,	but	she	seemed	okay	with	it.
     "We	both	 know	I	would	 never	have	been	happy	watching	from	the	sidelines,"
she'd	said.	I	knew	it	 was	true.	Liv	 was	an	astronomer,	like	 Galileo;	 an	explorer,
like	Vasco	da	Gama;	a	scholar,	like	Marian.	Maybe	 even	a	mad	scientist,	like	my
mom.
     I	guess	we	all	needed	to	start	over.
     Plus,	I	got	the	feeling	 Liv	 liked	her	new	teacher	as	much	as	her	old	one.	Liv's
education	had	been	turned	over	to	 a	certain	former	 Incubus	who	 spent	his	days
out	of	 sight	 --	in	 Ravenwood	 or	his	 favorite	 study,	 an	old	 haunt	in	 the	Caster
Tunnels	 --	  with	  Liv	   and	 the	  Head	 Caster	 Librarian	   as	 his	  only	  Mortal
companions.
     It	wasn't	how	 I	expected	the	summer	to	turn	out.	Then	again,	when	it	 came	to
Gatlin,	I	 never	 knew	what	 was	going	 to	happen.	At	 some	point,	 I	 had	stopped
trying.
     Stop	thinking	and	start	digging.
     I	dropped	my	shovel	and	pushed	up	against	the	side	of	the	grave.	Lena	leaned
over	on	her	stomach,	her	ratty	 Converse	kicking	 up	behind	 her.	I	 put	my	 hands
around	her	neck	and	pulled	her	mouth	to	mine	 until	our	 kiss	made	the	graveyard
spin.
     "Kids,	 kids.	Keep	it	 clean.	We're	ready."	Link	 leaned	on	his	shovel	and	stood
back	to	 survey	 his	handiwork.	  Macon's	grave	 was	open,	 not	that	 there	was	 a
coffin	down	 there.
     "Well?"	 I	 wanted	to	get	this	over	with.	 Ridley	 pulled	 a	small	bundle	of	black
silk	out	of	her	pocket	and	held	it	 in	front	of	 her.
     Link	 pulled	 back	 as	if	 she	had	shoved	 a	torch	 in	 his	face.	 "Watch	 it,	 Rid!
Don't	get	that	thing	anywhere	near	me.	Incubus	kryptonite,	remember?"

373
     "Sorry,	 Superman,	I	forgot."	 Ridley	 climbed	 down	into	 the	hole,	holding	 the
bundle	 carefully	  with	   one	 hand,	 and	  placed	 it	  in	  the	 bottom	  of	  Macon
Ravenwood's	empty	grave.	My	 mom	 may	have	saved	Macon	with	 the	Arclight,
but	we	saw	it	for	 what	it	was	--	dangerous.	A	supernatural	prison	I	 didn't	want	to
see	my	  best	friend	  trapped	 inside.	 Six	  feet	 under	 was	 where	 the	 Arclight
belonged,	and	Macon's	grave	was	the	safest	place	any	of	us	could	think	of.
     "Good	riddance,"	 Link	 said	as	he	pulled	Ridley	up	out	of	the	grave.	"Isn't	 that
what	you're	supposed	to	say	when	good	defeats	evil	at	the	end	of	the	movie?"
     I	looked	at	him.	 "Have	you	ever	read	a	book,	man?"
     "Dig."	 Ridley	 rubbed	dirt	off	 her	hands.	"At	least,	that's	what	I	say."
     Link	  piled	 shovelful	 after	 shovelful	  of	 dirt	 over	 the	 bundle	 while	  Ridley
watched,	without	taking	her	eyes	off	the	grave.
     "Finish	 it,"	I	 said.
     Lena	nodded,	jamming	her	hands	in	her	pockets.	"Let's	get	out	of	here."
     The	 sun	began	to	 rise	 over	the	 magnolias	 in	 front	 of	 my	 mom's	 grave.	It
didn't	bother	me	anymore,	because	I	knew	she	wasn't	there.	She	was	somewhere,
everywhere	 else,	still	  watching	 out	 for	  me.	 Macon's	 hidden	 room.	 Marian's
archive.	Our	study	at	Wate's	Landing.
     "Come	on,	L."	 I	 pulled	Lena	by	the	arm.	"I'm	 sick	of	 the	dark.	Let's	go	watch
the	sunrise."	 We	 took	 off,	 running	 down	 the	 grassy	hill	  like	 kids	 --	 past	the
graves	and	magnolias,	past	the	palmettos	and	oaks	tangled	in	Spanish	moss,	past
the	uneven	rows	of	grave	markers	and	weeping	angels	and	the	old	stone	bench.	I
could	feel	 her	 shivering	 in	 the	early	 morning	 air,	 but	neither	 of	 us	wanted	 to
stop.	So	we	didn't,	 and	by	 the	time	we	 reached	the	bottom	of	 the	hill,	 we	 were
almost	falling,	 almost	flying.	 Almost	happy.
     We	didn't	 see	the	eerie	golden	glow	pierce	through	 small	cracks	and	fissures
in	the	dirt	shoveled	over	Macon's	grave.
     And	 I	didn't	 check	the	iPod	in	 my	pocket,	where	I	 might	 have	noticed	a	new
song	in	the	playlist.
     Eighteen	Moons.
     But	 I	didn't	 check,	because	I	didn't	 care.	No	 one	was	listening.	 No	 one	was
watching.	No	one	existed	in	the	world	 but	the	two	of	us	--
     The	two	 of	us,	and	the	old	 man	in	the	white	 suit	 and	string	tie,	who	 stood	at
the	crest	of	 the	hill	  until	 the	sun	 began	to	rise	 and	the	shadows	fell	  back	into
their	crypts.
     We	didn't	 see	him.	We	only	saw	the	fading	 night	and	the	rising	blue	 sky.	Not
the	blue	 sky	  in	 my	 bedroom,	 but	 the	 real	 one.	 Even	 though	 it	  might	 look
different	to	each	of	us.	Only	 now	I	 wasn't	so	sure	the	sky	looked	the	same	to	any
two	people,	no	matter	what	universe	they	lived	in.

374
     I	mean,	how	could	you	 be	sure?
     The	old	man	walked	away.
     We	didn't	 hear	the	familiar	 sound	of	space	and	time	rearranging	as	he	ripped
into	the	last	possible	moment	of	night	--	 the	darkness	before	the	dawn.


          Eighteen	Moons,	eighteen	spheres,
          From	the	world	 beyond	the	years,
          One	Unchosen,	death	or	birth,
          A	Broken	Day	awaits	the	Earth	 ...

375
	After	

376
                                                 Siren's	      Tears



Ridley	 stood	in	her	room	at	Ravenwood,	the	room	that	used	to	belong	to	Macon.
But	nothing	 remained	the	same	except	the	four	walls,	 a	ceiling,	and	a	floor,	 and
possibly	the	paneled	bedroom	door.
     Which	 she	shut,	with	a	heavy	click,	 and	bolted.	She	turned	to	 face	her	room,
her	 back	 against	  the	 door.	  Macon	 had	  decided	 to	  take	 another	 room	  at
Ravenwood,	though	he	spent	most	of	his	time	in	his	study	in	 the	Tunnels.	So	this
room	belonged	to	Ridley	 now,	 and	she	was	careful	to	keep	the	trapdoor	leading
down	into	 the	Tunnels	 locked	under	thick	 pink	 shag	carpeting.	 The	walls	 were
covered	with	 spray	painted	 graffiti,	 black	 and	neon	 pink	 mostly,	with	  shots	of
electric	 green,	yellow,	  and	orange.	 They	 weren't	 words,	exactly	  --	 more	like
shapes,	slashes,	emotions.	Anger,	bottled	in	a	can	of	cheap	spray	paint	from	 the
Wal-Mart	 in	Summerville.	 Lena	 had	offered	to	do	 it	for	 her,	but	Ridley	 insisted
on	doing	it	herself,	Mortal-style.	  The	reeking	fumes	made	her	head	ache,	and	the
splattering	 paint	 made	 a	huge	 mess	of	  everything.	 It	  was	exactly	  what	 she
wanted	and	exactly	how	she	felt.
     She'd	made	a	mess	of	everything.
     No	 words.	  Ridley	  hated	 words.	 Mostly,	   they	 were	 lies.	  Her	 two-week
incarceration	in	 Lena's	 room	 had	been	enough	 to	 make	her	 hate	poetry	 for	 a
lifetime.
     Mybeatingheartbleedingneedsyou	--
     Whatever.
     Ridley	 shuddered.	There	was	no	accounting	for	taste	in	the	family	 gene	pool.
She	pushed	herself	away	from	 the	door	and	walked	 over	to	 the	wardrobe.	With
the	slightest	 touch,	she	opened	the	 white	 wooden	doors,	 revealing	 a	lifetime's
careful	collection	of	 clothing,	the	hallmark	 of	a	Siren.
     Which,	 she	reminded	herself,	she	wasn't.
     She	dragged	a	pink	 footstool	 to	 the	shelves	and	climbed	 up	 on	it,	 her	 pink
platform	 shoes	slipping	back	and	forth	 over	 her	pink	 striped	knee	socks.	It	 had
been	a	Harajuku	kind	of	a	day,	not	often	seen	around	Gatlin.	The	looks	she	got	at
the	Dar-ee	Keen	were	priceless.	At	least	it	had	passed	the	afternoon.
     One	afternoon.	Out	of	how	many?
     She	felt	 along	the	top	 of	the	shelf	 until	 she	found	it,	 a	shoe	box	 from	Paris.
She	smiled	  and	 pulled	  it	  down.	 Purple	  velvet	 four-inch	   peep-toes,	if	  she

377
remembered.	Of	 course	she	remembered.	She'd	 had	some	damn	 fine	 times	in
those	shoes.
     She	dumped	 the	contents	 of	 the	box	 onto	 her	 black	and	 white	 bedspread.
There	it	was,	half-shrouded	in	silk,	 still	covered	with	 crumbling	 dirt.
     Ridley	 slumped	down	 on	the	 floor	 next	to	 her	bed,	 resting	her	arms	 on	the
edge.	She	wasn't	stupid.	She	just	wanted	to	look,	 as	she	had	every	night	 for	the
past	two	weeks.	She	wanted	to	feel	the	power	of	something	magical,	a	power	she
would	never	have	again.
     Ridley	 wasn't	 a	bad	girl.	  Not	 really.	 Besides,	even	if	  she	was,	what	 did	 it
matter?	She	was	powerless	to	do	anything	about	 it.	She'd	been	tossed	aside	like
last	year's	mascara.
     Her	cell	 phone	rang,	and	 she	picked	it	 up	from	 her	nightstand.	 A	picture	 of
Link	 popped	up	on	 the	screen.	She	clicked	 it	 off	 and	tossed	it	into	 the	endless
pink	shag.
     Not	now,	Hot	Rod.
     She	had	another	Incubus	on	her	mind.
     John	Breed.
     Ridley	 settled	back	into	place,	tilting	  her	head	to	the	side	as	she	watched	the
sphere	begin	to	glow	a	subtle	shade	of	pink.
     "What	 am	I	going	 to	do	with	 you?"	 She	smiled	because,	for	once,	it	was	her
decision	to	make,	and	because	she	had	yet	to	make	it.
     three
     The	light	 grew	 brighter	and	brighter	 until	 the	room	 was	bathed	in	a	wash	of
rose-colored	light,	which	 made	almost	everything	 else	disappear	like	thin	 pencil
lines	that	had	been	only	partly	rubbed	out.
     two
     Ridley	 closed	her	eyes	--	a	little	girl	 blowing	 out	a	birthday	candle,	to	make	a
wish	--
     one
     She	opened	her	eyes.
     It	was	decided.

378
                                           Acknowledgments


Writing	 a	book	is	hard.	It	 turns	out,	writing	 a	second	book	is	twice	as	hard.	Here
are	the	people	who	got	us	through	the	many	phases	of	our	Seventeenth	Moon:


OUR	BELOVED	AGENTS,	SARAH	BURNES	AND	COURTNEY	GATEWOOD,	WITH	HELP
FROM	REBECCA	GARDNER,	FROM	THE	GERNERT	COMPANY,	who	continue	to
shepherd	Gatlin	  County	to	 new	 and	 faraway	 places	 no	 piece	of	 pecan	 fried
chicken	has	ever	seen.	SALLY	WILCOX	AT	CAA,	for	bringing	Gatlin	County	 to	a
town	where	nobody	would	ever	touch	a	piece	of	fried	anything.


OUR	BRILLIANT	TEAM	AT	LITTLE,	BROWN	BOOKS	FOR	YOUNG	READERS:	OUR
EDITORS,	JENNIFER	BAILEY	HUNT	AND	JULIE	SCHEINA,	OUR	ART	DIRECTOR,	DAVID
CAPLAN,	OUR	MARKETING	GURU,	LISA	ICKOWICZ,	OUR	QUEEN	OF	LIBRARY	SERVICES,
VICTORIA	STAPLETON,	OUR	PUBLICITY	GURU,	MELANIE	CHANG,	AND	OUR
PUBLICIST,	JESSICA	KAUFMAN,	who	are	as	good	at	what	they	do	as	Amma	is	at
crossword	puzzles.


OUR	AMAZING	FOREIGN	PUBLISHERS	AND	EDITORS,	ESPECIALLY	AMANDA	PUNTER,
CECILE	TEROUANNE,	SUSANNE	STARK,	MYRIAM	GALAZ,	AS	WELL	AS	THOSE	WE
HAVE	YET	TO	MEET,	who	have	welcomed	us	into	their	houses	and	their	countries.
OUR#1	SPANISH	FAN,	AUTHOR	JAVIER	RUESCAS,	who	not	only	blurbed	our	book	in
Spain	but	spread	the	word.


OUR	FAVORITE	READER,	DAPHNE	DURHAM,	who	gets	us	and,	more	important,
Ethan	and	Lena.	 There	isn't	 a	cream-of-casserole	big	 enough	to	show	 her	how
we	feel.	Even	with	cornflakes	 or	tiny	 fried	 onions	or	mashed-up	potato	chips	 on
top.


OUR	RESIDENT	TEEN	CLASSICIST,	EMMA	PETERSON,	who	translated	Latin	Casts

379
while	cramming	 for	 AP	Vergil.	 OUR	FRIGHTENING	TEEN	EDITOR,	MAY	PETERSON,
who	no	doubt	will	 go	on	to	terrify	 many	other	writers	in	 the	future.


OUR	BOSS	PHOTOGRAPHER,	ALEX	HOERNER,	whose	photo	of	us	looks	nothing	like
us,	so	we	love	it.	 VANIA	STOYANOVA,	for	her	beautiful	trailer,	 amazing	photos,
and	her	 work	 as	 co-administrator	  of	 our	 U.S.	 fansite.	 YVETTE	VASQUEZ,	for
reading	 our	  drafts	 a	 hundred	 times,	 blogging	  our	 tour,	  and	 acting	  as	 co-
administrator	 of	our	U.S.	fansite.	 THE	CREATORS	OF	OUR	INTERNATIONAL	FANSITES
IN	FRANCE,	SPAIN,	AND	BRAZIL.	ASHLY	STOHL,	who	designed	bookplates	and
invites,	built	 websites,	and	took	photos	that	brought	 the	South	to	life	for	 readers
around	the	 world.	 ANNA	MOORE,	for	building	our	 Beautiful	 Creatures	site	2.0.
AUTHOR	GABRIEL	PAUL,	who	creates	all	the	brilliant	online	games	for	our	tours
and	promotions.


OUR	CASTER	GIRLS	12,	13,	14,	15,	16,	17,	18,	AND	25.	You	are	the	heart	of	The	Caster
Chronicles	and	always	will	 be.


OUR	YA	  WRITING	MENTORS,	WP	AUTHORS,	BOOK	BLURBERS,	TRAILER	MAKERS,
FANSITE	DESIGNERS,	FELLOW	DEBUT	AUTHORS,	BLOGGERS,	NING/GOODREADS
FRIENDS,	AND,	OF	COURSE,	OUR	TWEETHEARTS.	Like	Gatlin's	postmaster,	Carlton
Eaton,	we	hear	all	 our	news	from	you	 first.	And	whether	 good	or	bad,	it's	 better
to	hear	it	from	 one	of	your	own.	Nobody	will	  ever	know	how	much	fun	you	make
even	the	Cave	o'	Revisions.


OUR	FAMILIES


ALEX,	NICK,	AND	STELLA	GARCIA	AND	LEWIS,	EMMA,	MAY,	AND	KATE	PETERSON
AND	ALL	OUR	RESPECTIVE	MOMS,	DADS,	SISTERS,	BROTHERS,	NIECES,	NEPHEWS,
SISTERS-IN-LAW,	PARTY-THROWING	COUSINS,	AND	FRIENDS.	FROM	AUNT	MARY	TO
COUSIN	JANE,	you	have	always	been	there	for	  us.	STOHLS,	RACCAS,	MARINS,
GARCIAS,	PETERSONS:	By	now	you	have	every	right	to	hate	us,	but	oddly	 you
don't.


DEBY	LINDEE	AND	SUSAN	AND	JOHN	RACCA,	for	housing	us	on	our	many	Southern

380
field	 trips.	 BILL	 YOUNG	AND	DAVID	GOLIA,	for	being	 our	 knights	 in	 shining
armor.	INDIA'S	AND	NATALIA'S	DADDY,	for	helping	us	when	we	were	supposed	to
be	helping	him.	SAUNDRA	MITCHELL,	for	everything,	as	always.


OUR	READERS,	TEACHERS,	AND	LIBRARIANS,	THE	CASTERS	AND	OUTCASTERS,	who
discovered	Beautiful	Creatures	 and	loved	it	enough	to	 take	another	trip	 through
the	Tunnels	with	us.	Without	you,	they're	just	(so	many)	words.


OUR	MENTOR,	MELISSA	MARR,	AND	OUR	THERAPIST,	HOLLY	BLACK.	They	know
why.	DR.	SARA	LINDHEIM,	our	Keeper,	who	knows	our	Casts	better	than	we	do.


And	Finally,	 MARGARET	MILES,	LIBRARIAN	AND	YOUTH	SERVICES	DIRECTOR	AT	THE
NEW	HANOVER	COUNTY	LIBRARY,	IN	WILMINGTON,	NORTH	CAROLINA.	Because
Marian	Ashcroft	 isn't	the	only	Caster	Librarian,	  after	all.

381
                                        Table	    of	  Contents


Front	Cover	Image

Welcome

Dedication

Epigraph

Before:	Caster	Girl

2.15:	Perpetual	Peace

4.17:	Burnt	Waffles

4.17:	Lemons	and	Ash

5.1:	Falling

5.16:	The	Call

5.17:	All	That	Remains

6.12:	The	Girl	of	My	Dreams

6.12:	The	Lake

6.12:	Caster	Boy

6.14:	Bookworm

6.14:	Beneath	the	Paper

6.15:	Southern	Crusty

382
6.15:	Tunnel	of	Love

6.15:	Unmistakable

6.15:	Wayward	Soul

6.15:	Exile

6.15:	Vexed

6.16:	Revelations

6.17:	Inheritance

6.17:	Keeping

6.17:	The	Arclight

6.17:	Jump

6.18:	Outer	Doors

6.18:	Through	the	Looking	 Glass

6.19:	Bonaventure

6.19:	Scars

6.19:	Down	Below

6.19:	Bad	Girl

6.19:	Consequences

6.19:	No	One	Special

6.20:	Common	Thread

6.20:	No	One's	Son

6.20:	Sea	Change

383
6.20:	Out	of	the	Light

6.20:	Flesh	and	Blood

6.20:	Army	of	 One

6.20:	Dark	Fire

6.20:	Seventeen	Moons

6.21:	Darkness	and	Light

6.22:	The	Way	Back	Home

6.22:	New	Blood

6.28:	Sunrise

After:	Siren's	Tears

Acknowledgments

Copyright

384
         BEAUTIFUL	
          DARKNESS

                   BY

     KAMI	  GARCIA	  &	
   MARGARET	  STOHL








LITTLE	BROWN	AND	COMPANY
           Boston	New	York

385
                                                Copyright



            Copyright	(c)	2010	Kami	Garcia,	LLC,	and	Margaret	Stohl,	Inc.
 All	rights	reserved.	Except	as	permitted	under	the	U.S.	Copyright	Act	of	1976,
no	part	of	this	publication	may	be	reproduced,	distributed,	or	transmitted	in	any
  form	or	by	any	means,	or	stored	in	a	database	or	retrieval	system,	without	the
                             prior	written	permission	of	the	publisher.

                                      Little,	 Brown	and	Company

                                           Hachette	Book	Group
                             237	Park	Avenue,	New	York,	NY	10017
                     Visit	our	website	at	www.HachetteBookGroup.com
                                             www.lb-teens.com

      Little,	 Brown	and	Company	is	a	division	of	Hachette	Book	Group,	Inc.
 The	Little,	Brown	name	and	logo	are	trademarks	of	Hachette	Book	Group,	Inc.

                                 First	eBook	Edition:	October	2010

The	characters	and	events	portrayed	in	this	book	are	fictitious.	Any	similarity	to
 real	persons,	living	or	dead,	is	coincidental	and	not	intended	by	the	authors.	To
the	extent	any	real	names	of	individuals,	locations,	or	organizations	are	included
  in	the	book,	they	are	used	fictitiously	and	not	intended	to	be	taken	otherwise.

                                       ISBN:	978-0-316-12917-6

