4
                                           Table	  of	 Contents

Title	Page
Copyright	Page
Dedication
Foreword
Introduction
	
PART	 1


Chapter	1	-	HOW	I	GOT	HERE:
Chapter	2	-	NATURAL	SELECTION:
Chapter	3	-	GORILLA	WARFARE:
	
PART	 2


Chapter	4	-	LEWIS	AND	CLARK	DISCOVER	OSAMA	BIN	LADEN:
Chapter	5	-	THE	EMBASSY	BOMBINGS:
Chapter	6	-	THE	INFILTRATION	OF	AL	QAEDA:
Chapter	7	-	WALKING	THE	BOB:
	
PART	 3


Chapter	8	-	CALM	BEFORE	THE	STORM:
Chapter	9	-	9/11:
Chapter	10	-	IMAGINE	EVERYONE’S	POTENTIAL	AS	THE	GUY	ON	THE
GROUND
Chapter	11	-	IMAGINE	HOW	TO	SEEK	OUT	THE	GUY	ON	THE	GROUND
Chapter	12	-	IMAGINE	HOW:
	
PART	 4

5
Chapter	13	-	ON	THE	GROUND	IN	AFGHANISTAN
Chapter	14	-	IT’S	NOT	REALITY	UNLESS	IT’S	SHARED
Chapter	15	-	ORGANIZING	FOR	COMBAT:
Chapter	16	-	EXPLORIN	G	TH	E	FRONTIER:
Chapter	17	-	REALITY	CHECK:
Chapter	18	-	THE	BATTLE	BEGINS:
Chapter	19	-	TAKUR	GHAR:
	
NOTES
INDEX

6
       THE	   MOST	    EFFECTIVE	        WEAPON	      ON	  ANY
      BATTLEFIELD	           WHETHER	       IT	  BE	  COMBAT,
  BUSINESS,	      OR	  LIFE	    IS	 YOUR	    MIND’S	      ABILITY
                       TO	  RECOGNIZE	        PATTERNS.



                            When	in	doubt,	develop	the	situation.	
                           Always	listen	to	the	guy	on	the	ground.	
                                    Humor	your	imagination.	
                               It’s	not	reality	unless	it’s	shared.	
                                Don’t	get	treed	by	a	Chihuahua.
	
The	power	of	the	guiding	principles	in	this	book,	written	by	a	former	Delta
Force	commander,	is	that	 they	 provide	direction	 and	context	 to	both
recognize	and	believe	in	life’s	underlying	patterns—so	we	can	understand,
adapt,	and	master	the	future	as	it	unfolds	in	front	of	us.


 	
 “A	book	about	the	complexities	of	combat	that’s	just	as	applicable	for	dealing	with	the	complexities
 of	business	and	our	personal	lives.	The	guiding	principle	lessons	Pete	shares	in	this	book	can
 dramatically	alter	the	way	we	think,	and	help	make	the	right	decisions	to	achieve	success	in	every
 part	of	our	lives.”
                                                                                          —Kevin	Sharer,
                                                                               Chairman	&	CEO,	Amgen


 	
 “If	you	can’t	take	your	immediate	observations	and	stitch	them	together	into	context	.	.	.	how	are	you
 going	to	make	sense	of	the	situation	you’re	in?	Recognizing	patterns	allows	you	to	understand	what’s
 going	on	around	you.	If	winning	in	combat,	business,	or	life	matters	to	you,	you	must	read	this	book.”
                                                                                             —Jeff	Jonas,
                                                          Engineer,	Chief	Scientist,	IBM	Entity	Analytics

7
Most	  Berkley	  Caliber	   Books	  are	 available	  at	  special	  quantity
discounts	for	 bulk	 purchases	for	 sales	promotions,	 premiums,	fund-
raising,	or	educational	 use.	Special	books,	or	book	 excerpts,	can	also
be	created	to	fit	specific	needs.
   	
For	details,	 write:	 Special	 Markets,	 The	 Berkley	 Publishing	 Group,
375	Hudson	Street,	New	York,	New	 York	10014.

10
                                                 THE	 BERKLEY	   PUBLISHING	  GROUP
                                                         Published	by	the	 Penguin	Group
                 Penguin	Group	 (USA)	 Inc.	375	Hudson	Street,	 New	York,	 New	York	 10014,	USA
    Penguin	Group	(Canada),	90	Eglinton	Avenue	East,	Suite	700,	Toronto,	Ontario	M4P	2Y3,	Canada	(a
                                                   division	 of	Pearson	Penguin	Canada	Inc.)
                                   Penguin	Books	Ltd.,	80	Strand,	London	WC2R	0RL,	England
     Penguin	Group	Ireland,	25	St.	Stephen’s	Green,	Dublin	2,	Ireland	(a	division	of	Penguin	Books	Ltd.)
   Penguin	Group	(Australia),	250	Camberwell	Road,	Camberwell,	Victoria	3124,	Australia	(a	division	of
                                                         Pearson	Australia	Group	Pty.	Ltd.)
     Penguin	Books	India	Pvt.	Ltd.,	11	Community	Centre,	Panchsheel	Park,	New	Delhi—110	017,	India
  Penguin	Group	(NZ),	67	Apollo	 Drive,	Rosedale,	North	Shore	0632,	New	Zealand	(a	division	of	Pearson
                                                                     New	Zealand	Ltd.)
Penguin	Books	(South	Africa)	(Pty.)	Ltd.,	24	Sturdee	Avenue,	Rosebank,	Johannesburg	2196,	South	Africa
	
                    Penguin	Books	Ltd.,	Registered	Offices:	80	Strand,	London	WC2R	0RL,	England
	
   The	publisher	does	not	have	any	control	over	and	does	not	assume	any	responsibility	for	author	or	third-
                                                            party	websites	or	their	content.
	
 Grateful	acknowledgment	is	made	to	Sean	Naylor	for	permission	to	reprint	passages	from	Not	a	Good	Day
                     to	Die:	 The	Untold	Story	of	Operation	Anaconda,	Berkley	Caliber	Books,	2005.
                                                                                   	
                                                          Copyright	©	2008	by	Pete	Blaber
	
                                                                     All	 rights	reserved.
  No	part	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced,	scanned,	or	distributed	in	any	printed	or	electronic	form	without
   permission.	Please	do	not	participate	in	or	encourage	piracy	of	copyrighted	materials	in	violation	of	the
   author’s	rights.	Purchase	only	authorized	editions.	BERKLEY	CALIBER	 and	its	logo	are	trademarks	of
                                                               Penguin	Group	(USA)	Inc.
	
	
                                                              eISBN	:	978-1-101-44319-4
	
                                                                          Blaber,	Pete.
            The	mission,	the	men,	and	me	:	lessons	from	a	former	Delta	Force	commander	/	Pete	Blaber.
                                                                               p.	cm.
                                                Includes	bibliographical	references	and	index.
                                                              eISBN	:	978-1-101-44319-4
              1.	Blaber,	Pete.	2.	United	States.	Army—Commando	troops—Biography.	3.	Terrorism—
                                                                     Prevention.	I.	Title.
	
                                                                    UA34.S64B53	2008
                                                                   356’.1670973—dc22
                                                                          2008019855

11
	
	

                                                              http://us.penguingroup.com

12
             To	Pete	and	Kylie.	
You’re	my	mission,	you’re	 my	men,	
    and	you’re	the	most	important	
thing	in	the	world	 to	me.	Thank	you.

13
                                                FOREWORD



Books	 written	 by	 former	  government	 leaders	are	 part	of	  a	distinct	  genre	of
literature.	As	 any	 writer	 will	  confirm,	 writing	  a	book	 is	a	 monumental	task—
there	are	no	shortcuts	to	sitting	down,	day	after	day,	week	 after	week,	constantly
saturating,	 incubating,	 and	 illuminating,	   then	 rewriting.	  Former	  government
leaders	assume	the	added	challenge	of	ensuring	that	the	content	is	free	from	any
sensitive	information	 that	could	aid	a	sophisticated	enemy	in	harming	the	United
States	or	its	service	members.	Names,	dates,	tactics,	techniques,	and	methods	all
have	to	be	 filtered	 and	sanitized	 to	ensure	operational	 security.	 Therefore,	 the
most	important	 and	vexing	 challenge	 facing	 any	government	 official	 who	 sets
out	 to	 write	  anything	 for	  publication,	  regardless	 of	 format,	  is	 the	 need	 to
maintain	the	operational	 security	 of	the	participants	 and	methods	involved.	 For
military	 and	intelligence	 operatives,	this	responsibility	 is	spelled	out	 in	a	formal
nondisclosure	 agreement	that	  each	member	 signs	 upon	  entry	 to	 their	  unit,
activity,	 or	agency.	The	 agreement	generally	prohibits	 unfettered	release	of	 the
following	 information:
       1.	Naming	 of	classified	units;
       2.	Naming	 of	people	assigned	to	classified	units;
       3.	Discussing	 recent	operations	and	missions	that	are	classified;	and
       4.	Discussing	 classified	tactics,	techniques,	and	procedures.



                               Disclosure	    Agreement	    Safeguards

   1.	 My	 former	 unit,	 Special	Forces	Operational	 Detachment—Delta	(“Delta”)
is	the	same	name	that	geologists	use	to	 describe	the	end	of	a	 river	that	 empties
into	the	 ocean.	It	 is	also	the	 Greek	word	 for	 difference.	 The	army	 unofficially
considers	the	name	and	unit	 classified.	However,	 “Delta”	  or	“Delta	  Force”	 has
been	so	popularized	by	the	Hollywood	 movie	and	publication	 industries	that	one
would	 be	hard	 pressed	to	say	 that	these	names	are	 not	in	 the	 public	 domain.
Moreover,	my	 official	  military	 records,	 which	 are	unclassified	and	available	 to
the	public,	 likewise	 record	the	 dates	and	specific	jobs	 I	 held	while	 assigned	to
this	unit.	 The	 reality	 is	 that	those	 of	 us	who	 served	there	rarely	 use	the	 term

14
“Delta.”	 Instead,	we	almost	always	refer	 to	the	organization	as	“the	Unit.”	  Since
I	am	 trying	 to	write	 this	 book	in	 an	accurate,	reality-based	context,	 the	Unit	 is
the	term	 I	  most	 frequently	 use	 throughout	 the	 book.	 When	 I	 refer	 to	 other
military	 or	government	organizations,	activities,	 or	agencies	in	this	book,	I	 do	so
only	 in	 the	 interest	 of	 continuity,	  and	only	 if	  another	 publication	 or	 official
unclassified	 government	 document	has	 already	mentioned	 that	 organization’s
participation	in	 the	mission	at	issue.
   2.	 Nicknames,	titles,	and	pseudonyms	are	used	to	address	this	concern.	Again,
I	  do	  this	  to	  protect	  persons,	 units,	  activities/agencies	  and	 their	   tactics,
techniques,	and	procedures	from	compromise	or	 harm	by	 sophisticated	enemies
of	the	 United	 States.	In	the	 interest	of	 continuity	 with	  previous	publications,	 I
sometimes	refer	to	 certain	 publicly	 recognized	 senior	military	  leaders	by	 their
true	names.	I	do	this	when	it’s	 obvious	that	there	is	no	operational	 security	issue
involved.	 I	 have	otherwise	 intentionally	 depersonalized	the	 stories	to	 maintain
the	anonymity	 of	 the	 individuals	 involved.	  So,	unless	a	 person	is	named	 in	 a
direct	quotation	 from	 a	book	 or	 periodical,	 I	refer	 to	 that	person	only	 by	 their
position	(e.g.,	“commanding	 general”).
   Even	 when	 military	  leaders	are	 identified	 in	 other	 open-source	documents,
such	as	the	bestselling	books	Not	a	Good	 Day	to	 Die	and	Cobra	 II,	 I	only	 refer
to	them	by	their	 duty	position.	 My	 intent	is	not	to	 make	judgmental	assessments
of	anyone;	rather,	it	is	to	extract	and	share	the	timeless	lessons	from	the	action	or
mission	in	the	form	of	 guiding	principles.
   3.	 All	  of	 the	 operations	discussed	in	 this	 book	 have	been	 written	 about	 in
numerous	other	civilian	 and	government	publications.	 The	stories	of	me	and	my
men	in	 Afghanistan	 and	Iraq	are	 recounted	in	 the	two	 bestsellers	listed	above.
The	 army	 expressed	no	 concern	 with	 these	 authors	 using	 my	 true	 name	 to
recount	the	events	described	in	those	publications.	In	both	 cases,	the	army	never
sought	my	permission	to	use	my	 name	or	likeness	before	approving	these	books
for	publication	 and	into	the	public	domain.
   4.	 I	have	used	great	care	to	avoid	going	into	context-specific	 detail	concerning
any	tactics,	 techniques,	and	procedures	used	 by	any	 military	  organization.	 As
described	in	  the	 opening	  chapter	 of	 this	  book,	 the	 key	  to	 success	 on	 all
battlefields—past,	present,	and	future—has	very	little	 to	do	with	electronic	 whiz-
bang	gadgets	and	top-secret	technologies;	instead,	it’s	 all	 about	how	you	 think,
how	you	make	decisions,	and	how	 you	execute	those	decisions—none	of	 which
may	be	properly	considered	“classified.”
   The	 content	of	 this	book	 is	as	clear,	detailed,	 and	accurate	an	account	of	 the

15
events	and	experiences	in	which	 I	took	 part	as	I	 can	provide	while	 maintaining
the	sanctity	of	the	operational	security	issues	described	above.
   All	    of	  the	  material	   contained	  herein	  was	  derived	  from	   unclassified
publications	and	 sources;	nothing	 written	 here	is	 intended	to	 confirm	 or	 deny,
officially	  or	unofficially,	   any	events	described,	or	 the	views	 of	 any	individual,
government,	or	 agency.	 The	 insights	 in	 this	 book	 are	based	on	 my	 personal
perceptions,	experiences,	and	interactions.	If	 a	story	 seems	to	be	missing	 some
level	of	 context-rich	 detail,	the	reason	is	more	 than	likely	 to	protect	 operational
security.
   In	 an	effort	 to	protect	the	nature	of	specific	 operations	and/or	individuals	 who
participated	in	 some	of	these	events,	I	 sometimes	had	to	take	 liberties	 with	 the
dates,	times,	 or	 order	 of	 events.	 Nonetheless,	none	 of	 the	 security-instituted
adjustments	 affects	  the	  context	  of	  the	  lesson	 that	  the	  story	  reveals	 or
compromises	the	persons	or	agencies	that	may	have	been	involved.
   To	 ensure	continuity	 of	 content,	I	 have	included	 some	accounts	of	 events	in
which	 I	 was	not	 directly	  involved.	 Once	 again,	 I	 only	 use	these	accounts	 to
amplify	the	overarching	 lesson	(e.g.,	the	John	Walker	Lindh	story	to	demonstrate
the	utility	 of	developing	 the	situation).	In	other	cases,	such	as	the	Battle	of	Shahi
Khot,	 I	 include	  the	 perspective	 of	 some	 of	 my	 men,	 because	without	  their
accounts,	the	story	cannot	be	accurately	or	completely	 told.	 The	details	of	 these
accounts	come	 from	  the	 aggregation	 of	 personal	 conversations,	 face-to-face
discussions	with	 the	principals,	  after-action	 discussions,	and	the	many	 written
documents	created	immediately	 following	  each	event.	 All	  of	 these	documents
are	unclassified	and	 available	to	 the	public.	  In	every	 case	I	 have	attempted	to
stay	true	to	the	facts	of	the	event.
   Finally,	  combat	is	just	 like	 life;	 no	two	 individuals	 see	it	or	 experience	it	the
same	way.	  This	 book	  is	 my	  account	 of	 what	  happened.	If	  there	  are	any
inaccuracies	in	the	events	described	herein,	the	responsibility	is	mine	alone.	This
book	presents	my	views	and	does	not	represent	the	views	of	 the	U.S.	Army,	 the
U.S.	Department	of	Defense,	or	anyone	else.

16
                                      INTRODUCTION:



                         THE	  MISSION,	   THE	  MEN,	  AND	  ME


April	 11,	2003
We	called	ourselves	the	Wolverines.1	Our	mission	was	marauding.a	We	were
five	hundred	miles	behind	enemy	lines.	I	 commanded	the	Wolverines.	They
called	me	Panther.
   The	night	 was	moonless	and	bitter	cold.	Twelve	all-terrain	and	undercover
vehicles	stealthily	crept	across	the	desert.	Driven	by	heavily	armed	and	heavily
bundled	Delta	operators,	the	vehicle’s	fat,	knobby	tires	quietly	 crunched	the
frozen	sand	as	they	crawled.	Just	ahead,	bathed	in	the	glow	of	night	vision-
goggle	green,	 lay	 the	 deserted	eight-lane	highway	 that	 fenced	 Saddam’s
hometown	of	Tikrit	from	the	edge	of	the	desert.2	No	Western	military	force	had
seen	or	set	foot	in	this,	the	most	modern	and	fanatically	loyal	of	Iraqi	cities,	in
more	than	fifty	years.	Just	one	day	after	the	Iraqi	regime	collapsed,	Saddam	and
his	henchmen	were	officially	on	the	run;3	the	Wolverines	were	on	their	scent.
   Our	 destination	was	underneath	the	cloverleaf	intersection	a	few	hundred
meters	down	the	highway.	 Without	 any	armor	protection,	 the	twelve	 Delta
vehicles	jockeyed	for	 every	 available	inch	 of	  protective	cover	 behind	the
massive	concrete	support	pillars.	Once	in	position,	we	relayed	the	code	word	to
our	tanks.
   Out	 of	the	blackness,	five	tanks	crawled	forward.	Their	hulking	 hexagonal
masses	were	barely	detectable	to	an	attentive	ear,	and	totally	invisible	to	the
naked	eye.	Their	destination	was	the	top	of	the	cloverleaf.	At	the	apex	of	the
intersection,	they	starburst	and	drove	halfway	down	each	of	the	off-ramps,	then
shifted	into	silence.	With	thermal	night	 sights	and	guns	scanning,	they	could
surveil	and	secure	all	four	cardinal	directions.	The	fifth	tank	stayed	at	the	top
and	maintained	an	eagle’s-eye	view	of	Saddam’s	backyard	below.
   With	the	desert	at	their	backs,	the	Wolverines	were	in	position.
   From	 the	outside	looking	 in,	 Tikrit	 appeared	like	any	 semimodern	town:
apartment	buildings,	gas	stations,	blinking	traffic	lights,	and	cars	parked	along

17
palm-tree-lined	 streets.	But	 for	 one	imperceptible	  detail,	nothing	 was	 stirring,
neither	man	 nor	beast.	Years	 of	 conducting	 operations	in	 urban	 environments
had	taught	 us	 that	 when	  all	 is	 calm	  in	 a	 city,	  something	 is	 usually	 awry.
Watching	and	waiting	  behind	our	 guns,	we	could	 hear	our	breath	as	it	 froze	 in
front	of	our	faces.
   In	 an	 instant,	the	 ghostly	 city	 roared	to	 life.	 Enemy	 muzzle	flashes	 blinked
across	the	urban	horizon	like	 flashbulbs	at	the	Super	Bowl,	 except	these	flashes
shot	tracers.	 The	tracers	 instantly	 coagulated	 around	the	 tanks.	Enemy	 firing
positions	were	everywhere:	 apartment	buildings,	 storefronts,	and	alleys.	 Pickup
trucks	with	 machine	guns	 mounted	in	 their	cabs	popped	in	 and	out	 of	garages,
and	back	and	forth	around	corners	like	angry	cockroaches.
   From	 his	 vehicle	atop	 the	cloverleaf,	 Bill,	 my	 second	in	 command,	assessed
the	situation.4	One	of	the	most	experienced	combat	commanders	in	the	Unit;5	he
used	a	purposefully	calming	tone	as	he	radioed	the	tanks.
   “This	 is	Echo	0-2—backup.”
   Backing	  up	 allowed	  the	tanks	 to	 use	 the	 elevation	 of	  each	cloverleaf	  as
protection	from	 the	 ground-level	 machine	gun	 fire.	 As	their	 tracks	 surged	into
reverse,	the	 tanks’	  super-sophisticated	fire	  control	 systems,	 thermal-imaging
night	 sights,	  and	 ballistic	  computers	 digitally	   collaborated	 with	  their	  120-
millimeter	 main	 guns	to	 return	 fire.	 Thirty-pound	  projectiles	 torched	from	 the
tubes.	 Betrayed	 by	  their	  own	  muzzle	  flashes,	 enemy	  positions	 began	  to
disintegrate.	Corners	of	buildings	 were	lopped.	Storefronts	 were	in	the	rear,	and
angry	cockroach	 pickup	  trucks	 were	 doing	 fiery	 backflips.	  Nevertheless,	the
cadence	of	enemy	fire	 did	 not	decrease.	Even	in	 wartime	while	 watching	 for	 a
night	attack,	most	soldiers	fall	 asleep.	The	enemy	we	initially	  engaged	consisted
only	of	 the	men	who	 had	been	awake	and	on	watch.	With	 each	passing	minute,
additional	 men	 awoke	from	  the	warmth	  and	slumber	 of	 their	 fetal	 positions,
grabbed	their	weapons,	and	joined	the	fight.
   All	  but	one	tank	driver	responded	to	the	order	to	back	up	with	an	affirmative.
   “Ahh,	  Echo	0-2,	we	got	a	problem,”	the	missing	tank	crew	 finally	 responded.
   “This	 is	Echo	0-2.	What’s	 the	deal?”
   “We	 must	have	run	over	some	telephone	wire	on	the	way	down	the	ramp,	’cuz
now	it’s	completely	 wrapped	around	my	tracks	and	I	can’t	back	up.”
   “This	 is	Echo	0-2.	Okay,	 how	long	till	 you	can	get	it	free?”
   “I	  don’t	 know—we’re	  starting	 to	 take	a	lot	 of	 fire,”	  he	shouted	 as	his	.50-
caliber	machine	gun	rhythmically	 thumped	away	in	the	background.
   “This	 is	Echo	0-2.	Hang	 in	there;	I’m	 sending	help.”

18
   Before	 Bill	  could	 pass	the	 message,	a	group	 of	 five	 Delta	 Force	 operators
moved	forward	in	 a	half-crouched	sprint.	 At	the	apex,	the	five	 operators	split	up
and	joined	each	of	the	five	tanks	to	help	direct	their	fire	 and	steady	their	nerves.
   From	 our	hide	site	a	few	 kilometers	out	 in	the	desert,	I	listened	intently	 to	 the
radio	transmissions	 and	watched	 the	increasing	 rate	and	rapidity	  of	 the	tracer
barrage	arcing	across	the	pitch-black	 sky.	 I	assessed	the	situation.	If	 the	enemy
keeps	coming,	  he’ll	  need	 help,	 I	  thought.	  I	 contacted	  helicopter	 gunships
loitering	in	 the	sky	a	hundred	miles	distant,	and	directed	them	to	fly	 closer	to	the
highway	intersection	and	prepare	to	take	guidance	from	Bill	 and/or	his	men.6
   Bill	  called	me	first:
   “Echo	  0-1,	 this	is	 Echo	 0-2.	 We’re	 taking	 some	pretty	 heavy	 fire	 from	 all
directions.	I	 got	 one	tank	 potentially	 stuck	 on	some	telephone	 wire.”	 Bill	  was
still	 speaking	calmly,	 but	every	 time	his	 hand	mike	 was	open,	I	 could	hear	the
roar	of	the	tanks’	main	guns	behind	him.7
   The	 Doppler-induced	 wap-wap	 of	 the	attack	helicopters	 whispered	 from	 the
distance,	raised	their	pitch	as	they	approached,	then	screamed	over	our	heads	and
directly	 into	 the	fight.	 Five-second	 chain-saw	burps	from	 their	 7.62-millimeter
Gatling	guns	introduced	them	to	the	enemy.	The	battle	raged	on.
	
	
Before	the	Wolverines	 drove	 out	of	 the	hide	site	earlier	 that	evening,	 I	brought
them	together	and	addressed	the	entire	 force.	My	  intent	was	 to	ensure	that	we
weren’t	 becoming	 victims	  of	 our	 own	  charade.	We	 needed	a	 shared	reality
around	what	we	were,	what	 we	weren’t,	and	what	 the	mission	was	that	we	were
trying	to	accomplish	that	night.
   Tucked	 behind	sand	dunes	and	encircled	by	nearly	impassable	desert	trenches
known	as	wadis,	our	hide	site	contained	a	tiny	 cluster	of	one-story	buildings	 that
had	once	served	as	the	most	secret	and	secure	of	all	Iraqi	military	 bases,	like	an
Iraqi	version	 of	Area	 51	in	 the	Nevada	desert.	Completely	 off	 the	beaten	track,
and	off-limits	 to	 all	but	 a	few	top	 Iraqi	 government	officials,	 it	 was	tailor-made
to	be	repurposed	as	our	marauding	lair.
   We	 named	ourselves	the	Wolverines,	 after	the	 teenage	gang	that	took	on	 the
invading	 Soviet	 army	 in	  the	 famous	 B	 movie	 Red	 Dawn.8	 Like	  the	 movie
version	of	the	Wolverines,	 we	were	using	disguises,	deception,	and	diversions	to
confuse	and	confound	 the	 enemy.	Most	 of	 us	had	 been	undercover	 numerous
times	 in	 our	 careers:	 as	 businessmen,	as	 tourists,	 and	 even	 as	a	 bunch	 of

19
anthropologists	on	a	desert	dig.	Our	approach	was	to	blend	in	anywhere;	it	was	a
way	of	life.	 However,	none	of	us	had	ever	attempted	what	we	were	now	doing	 in
the	Iraqi	desert	during	this	mission:	disguising	 ourselves	as	a	tank	division.
   They	 say	you	 can’t	 judge	a	book	 by	its	 cover,	but	 we	were	 hoping	the	 Iraqi
military	 would	 do	 just	that;	 sort	of	 a	modern-day	 version	of	 the	Trojan	 horse9
technique.	Except	instead	of	 trying	 to	 appear	nonthreatening	to	fool	 the	enemy
into	letting	  their	guard	 down,	 as	the	Greeks	used	the	 Trojan	 horse	against	the
city	of	Troy,	 we	were	trying	 to	appear	threatening	to	make	the	enemy	believe	we
were	the	vanguard	of	 a	massive	tank	 division.	 We	believed	 that	by	 conducting
hit-and-run	operations	against	the	Iraqi	military	 forces	defending	central	Iraq,	 we
could	strike	 fear	and	panic	 in	their	 hearts	and	make	them	believe	 we	had	them
surrounded	and	that	their	situation	was	hopeless.
   The	 Wolverines	 had	been	wildly	 successful	so	far.	 We	had	conducted	one	of
the	longest	ground	infiltrations	 behind	 enemy	lines	in	the	history	 of	modern-day
warfare.10	By	 combining	 precision	fire	 with	 precision	 maneuver,	our	small	 but
nimble	force	 was	able	to	 achieve	effects	way	 out	of	 proportion	 to	 our	size	and
the	effort	 we	 expended.	11	Full	 enemy	 brigades	had	collapsed	 and	fled	 at	the
sight	and	commotion	of	 our	marauding	attacks.	This	was	the	first	 time	in	 history
that	a	 tank	unit	 was	 attached	to	 a	special	 operations	force	 to	 conduct	 special
operations	 missions	  behind	 enemy	  lines.	  We	  had	 destroyed	 hundreds	  of
Saddam’s	machines	of	war—tanks,	 artillery,	 rocket	launchers,	and	jets,	 most	of
them	 abandoned	 by	  their	  crews	 seconds	 before	  we	 drilled	   them	  with	  a
technological	orgy	of	 laser-	and	precision-guided	munitions.
   Our	 ruse	had	worked	 way	 beyond	even	our	 most	optimistic	 expectations.	12
We	 had	 accomplished	 our	 overall	  mission	 of	 causing	 Saddam	 and	 his	 top
generals	to	believe	the	main	attack	was	coming	from	west	of	Baghdad,	instead	of
where	the	entire	 invasion	force	 was	actually	 attacking	 from—the	 south.13	The
Iraqi	 generals	had	 arrayed	 their	 defending	 forces	 accordingly;	 as	 a	result	 of
trying	 to	defend	 everywhere,	they	 defended	nowhere.	With	 the	 collapse	of	 the
Iraqi	 government,	  we	 were	 the	 only	  barrier	  between	Saddam	 and	 his	  last
potential	 escape	route	 out	 of	 Iraq.	 Our	 counterfeit	  tank	 division	  created	the
impression	that	 the	vast	deserts	of	 northwestern	Iraq	 were	sealed	shut,	 forcing
Saddam	and	his	 henchman	to	 go	 to	 ground	instead	 of	 into	 exile,	 where	 they
would	almost	assuredly	escape	justice.	(See	Map	1).
   The	reality	 behind	our	ruse	was	that	our	Trojan	horse	was	beginning	to	pull	 up
lame.	We	had	started	with	ten	tanks,	delivered	to	us	via	C-17s	under	the	cover	of

20
night,	on	 an	airstrip	 we	scraped	onto	 the	desert	floor,	 while	 blazing	 across	the
Mars-like	 no-man’s-land	of	 western	Iraq.	14	 Hundreds	of	 kilometers	of	 rugged,
roadless	desert	with	 no	logistical	  support	took	 a	toll	 on	 the	ten.15	 As	engines
strained	and	parts	snapped,	it	 took	 ten	tanks	to	 make	five,	  and	then	there	was
something	broken	on	every	one	of	the	five.	 All	 were	in	dire	need	of	maintenance
and	repair,	but	there	was	none	to	be	had.
   We	 had	no	 maintenance	personnel,	no	spare	parts,	 and	no	way	 to	 get	them.
Not	 because	of	some	 bureaucratic	oversight,	 but	 because	we	believed	 that	 to
succeed	at	marauding	we	had	to	 be	nimble,	 and	if	 you	 want	to	 be	nimble,	 you
gotta	be	quick.	Tooth	 to	tail	 is	how	 the	conventional	military	  describes	the	ratio
of	 combat	troops	 to	 support	 troops.	Many	  conventional	 thinkers	 describe	the
perfect	ratio	 as	one	to	 nine.	Our	 ratio	 was	one	 to	none.	We	 were	 100	percent
tooth,	with	zero	tail	 to	slow	us	down.16
   Assembled	 around	me	as	I	 spoke	that	evening	were	 about	a	hundred	heavily
armed	and	heavily	 grizzled	 warriors.	 With	  no	access	to	running	 water	 and	no
resupply,	 they	 wore	 the	 same	clothes	 and	 hygienic	  accoutrements	they	 had
donned	twenty-four	   days	 earlier.	 Their	  faces	 wore	 the	 expression	 of	  pure,
unadulterated	courage.
   “Remember	 that	 we’re	 a	 small,	 agile	 force;	 we	don’t	  have	enough	 combat
power	or	armor	protection	 to	take	on	large	Iraqi	 mechanized	forces,	or	to	 slug	it
out	with	 insurgents	in	an	urban	area	where	they	can	use	swarming	 tactics	to	cut
us	to	pieces.”
   I	 paused	while	some	of	 the	operators	murmured.	Many	 of	the	men	in	 front	 of
me	had	cut	their	 teeth	on	the	streets	of	Mogadishu,	 Somalia.	Some	of	their	 best
friends	had	been	blown	  to	pieces	while	 escorting	 the	ill-fated	  convoy	that	 had
driven	haplessly	 through	 the	streets	of	 Mogadishu	 to	locate	 a	helicopter	 crash
site.	They	 understood	 with	 crystal	 clarity	 what	 a	 swarming	 enemy	can	 do	 to
vehicles	constrained	to	the	tight,	chaotic	confines	of	an	urban	jungle.
   “Your	   mission	 tonight	 is	 to	 conduct	 a	 show	 of	  force	 on	 the	 outskirts	 of
Tikrit.17	  We’re	 not	 trying	 to	 seize	terrain	 or	 destroy	 an	objective;	  this	is	 an
effects-based	operation.	Our	purpose	is	to	make	the	Tikrit	military	  forces	believe
they	are	surrounded	by	a	large	U.S.	armored	formation.	 But	 to	do	that,	we	 can’t
just	hide	in	 the	desert;	we	have	to	 show	them	the	tanks.	 Approach	the	outskirts
of	the	city	 with	 extreme	 caution;	this	 is	Saddam’s	hometown,	 and	we	know	 he
keeps	his	best-equipped	and	most	loyal	 men	there	to	protect	 it.	 We	want	 to	get
close	enough	 to	 the	 enemy	 so	 they	 can	 see	 us,	but	  we	 don’t	 want	  to	 get

21
decisively	engaged.	Keep	your	back	to	the	desert	at	all	times.”18
	
	
“Echo	0-1,	this	is	Echo	0-2.	Sit-rep	 follows.”b	 It	 was	Bill	 again.
   “It’s	  getting	 pretty	hot	 here.	We	estimate	at	 least	five	 hundred	enemies.”	He
paused.	“They	got	heavy	 weapons	and	RPGs.”	He	paused	again.	“All	  the	roads
into	the	city	 are	barricaded;	they	have	dug-in	positions	along	the	streets,	bunkers
on	top	of	the	buildings,	and	lots	of	 vehicle-mounted	antitank	weapons.	Over.”
   “What’s	  your	recommendation?”	I	asked	him.
   “Well,	  my	mission	 is	to	conduct	a	show	 of	force,	and	we’re	 definitely	 putting
on	a	show.”	He	 paused.	“You	told	 me	not	to	get	decisively	 engaged,	but	even	if
you	didn’t	  tell	 me	 that,	we’re	 heavily	  outnumbered	and	 outgunned,	and	right
now	I’m	 in	real	danger	of	losing	 a	tank.	I	recommend	we	continue	to	engage	and
destroy	the	enemy,	but	as	soon	as	we	free	the	entangled	tank	I	need	to	pull	back
into	the	desert	to	prevent	from	getting	overrun.”
   “Roger;	 approved.	 As	soon	as	that	 tank	is	free,	 pull	 back	into	 the	desert	and
return	to	our	hide	site,”	I	 told	him.
   Bill	  responded,	“Roger	out.”
   A	 split	second	after	Bill	 signed	off,	 the	radio	crackled	to	life	 again.
   “This	 is	Serpent	01.	What	do	you	think	 you	are	doing?”19
   It	 was	 our	commanding	 general.	He	was	 monitoring	 our	 radio	transmissions
from	 inside	his	 operations	center	in	 another	 country,	 more	than	three	 hundred
miles	away.	20
   I	 wasn’t	really	 sure	about	the	context	of	his	question,	so	I	quickly	 summarized
our	mission	and	then	gave	him	an	update	on	the	current	enemy	situation.
   “Negative,	 negative,	 negative.	You	are	not	to	 pull	 out	of	that	 city.	I	 want	you
to	keep	moving	forward	into	 the	city	and	destroy	the	enemy,”	he	barked.21
   From	 his	 temperature-controlled	 operations	center,	the	 commanding	 general
saw	the	battle	 as	a	series	of	 color-coded	computer	 icons	on	 a	giant	 flat-screen
television.	He	heard	the	battle	as	a	series	of	truncated	interrogatives	between	Bill
and	me	during	 our	 intermittent	 satellite	 radio	 transmissions.	What	 he	couldn’t
see	was	the	 enemy	 forces	 attempting	 to	 swarm	the	 cloverleaf,	  or	 the	robust
roadblocks	they	 so	 deftly	 constructed	 on	 the	 roads	leading	 into	 the	 city.	 He
couldn’t	feel	 the	biting	cold,	 nor	the	vulnerability	 the	majority	 of	 the	Wolverines
felt	in	 the	unarmored	and	unprotected	vehicles	on	which	 they	 rode.	He	couldn’t

22
hear	the	sonic	crack	of	the	enemy’s	bullets	as	they	snapped	like	bullwhips	 above
the	men’s	 heads,	 nor	 the	 assessments	the	men	 on	 the	ground	  were	making
regarding	 the	 brutal	  reality	 of	  their	 current	  predicament.	 The	 commanding
general	had	no	context.
   A	 day	 prior	 and	five	 hundred	miles	south,	 the	armored	divisions	 that	led	 the
coalition’s	 main	 attack	 penetrated	Baghdad	using	 the	shock	 and	awe	 of	 what
would	from	 that	day	forward	 be	referred	to	in	military	 parlance	as	a	thunder	run.
They	had	crushed	the	enemy	resistance	by	driving	a	column	of	 armored	vehicles
through	the	heart	of	the	city.
   More	 than	likely,	 our	commanding	 general	had	visions	of	similar	 grandeur	for
our	counterfeit	 armor	 column.22	 But	thunder	 running	 wasn’t	 our	mission,	 and
my	men	were	only	 pretending	to	be	part	of	 an	armored	division.	 A	real	 armored
division	 has	more	than	 three	hundred	tanks	and	 twice	 that	number	 of	armored
support	vehicles.	 We	had	 just	five	  tanks	and	at	 least	one	of	 them	 was	on	 life
support.	More	than	150,000	men	and	vehicles	conducted	the	attack	on	Baghdad;
we	were	on	the	edge	of	Saddam’s	hometown	with	fewer	than	a	hundred.
   In	 a	 respectful	 yet	matter-of-fact	  tone,	I	 reminded	 the	commanding	 general
what	our	mission	was,	and	then	reiterated	the	seriousness	of	the	enemy	situation.
Finally	 I	 explained,	 “I	 already	 told	 Bill	  to	 break	contact	 with	 the	 enemy	and
move	back	into	the	desert	to	regroup.”	The	commanding	general	didn’t	 respond.
   A	  few	 seconds	later	 my	  secure	satellite	 phone	 rang;	 it	 was	 the	 general’s
second.	He	spent	a	couple	of	excruciatingly	  long	minutes	trying	 to	 use	Socratic
questions	to	get	me	to	change	my	mind.	I	had	been	patient	with	the	commanding
general,	but	I	was	in	 the	middle	of	 a	mission,	and	my	 men’s	lives	 were	hanging
in	 the	balance.	 Every	 second	I	 spent	 appeasing	him	 was	a	 second	lost	 from
concentrating	on	the	 battle;	I	 couldn’t	 chitchat	 any	longer.	 I	told	 him	 the	same
thing	 I	 told	 the	 commanding	 general:	 “That’s	  not	 our	 mission;	 the	 situation
doesn’t	warrant	it,	and	I	have	already	ordered	the	men	to	pull	back.”
   Around	  the	 cloverleaf,	 the	 enemy	continued	 to	 press	 the	fight.	  Highspeed
pickup	trucks	 were	attempting	 frontal	 attacks	against	the	tanks;	the	 enemy	was
trying	to	find	 a	kink	in	 our	Trojan	horse’s	armor.	Most	 of	the	helicopter	gunships
had	been	hit	by	small-arms	 fire	 and	were	requesting	to	pull	 back.23	Every	 man
on	the	cloverleaf	 was	engaging	the	swarming	 enemy	with	 whatever	 weapon	he
had	at	his	fingertips.	Being	outnumbered	and	outgunned	was	something	my	guys
were	uniquely	qualified	 for,	 and	confident	 that	they	could	handle—at	 least	for	a
while.	It	 was	the	radio	 transmissions	between	the	commanding	general	and	me,

23
broadcast	in	every	 vehicle	 and	on	every	 man’s	headset	that	were	 beginning	 to
concern	them.
   My	 satellite	 phone	rang	one	more	time;	it	 was	the	general’s	second	again.	An
army	colonel	and	a	genuinely	nice	guy,	he	was	caught	between	a	rock	and	a	hard
place	with	his	boss.
   “Hey,	  uh,	Pete,	listen,	I	 think	you	 should,	uh,	send	your	 guys	into	the	 city.	If
you	don’t,	 uh,	move	through	that	 city,	your	 uh,	future	 as	a	commander	could	be
affected.”	The	phone	went	dead.
   The	 three	men	around	me	stopped	what	they	were	doing	and	stared	at	me	with
wide-eyed	 trepidation.	  “What	   are	 you	  gonna	 do,	  Panther?”	 one	  of	 them
whispered.
   Remember	the	3Ms,	I	thought.
	
	
The	3Ms	 is	a	 guiding	 principle	  that	 I	 learned	early	 in	 my	 career,	 which	 had
provided	direction	 and	context	for	 me	ever	since.	In	 1985,	when	I	was	a	 brand-
new	second	lieutenant	reporting	 for	 duty	in	 Korea,	 my	battalion	 commander,	a
soft-spoken	Vietnam	veteran	 and	 Marlboro	  Man	 lookalike,	 called	 me	into	 his
office	and	asked	me	if	I	had	ever	heard	of	the	3Ms.
   “No—sir,”	   I	 replied	 sheepishly	(I	was	sure	 it	was	something	I	 was	supposed
to	 have	 learned	  during	  basic	 officer	  training).	   He	 sauntered	  over	 to	  the
chalkboard	and	drew	three	capital	 Ms,	one	on	top	of	the	other	in	a	 column.	Then
he	turned	to	me	and	explained.
   “The	 3Ms	 are	the	keys	to	being	successful	in	 life.	They	stand	for	 the	mission,
the	men,	and	me.”	 He	then	 drew	a	line	 from	 the	top	M,	 through	 the	middle	 M,
down	to	the	bottom	M.	“They’re	 all	 connected,”	 he	continued.	“So	if	 you	neglect
one,	you’ll	  screw	 up	 the	others.	 The	 first	 M	 stands	 for	 the	 mission;	 it’s	 the
purpose	for	which	you’re	 doing	 what	you’re	 doing.	Whether	in	your	 personal	or
professional	life,	 make	sure	 you	understand	 it,	and	 that	 it	makes	legal,	 moral,
and	ethical	 sense,	then	use	it	to	guide	 all	 your	decisions.	The	 second	M	stands
for	the	men.	Joshua	Chamberlain,	a	Medal	 of	Honor-	 receiving	schoolteacher	in
the	Civil	 War,	 once	said	 that	 ‘there	 are	two	 things	an	 officer	 must	do	 to	lead
men:	he	must	care	for	his	men’s	welfare,	and	he	must	show	courage.’	Welfare	 of
the	troops	and	courage	 are	inextricably	 linked.	 When	it	comes	to	your	 men	you
can’t	be	good	 at	one	without	 being	 good	at	the	other.	 Take	care	of	 your	men’s
welfare	 by	listening	 and	 leading	 them	with	  sound	tactics	 and	 techniques	that
accomplish	your	mission,	and	 by	always	having	the	courage	 of	your	convictions

24
to	do	the	 right	 thing	 by	them.	The	 final	 M	 stands	for	 me.	Me	comes	last	 for	a
reason.	You	have	to	 take	care	of	 yourself,	but	 you	should	 only	do	 so	after	 you
have	taken	care	of	the	mission,	and	the	men.	Never	put	your	 own	personal	well-
being,	or	advancement,	ahead	of	the	accomplishment	of	your	mission	and	taking
care	of	your	men.	.	.	.	”
	
	
“Echo	0-1,	this	is	Echo	0-2.”	 Bill’s	 tone	was	urgent.
   “We	  almost	have	 the	tank	 free,	but	 we	 gotta	move	 from	 this	 position	 right
away	or	they’re	 going	 to	surround	us!”	 Bill	  was	screaming	to	hear	himself	 talk
over	the	guttural	 staccato	of	 the	tanks’	 heavy	 machine	guns.	“I’m	  ready	 to	do
whatever	you	tell	me.	What	do	you	want	 me	to	do?”
   “Pull	 back	to	the	desert	as	ordered,”	I	told	him.
   There	  was	  no	 chance	 for	  Bill	   to	  respond.	 The	  enraged	 voice	  of	  the
commanding	general	broke	in,
   “What	 did	 you	say?	You	listen	to	me,	I	told	 you	to	.	.	.”	Dead	silence.
   I	 waited	another	minute.
   “This	  is	Echo	 0-1.	Say	again.	 Over.”	 I	 waited	a	 few	more	 seconds	and	then
repeated	the	call	two	more	times.	Still	dead	silence.
   I	 had	no	 idea	what	had	happened	to	him,	 but	it	 really	 didn’t	 matter.	 Bill	 and
the	rest	 of	  the	 Wolverines	 were	 likely	  already	 off	  the	 cloverleaf,	  and	they
weren’t	 taking	 any	more	 calls	after	 I	 told	 them	 they	were	 cleared	to	 return.	 I
would	later	 learn	from	a	close	friend	 who	worked	 on	the	commanding	 general’s
staff	that	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 his	transmission,	 the	radio	 system	 the	general	was
yelling	 into	 had	shortcircuited	 and	thus	prevented	him	 from	 sharing	the	 rest	of
his	response	with	me	and	the	 world.	 He	was	so	enraged	that	he	threw	 his	radio
headset	down	and	stormed	off	to	his	quarters.24
   When	 the	sun	came	up	a	few	hours	later,	 I	walked	 out	into	 the	desert	as	I	did
each	morning	to	await	 the	return	of	 the	Wolverine	 marauders.	It	was	the	 end	of
yet	another	twenty-two-hour	  blur	 of	a	combat	 day.	I	 was	standing	alone	 in	the
desert	as	the	vehicles	pulled	 into	 the	relative	 safety	of	 our	sand	dune-encircled
hide	site.	While	the	men	dismounted	and	began	unloading	spent	ammunition	and
checking	themselves	and	their	vehicles	 for	damage,	one	of	the	 most	senior	men
in	the	Unit,	 Armani,	 hopped	out	 of	the	 lead	vehicle	and	 made	a	beeline	for	 my
location.	With	 hair	 and	clothes	completely	disheveled,	 zombielike	faraway	 eyes
straining	 to	stay	 open,	and	 weapons	and	 equipment	 perfectly	 maintained	 and

25
form-fitted	 to	 his	body,	 he	had	 the	familiar	  look	 of	a	 Delta	operator	 returning
from	an	intensive	night	of	 combat.	I	wasn’t	 sure	what	he	was	going	to	say.	There
was	no	salutation.	Armani	simply	 grabbed	my	hand,	looked	me	in	the	eye,	and	in
a	voice	 shouted	hoarse	from	 a	night	 of	 screaming	over	 gunfire,	 he	whispered,
“We	 were	hanging	on	 every	word	 of	 your	 conversation	with	 the	general	 while
we	fought	last	 night.	We	 would	have	been	cut	to	 pieces	if	we’d	 driven	 into	that
city.	I	just	 wanted	to	shake	your	hand	and	say	thanks.”
   That	 simple	handshake	and	the	barely	audible	words	of	gratitude	from	 a	man	I
completely	  respected,	 along	  with	   the	  knowledge	  that	  all	  my	   men	 had
successfully	returned	from	 a	dangerous	mission,	was	a	defining	 moment	for	 me
that	I	am	as	proud	of	 as	any	event	in	my	entire	 life.	Ironically,	  I	really	 didn’t	 do
anything	other	than	what	I	 was	supposed	to	do.	I	didn’t	 lead	a	charge	against	an
enemy	 machine-gun	 nest,	 nor	 did	  I	 execute	 some	 Napoleonic	 cutting-edge
operational	maneuver;	I	simply	 did	 the	right	 thing.	It	 was	the	right	 thing	for	 the
mission,	it	was	the	right	thing	 for	the	men,	and	it	was	the	right	thing	 for	me.
   There	  were	 many	 lessons	 from	  what	 the	 audacious	 men	 of	  Task	 Force
Wolverine	 accomplished	 during	 the	 early	 days	of	 combat	 in	 Iraq.	 Interviews
with	captured	Iraqi	 leaders	confirmed	 that	Saddam	and	his	generals	all	believed
that	 our	 band	 of	 a	 few	  hundred	 marauders	was	 the	 vanguard	 of	 the	 main
coalition	attack.c25	 But	the	most	important	 lesson	I	took	 away	from	 those	early
days	of	combat	in	 Iraq,	was	the	primacy	 of	the	3Ms	 (the	Mission,	 the	Men,	 and
Me).
   I	 had	used	the	 3Ms	many	 times	in	 my	military	  career	prior	 to	the	 cloverleaf
incident,	but	that	was	the	first	 time	I	 had	used	it	to	make	a	split-second	life-and-
death	decision.	By	refocusing	 my	mind	 on	my	mission,	 my	responsibility	 to	 my
men’s	 welfare,	 and	 then	 putting	 any	 thoughts	 of	 me	 completely	  out	 of	 the
equation,	I	 was	able	to	 recognize	and	adapt	to	 a	hauntingly	 familiar	  pattern	of
modern-day	battlefield	behavior	 while	it	 unfolded	in	front	 of	me	(a	leader	misled
by	technology	 and	misguided	 by	 hubris	 trying	 to	 make	life-or-death	 decisions
without	the	context	of	 the	guys	on	the	ground).
   One	 of	the	 unfortunate	realities	 of	large	 organizations	such	as	the	military	  is
that	the	truly	meaningful	 lessons	from	key	events	such	as	the	cloverleaf	incident,
are	rarely	captured	 or	shared	in	 the	historical	 record.	 There	are	many	 possible
reasons	for	this.26
   The	 first	  is	 that	 the	 actual	 event	and	 the	 lessons	it	  produces	may	 reflect
negatively	on	some	or	 all	of	 the	individuals	 involved,	 and	thus	are	intentionally

26
watered	down	 or	cloaked	 under	an	arbitrary	 stamp	 of	secrecy	to	 prevent	them
from	being	shared.
   In	 other	cases,	the	key	participants,	the	warriors	themselves,	are	caught	up	in	a
cycle	of	 continuous	 operations	and	 never	have	 adequate	time	to	 incubate	 and
illuminate	 on	the	real	lessons	of	 the	events.	In	the	rare	 cases	when	the	warriors
do	get	time	 to	reflect,	 write,	 or	 share	their	insights,	 what	they	 produce	is	often
contaminated	by	 the	 human	 psyche’s	 need	to	 achieve	 importance,	 or	 by	 the
administrative	policies	 and	political	 conditions	 that	confront	 and	influence	them
at	the	time.
   Finally,	  the	 lessons	themselves	are	most	 often	 misdirected	 on	the	 dramatic
particulars	of	 the	tactics	and	techniques,	instead	of	the	patterns	of	 activities	 and
behaviors	that	were	 actually	 responsible	for	 the	outcome	 of	the	 event.	For	 it’s
not	 the	 action—the	 blinding	  flash	 of	  a	 concussion	grenade,	 or	 the	 stealthy
approach	of	the	night	 vision-clad	 commando,	but	the	interaction,	 in	 the	form	 of
the	way	 we	think,	 the	way	 we	 make	decisions,	and	 the	way	 we	operationalize
our	decisions	that	matter	most.
   The	 ultimate	goal	of	 this	book	is	to	share	what	I	consider	to	 be	life-saving	and
life-changing	 lessons	that	I	was	fortunate	enough	to	learn	as	a	key	participant	 in
many	 of	 recent	 history’s	  most	 impactful	  events.	The	 single	 most	 important
lesson	I	learned,	and	the	 plain	but	 powerful	 foundation	 that	supports	the	 entire
book,	 is	 that	 the	 most	  effective	 weapon	 on	  any	 battlefield—whether	  it	  be
combat,	business,	or	 life—is	  our	mind’s	  ability	 to	 recognize	 life’s	 underlying
patterns.
   Patterns	of	 thinking,	 patterns	of	 nature,	and	patterns	of	history	 are	just	 a	few
of	the	infinite	 examples	of	 life’s	 underlying	 patterns	that	inform	 the	behavior	of
the	complex	 world	  that	swirls	  around	us.	 Patterns	reveal	 how	 the	real	 world
works.	 When	recognized,	 they	 allow	 us	 to	 understand,	adapt,	and	 master	the
future	as	it	unfolds	in	front	 of	us.
   Although	  patterns	change	in	every	context,	the	method	 I	learned	to	recognize
the	patterns	always	stayed	the	same.	It	was	through	the	use	of	guiding	principles
such	as	the	3Ms.
   Using	 guiding	 principles	 to	 detect	patterns	is	 axiomatic.	 Sailors	of	 antiquity
coined	 the	 guiding	 principle	  “Red	  sky	 at	 night	 sailor’s	  delight;	  red	 sky	 in
morning	sailor’s	  warning”	 to	 help	them	 recognize	and	adapt	to	 future	 weather
patterns.	The	philosopher	George	Santayana	coined	the	guiding	principle	“Those
who	fail	 to	heed	the	lessons	of	history	are	doomed	to	repeat	them,”	to	help	all	 of
us	recognize	that	history	reveals	patterns,	and	patterns	reveal	life.	 Hidden	inside

27
both	the	 sailors’	 and	 Santayana’s	guiding	  principles	 is	 an	innate	 lesson	with
profound	implications	  for	 all	of	 us:	to	 recognize	and	adapt	to	 life’s	 underlying
patterns,	it’s	the	guiding	principle	 you	must	remember!
   With	 each	new	battlefield	 I	 stepped	foot	on,	and	each	mission	I	took	 part	in,	I
became	more	and	more	convinced	of	the	pattern-revealing	power	of	a	handful	 of
guiding	principles.	 So	I	began	to	write	 them	down	 on	whatever	I	 could	find	 and
stash	the	notes	in	whatever	outfit	  I	happened	to	be	wearing	 at	the	time.	 On	the
back	of	hotel	 stationery	and	hidden	in	 the	lining	 of	 my	suit	 jacket	in	 Colombia.
Written	in	 alphanumeric	code	on	the	inside	of	my	Serbo-Croatian	language	book
while	 sitting	 inside	a	safe	house	in	 Bosnia.	 On	the	back	 of	 a	map	while	 being
stalked	by	 a	grizzly	 bear	in	 Montana.	 On	a	pocket	 notebook	wrapped	 inside	a
Ziploc	sandwich	 bag	to	protect	against	driving	 snowstorms	in	 Afghanistan.	And
in	Iraq,	 while	 sitting	 cross-legged	in	 a	sandstorm,	using	 infrared	ink	 under	 the
glow	of	 night	 vision-goggle	 green.	It	didn’t	  matter	what	country	 I	 was	in,	what
culture	I	 was	interacting	 with,	 or	what	 kind	 of	complex	 situation	 I	was	 dealing
with;	 the	utility	 of	 the	guiding	 principles	 never	faltered.	I	 realized	that	the	 truly
meaningful	lessons	from	all	these	experiences	were	the	guiding	principles.
   The	 power	 of	 the	 guiding	 principles	 shared	in	 this	 book,	 such	as	 “Always
listen	to	 the	guy	 on	the	 ground”;	 “When	 in	 doubt,	 develop	the	 situation”;	 and
“Don’t	 get	 treed	by	a	 Chihuahua”	is	 that	they	 provide	 direction	 and	context	to
both	recognize	and	 believe	in	 life’s	  underlying	 patterns	so	we	 can	understand,
adapt	to,	and	master	the	future	as	it	unfolds	in	front	of	us.
   Although	  the	Delta	 Force	culture	 is	one	of	 quiet	 professionalism	that	 values
humility	 over	self-aggrandizement,	that	same	culture	also	instills	 an	innate	sense
of	responsibility	  to	always	 strive	 to	make	a	 contribution	 to	 the	greater	good.	 I
believe	that	 the	best	way	 to	balance	this	 tension	is	 by	 sharing	my	 experiences
and	the	corresponding	lessons	learned	through	this	book.
   My	  motivation	  for	 writing	  this	 book	 isn’t	  personal	 or	 political.	  Instead,	I
believe	that	 accurately	 understanding	and	 sharing	lessons	from	 the	 past	is	 an
essential	step	for	 gaining	 insight	 into	 and	preparing	for	 the	 future.	 If	 properly
absorbed,	the	guiding-principle	 lessons	shared	in	this	book	will	  help	ensure	that
we	as	 individuals	 and	 as	a	 nation	can	 learn	 from	 our	 experiences	and	 better
prepare	ourselves	to	 not	 only	 survive,	 but	 also	 to	 thrive	 in	 an	 uncertain	and
unpredictable	future.
   The	  stories	in	  this	 book	 and	 the	 guiding-principle	   lessons	they	 produced
belong	to	all	of	us.

28
PART	1

29
                                                          1



                                        HOW	  I	 GOT	  HERE:


                                    PATTERNS	OF	HINDSIGHT
	
	
	
	
	
How	do	we	 end	up	doing	what	we	do	in	 life?	 How	do	we	 become	what	we
become?	How	did	we	get	where	we	are	today?	At	some	point	in	our	lives,	we	all
ask	ourselves	these	questions.	Of	course,	there’s	no	single,	causal	explanation	or
answer,	but	by	looking	back	through	the	pattern-revealing	lens	of	hindsight,	we
can	 recognize	some	 of	  the	  defining	  activities,	 experiences,	ideas,	 and
opportunities	that	ultimately	shaped	our	paths.	History	 reveals	patterns,	and
patterns	reveal	life.
   I	 was	born	and	raised	in	Oak	Park,	Illinois.	 My	 parents	gave	birth	to	nine
children.	Yes,	we	were	of	 Irish-Catholic	descent	(it’s	the	first	 question	most
people	ask	when	they	hear	nine	kids).
   Built	 in	1896,	the	house	I	grew	up	in	is	the	same	house	my	mother	lives	in
today.	With	four	boys	and	five	girls,	life	had	its	share	of	unique	idiosyncrasies.
Food	was	always	scarce.	We	considered	bologna	a	delicacy,	and	when	there
were	actually	a	 few	 slices	left,	 they	 were	usually	 hidden	behind	or	 under
something	else	in	the	refrigerator—familial	Darwinism	at	work.	Although	the
house	had	six	bedrooms,	all	four	boys	slept	in	the	same	room.	My	mother	locked
us	in	at	night	to	keep	us	from	going	downstairs	and	raiding	the	kitchen.	To	get
the	extra	rations	I	was	sure	I	needed,	I	started	climbing	out	the	window,	crawling
across	the	roof,	hanging	off	the	gutters,	and	dropping	to	the	ground,	where	I’d
then	reenter	the	house	through	a	basement	window	I	had	left	open	before	going
to	bed.
   My	 brothers	and	sisters	would	probably	say	that	my	greatest	talent	as	a	kid
was	finding	things.	My	parents	ran	a	tight	ship.	When	one	of	my	siblings	gained

30
possession	of	something	my	 parents	thought	 inappropriate,	such	as	my	 sister’s
low-cut	 hip-hugger	  pants,	my	  older	 brother’s	 Doors	  album,	 or	 my	 younger
brother’s	 BB	 gun,	 my	 parents	 confiscated	the	 “offensive”	   items	and	 stashed
them	away	 in	the	 types	of	 places	where	 no	one,	 including	 my	 parents,	would
ever	look	  again.	 Inevitably	  my	 siblings	  would	 turn	 to	  me	for	  the	 recovery
operation.	My	process	was	elementary.	The	size,	shape,	and	composition	of	what
I	was	looking	  for	were	 key.	A	 BB	 gun	 required	a	rifle’s	  length	of	 rigid	 hiding
space	volume;	a	Doors	album	a	long,	 thin	slot;	 while	 my	sister’s	 pants	could	be
squished	away	 almost	 anyplace.	I’d	  always	 imagine	 where	 I	 would	 hide	 the
object	if	 I	were	my	parents	(up	high	 and	out	of	reach	from	 my	little	 brother,	odd
and	unexpected	compartments	for	my	sister’s	 stuff,	etc).	I	 knew	every	 nook	and
cranny	in	 the	house,	so	if	 a	dresser	or	a	box	in	 the	closet	 were	askew,	it	 was	a
surefire	clue	that	I	was	getting	 hot.	Nothing	was	out	of	 bounds	as	a	hiding	place:
inside	TV	 sets,	behind	dresser	drawers,	on	top	of	the	 furnace	in	the	basement.	I
never	failed	 in	 a	finding	  mission—ever!	 Helping	 my	 brothers	 and	sisters	find
their	stuff	 was	cool,	 but	it	 wasn’t	 what	jazzed	me;	 I	thrived	 on	 the	thrill	 of	 the
hunt.
   I’ve	  come	 to	believe	 that	 within	  the	heart	 of	 every	 boy	 lies	 the	seed	of	 a
warrior.	Even	 a	boy	born	and	raised	in	a	bubble	 with	no	 exposure	to	TV	or	 toys
will	 occasionally	 chew	 his	 toast	into	 the	shape	of	 a	 gun,	or	 stealthily	 roll	 his
bubble	across	the	room	to	sneak	up	on	his	mom.	The	degree	to	which	the	warrior
seed	grows	and	 flourishes	 is	 dependent	on	 the	life	  experiences	in	 which	  it’s
nurtured.	For	me,	there	was	one	seminal	experience	that	I	first	took	 part	in	at	the
age	of	seven.	It	wasn’t	the	Boy	Scouts.	It	was	“bombing	 cars.”
   For	 me	and	my	 friends,	 bombing	cars	had	nothing	 to	do	 with	 trying	 to	scare
people	or	damage	their	property.	Instead,	it	was	our	way	of	imbibing	 what	I	 have
since	come	to	know	as	“the	warrior’s	 cocktail”	  (the	thrill	 of	 the	hunt	mixed	with
the	thrill	 of	the	chase).
   To	 get	the	best	possible	 chases,	the	types	that	would	 challenge	our	ability	  to
run,	 dodge,	 evade,	and	 outsmart,	 we	 were	  picky.	 We	  picked	 our	 bombing
positions	 with	  great	  care	 to	 ensure	 we	  always	 achieved	 surprise.	  Houses
surrounded	by	 thick	 evergreen	trees	or	 juniper	 bushes	were	our	 favorites.	 We
threw	snowballs	 only	  at	cars	driven	  by	men—the	 younger	 and	the	 more,	 the
better.	Back	then,	there	was	a	high	price	to	pay	if	 you	got	caught.	You	 either	got
the	crap	kicked	out	 of	you	 and	your	face	washed	with	 snow	on	the	 spot,	or	you
were	dragged	off	 to	the	police	 station	and	locked	 up	until	 your	parents	came	to
get	you—my	claim	 to	fame	was	that	I	never	got	caught.

31
   At	 times,	our	numbers	would	 swell	to	upward	of	fifty	  kids,	sometimes	heaving
more	than	 fifty	  frozen	projectiles;	  on	those	 days	we	 called	 it	 carpet-bombing
cars.	Before	we’d	 start	 bombing,	I’d	  gather	the	younger	 kids	around—most	 of
whom	 were	 pretty	  scared—and	 share	 what	 we	 called	  the	 golden	 rules	  of
bombing.
   “Be	  prepared.	Know	 how	 all	 the	gate	latches	open	 and	shut,	and	remember
who	has	dogs	in	 their	 yards.	Pull	 your	hat	 up	high	 so	there’s	nothing	 blocking
your	vision	and	your	ability	 to	see	what’s	going	on	around	you.
   “When	 the	 chase	starts,	stay	flexible.	We	 can	run	anywhere	 we	want—we’re
kids,	they’re	not.	Change	directions	a	lot:	 the	more	you	stay	out	of	 his	sights,	the
less	he’ll	 want	to	keep	chasing	you.	 If	 the	snow	is	fresh,	 don’t	 ever	hide—your
footprints	will	 lead	him	 right	on	top	of	 you.
   “If	  you	can’t	 outrun	’em,	 you	gotta	outsmart	 ’em.	If	 the	guy	is	 about	to	catch
you,	slow	 down	a	 bit,	then	 drop	to	the	 ground	in	 a	ball	 and	he’ll	 trip	 over	you
and	go	flying	 into	 the	snow.	If	 you	get	 caught,	start	bawling	 your	eyes	out,	and
tell	’em	 you	were	 just	walking	 home	from	 school	and	some	older	 kids	told	 you
to	start	running.	If	all	 else	fails,	just	stick	with	 me.	I’ll	 make	sure	you	get	away.”
   More	 than	 any	other	activity	  in	my	 youth,	 bombing	 cars	was	the	experience
that	allowed	 my	warrior	 seed	to	 grow	and	 thrive,	while	 also	 arming	me	 with	 a
mind-set	full	 of	options	as	both	the	hunter	and	the	hunted.
   High	  school	was	 sort	of	 a	 halcyonic	 blur	 for	 me.	I	 spent	 most	of	 my	 time
hanging	out	with	  my	friends,	 playing	 sports,	or	 just	plain	 ol’	 having	 fun.	 I	ran
cross-country	and	played	ice	hockey,	dual-purpose	handrails	that	 kept	me	out	of
trouble	and	in	 great	physical	 condition.	 I	listened	 to	a	lot	 of	 Led	Zeppelin,	 and
babysat	for	 my	 neighbors	to	 make	my	 kicking-around	  money.	Although	  there
aren’t	many	 things	I’d	  change	about	my	adolescent	years,	there	was	 one	event
during	my	 senior	year	of	high	 school	that,	if	 given	the	opportunity	 at	the	time,	 I
definitely	 would	have	requested	a	do-over.
   A	 few	 months	before	graduation,	 a	girl	 who	was	a	 neighbor	of	 mine	told	 me
that	if	I	 were	to	ask	her	friend	to	 my	prom,	her	friend	 would	 definitely	 say	yes.	I
was	totally	 psyched.	 I	 had	yet	 to	 attend	a	 single	dance	 in	 four	 years	of	 high
school,	and	this	would	 be	my	 last	chance.	I	had	had	a	 crush	on	her	friend	 for	 a
long	time,	 but	had	never	been	able	to	get	my	 nerve	up	to	 ask	her	out	on	a	date.
Now,	 with	 the	threat	 of	 rejection	 greatly	minimized,	  I	 figured	 I	 might	 just	be
able	to	 close	the	 deal.	While	  walking	 home	 from	 school	that	 day,	 I	 mentally
rehearsed	the	words	I’d	use	when	I	 called	her	on	 the	phone	later	that	evening.	I
was	the	king	of	 dialing	six	 numbers,	then	hanging	up	the	receiver—this	 was	not

32
going	to	be	easy.	Lost	in	my	 hypothetical	phone	conversation,	I	didn’t	 notice	 the
jacked-up	Dodge	 Charger	 jump	 the	 curb	 and	skid	 to	 a	 stop	on	 the	 perfectly
manicured	lawn	a	few	 feet	away.	“Kashmir”	  by	 Led	Zeppelin	 was	blaring	 from
the	Bose	in	the	back.	Three	of	 my	friends	 jumped	out	and	surrounded	me.	They
were	fired	 up	about	 something.	“Wait	  until	 you	 hear	what	 we	got	 planned	for
prom	night,”	  Billy	  Pappas,	a	fuzzy-haired	Greek	 kid	 who	 loved	to	 drink	 beer,
announced.	A	keg	of	beer?	A	live	band	at	the	party	afterward?	 I	wondered.	Billy
didn’t	 wait	 for	 my	 answer.	 “For	 all	 those	 suckers	going	 to	 the	dance,	this	 is
gonna	go	down	as	the	greatest	prank	in	school	history!”
   “Wait	  a	minute,	 Billy.	 Aren’t	  you	going	 to	the	prom	 with	 your	girlfriend?”	  I
asked	in	disbelief.	“No	 way,”	he	replied.	“This	 will	 be	much	more	fun!”
   “Come	 on,	Pete,	we	can’t	pull	 it	off	 without	 you,”	 they	all	chimed	 in	together.
I	 didn’t	 say	 anything.	 “Without	  you	 we’re	 sure	 to	 get	caught;	 we	 need	you,
man.”	 Ego	 has	a	 powerful	 pull	  on	 all	 humans,	but	 on	 a	 male	 teenager,	it’s
enslaving.	As	  they	 explained	 the	“plan”	  to	 me,	 I	  don’t	 remember	 if	 it	  ever
seemed	like	much	 of	 a	good	idea	 or	even	 like	 much	of	 a	good	 time,	 but	they
acted	like	they	really	 needed	me.	I	wasn’t	thinking	  in	terms	of	 the	last	dance,	or
the	girl,	 who	was	 probably	at	home	 that	very	 minute	waiting	 for	 my	 call.	All	  I
thought	about	was	how	much	my	buddies	admired	my	 talents	as	an	escape	artist,
and	how	throwing	 my	 hat	in	 with	 them	 gave	me	an	easy	way	 out	of	 having	to
step	up	to	the	plate	to	actually	dial	that	seventh	number.
   The	 day	of	the	dance,	we	pooled	our	dollars	and	change	together	and	bought	a
case	of	beer	and	a	bushel	of	ripe	tomatoes.	With	 the	tomatoes	and	beers	divvied
up	among	 us,	the	 four	 of	 us	settled	into	 position,	 hidden	 in	 a	 thick	 tangle	of
juniper	bushes	that	blanketed	 the	corner	house	one	block	 down	 the	street	from
the	high	school.	 There	we	sat	for	 the	next	two	 hours,	waiting	 for	 what	the	 plan
predicted	would	 be	a	parade	of	buses	loaded	with	prom	 couples	on	their	way	 to
the	dance.	We	 whiled	 away	the	 hours	by	 guzzling	 our	 beer	and	talking	  about
how	stupid	 all	 the	other	guys	 were	for	 actually	 going	to	 the	prom	 and	missing
out	on	all	this	 “fun.”	 The	 air	lay	heavy	with	 the	stench	of	piss	and	pine.	 Finally,
a	single	orange	school	bus	rumbled	down	the	street	toward	our	ambush	position.
   Completely	  tanked,	 all	 four	  of	 us	 lurched	 out	 of	 the	 bushes	hooting	  and
hollering	 like	 deranged	savages.	Each	of	 us	 heaved	five	 or	 six	 tomatoes	in	 a
manner	completely	commensurate	with	 the	effects	of	 downing	five	 or	six	 beers.
I	don’t	 believe	a	single	tomato	so	much	as	grazed	the	bus—I	can	vouch	for	all	of
mine.	Standing	on	the	edge	of	the	street	in	the	warm	spring	twilight	 of	 my	senior
year,	I	remember	staring	at	a	couple	who	were	sitting	 in	the	back	of	 the	bus,	lost

33
in	each	other’s	arms,	and	completely	oblivious	 to	me	and	the	tomatoes	I	had	just
hurled.	Police	sirens	screamed	in	the	distance;	someone	had	called	the	cops.
   What	 had	I	 done?	I	 wondered.	I	 turned	aside	my	last	 best	chance	to	go	 to	a
high	 school	 dance	 for	  what	  had	 to	 be	 the	  lamest	 prank	 that	  I	 had	  ever
participated	in.	 Down	the	street,	two	of	my	 buddies	stood	silently,	mirror	 images
of	me,	but	 not	Billy.	  He	 was	out	in	 the	middle	 of	 the	street	in	 a	full-up	 purple
rage,	screaming	at	the	top	of	 his	lungs,	 “Screw	you,	 Cindy!”	  while	 flipping	 the
bird	like	 a	spear	at	the	now	distant	school	bus.	That’s	when	it	 hit	me.	It	 all	made
sense.
   The	 prank	was	all	 about	revenge	against	his	 girlfriend,	 whom	 he	had	broken
up	with	 a	couple	 of	weeks	 earlier.	To	 pull	 off	 the	prank,	 and—perhaps	just	 as
important—to	help	 pay	for	the	beers,	he	needed	me	and	my	buddies.
   I’d	 been	duped.	I	should	 have	seen	it	coming.	I	could	 feel	the	giant	L	 forming
on	my	forehead.	I	felt	like	 a	total	loser.
   “Hey,	  guys,	the	 cops	are	coming.	 Follow	  me.”	 I	 turned	and	 sprinted	into	 a
nearby	alley.	Three	hours	and	many	miles	 later,	the	cops	gave	up.	Thanks	to	the
chase,	and	the	fact	that	all	of	us	got	 away,	my	buddies	considered	it	 the	greatest
prank	of	all	 time.	Not	 me.	Most	 of	us	can	remember	the	name	of	 the	person	we
went	to	the	senior	 prom	with.	 I	 can	only	remember	the	name	of	 the	girl	 I	 never
asked.
   The	 silver	 lining	  of	 my	 heartfelt	 regret	was	 that	the	 incident	 precipitated	 a
lifelong	 quest	to	better	understand	why	 I	sometimes	made	such	chowderheaded
decisions.	I	never	wanted	that	 giant	L	 to	form	 on	my	 forehead	again.	I	also	had
one	more	mistake	to	add	to	my	lifelong	 résumé	of	mistakes,	the	curriculum	 vitae
for	all	wisdom	 and	knowledge.
   After	   high	   school,	  I	  attended	  Southern	  Illinois	   University	    (SIU),	  in
Carbondale,	Illinois.	 I	chose	SIU	 not	because	of	academics,	or	special	curricula,
or	even	because	it	was	in	 Illinois.	 I	 chose	SIU,	 because	it	was	in	the	 middle	of
the	Shawnee	National	Forest.	The	275,000	acres	of	the	Shawnee	National	Forest
lie	in	 the	rough,	 unglaciated	wilderness	region	 of	 southern	Illinois	 between	 the
Ohio	and	Mississippi	  rivers.	I	 fell	 in	 love	with	 the	 area	on	my	first	 visit	  to	the
school.	Over	 the	next	 four	years,	 the	forest	maintained	 a	powerful	  pull	 on	my
scholastic	psyche.	I	 spent	most	 weekends	hiking	 with	 friends	 into	 the	 forest’s
roughest	and	least	explored	recesses.	The	names	of	these	places—Panthers’	Den,
Giant	 City,	 Trail	 of	  Tears,	and	 Devils’	 Kitchen—were	  accurate	indicators	  of
both	their	inaccessibility	 and	the	wilderness	hazards	they	presented.
   In	 those	days,	SIU	was	most	famous	for	 its	Mardi	 Gras-like	 Halloween	party.

34
Tens	of	thousands	of	 students	would	 flock	 to	SIU	 each	year	for	 the	 festivities.
The	 town	 encouraged	 the	 melee	 by	  closing	 Main	  Street	 and	 allowing	  the
elaborately	costumed	revelers	to	party	 and	riot	 until	 they	literally	  dropped.	The
costume	was	a	big	deal;	you	weren’t	just	supposed	to	wear	it,	you	were	expected
to	become	it.	Pirates,	whores,	vampires,	and	gangsters.	I	noticed	that	the	costume
one	chose	was	in	 many	 cases,	a	good	 indicator	 of	 some	defining	 slice	 of	 the
costume-wearer’s	personality.
   I	 dressed	up	as	the	same	thing	every	year,	 a	commando.	I	didn’t	  know	much
about	 what	  a	 commando	  was.	 Inside	  my	  untainted	 non-military	   mind,	  I
perceived	a	commando	 as	a	hybrid	 of	 James	Bond	and	a	 Spartan	warrior.	 My
predilection	 for	 impersonating	 a	 commando	 had	nothing	  to	 do	 with	 guns	 or
blowing	 things	up—though	 I	 definitely	  thought	those	were	 cool,	 too;	rather,	 it
was	the	 intrigue	 behind	 the	role	 that	 completely	 enraptured	 me.	Specifically,
what	I	 considered	the	tools	 of	 the	commando	 trade—disguises,	deception,	and
diversions,	 all	  used	 in	 the	  name	 of	 outsmarting	  an	 adversary.	 With	   each
successive	year	that	I	 dressed	up	and	immersed	myself	 in	 the	role,	 I	 felt	 more
and	more	certain	that	I	was	finding	my	 path.
   During	 my	 second	year,	I	went	 with	friends	 to	our	 school’s	downtown	 movie
theater	to	see	the	twin	 billing	  of	The	 Deer	Hunter	 and	Apocalypse	Now.	 I	 was
mesmerized.	It	wasn’t	 the	music,	 or	missiles,	or	 even	the	moxie	 that	captivated
me.	Instead,	it	was	 the	futility	  of	the	 way	we	fought	 the	war	 and	the	objects	of
that	futility,	  the	brave	men	who	 had	to	do	 the	fighting.	 The	two	 movies	 piqued
my	interest	 in	 the	 Vietnam	 War.	 My	 newfound	 curiosity	 motivated	 me	 to	 do
something	that	all	of	 my	academic	courses	had	previously	failed	to	do;	 I	became
a	regular	at	the	university	library.
   Sitting	 at	 the	same	table	in	the	rarely	 visited	 periodical	 archives	section	each
night,	 I	 spent	 weeks	scouring	  thick	 black	 binders	 full	  of	 old	  issues	of	 Life
magazine.	I	read	every	Vietnam	story,	but	 the	pictures	had	the	biggest	impact	on
me.	I	 had	 lots	 of	 questions,	 so	I	  sought	out	 and	 talked	 with	 some	 Vietnam
veterans	who	were	teaching	at	the	school	at	the	time.	They	 shared	many	of	their
perspectives	with	me,	and	the	more	I	 heard,	the	more	frustrated	I	 became.	I	was
generally	frustrated	 because	as	hard	 as	it	 was	 for	 me	to	 admit	 at	 the	 time,	 I
realized	that	my	 country	 lost	 the	war.	 I	was	 specifically	 frustrated	 because	the
more	I	learned	about	 the	decisions	made	by	various	 leaders	during	the	war,	 the
more	I	became	certain	that	it	was	the	decisions,	not	the	enemy,	that	caused	us	to
lose.	How	could	so	many	seemingly	 bright,	intelligent	 people	in	 our	government
have	made	 so	many	 bad	 decisions?	 From	 Kennedy	 and	 McNamara	 through

35
Nixon	 and	Westmoreland,	the	decisions	they	 made	concerning	everything	 from
how	we	 got	involved	 to	 how	 we	actually	 fought	 the	war	 completely	 perplexed
me.
   I	  wondered	why	  we	didn’t	  create	 a	guerrilla	  army	 to	 fight	 the	 Viet	 Cong
instead	of	 spending	billions	 to	 create	a	Westernized	 version	of	 a	 conventional
army	 that	 neither	  fit	  the	 culture	 of	  the	 South	 Vietnamese	  nor	 the	 enemy
adversaries	they	were	trying	 to	defeat.	When	 I	looked	 at	the	combat	pictures	 in
Life,	 I	 wondered	 why	  our	 military	  forces	 traveled	 in	 such	 large,	 lumbering
groups	instead	of	splitting	 up	into	 small	teams	to	give	them	greater	agility.	 Why
did	they	fly	 helicopters	everywhere,	announcing	their	 locations	and	intentions	 to
the	enemy	wherever	 they	went?	Why	 didn’t	  they	stay	 in	the	 jungle,	instead	 of
going	back	to	their	base	camps	all	the	time?	To	defeat	the	enemy,	why	didn’t	 we
fight	like	 the	enemy?
   Although	 it	 would	 be	many	years	until	I	 felt	 comfortable	admitting	 it,	I	 began
to	grow	a	deeply	seated	operational	respect	for	the	Viet	Cong.	They	were	always
light	and	agile.	 They	carried	and	wore	 only	what	 they	needed	for	the	mission:	 a
tube	of	rice,	 an	AK-47,	 a	few	 magazines	of	ammunition,	 and	loose-fitting,	 dark
pajamas.	They	  seemed	to	  have	 a	 whatever-it-takes	 attitude	  toward	 combat
operations.	They	massed	only	 when	required,	 and	they	usually	 fought	 in	 small
groups	of	as	few	as	two	or	three	men.	When	things	got	too	hot,	they	 melted	back
into	the	jungle	to	fight	 again	another	day.	They	were	nimble.
   The	 American	 history	 course	I	 was	taking	 at	the	 time	offered	 a	field	  trip	 to
Gettysburg,	Pennsylvania,	to	 tour	the	 famous	Civil	 War	 battlefield	 of	 the	same
name.	Initially	  I	 wasn’t	 interested—after	all,	 what	 could	 I	 learn	from	 walking
across	a	bunch	of	cornfields	 and	talking	 about	a	battle	and	a	war	 that	happened
more	than	a	hundred	years	earlier?	A	few	days	later,	while	 walking	on	campus,	I
ran	into	one	of	the	Vietnam	 veterans	I	had	recently	befriended.	I	asked	him	what
he	thought	 about	visiting	  Gettysburg.	 “If	  you	 want	 to	learn	 about	 what	went
wrong	  in	  Vietnam,”	  he	  responded	 sagely,	 “you	   can	 find	   the	 answer	  at
Gettysburg.”	 Then	he	turned	 around	and	walked	 away.	 That	was	all	 he	 had	to
say	about	that.	Curious	to	discover	 the	meaning	of	his	 orphic	response,	I	signed
up	for	the	trip	later	that	day.
   At	  Gettysburg,	 our	 group	 conducted	 an	 interactive	 tour	 of	 the	 battlefield.
Walking	 across	the	heavily	wooded	hills	 and	gently	rolling	 cornfields,	 our	guide
explained	the	tactical	 significance	 of	each	of	 the	major	engagements.	The	most
striking	 was	  the	 spot	 in	 the	 middle	  of	 the	  battlefield	  where	 the	 notorious
Pickett’s	Charge	took	 place.	General	Robert	E.	Lee,	the	commanding	 general	of

36
the	South,	ordered	 General	George	Pickett	 and	fifteen	 thousand	 of	his	 men	to
march	in	 a	 box	 formation	  across	a	 mile-long	 stretch	 of	 open	 cornfields	 and
conduct	a	head-on	assault	against	the	front-line	 forces	of	 the	Union	 Army.	 The
Union	 forces	were	 ensconced	behind	 a	four-foot-high	  stone	 wall	 on	 top	 of	 a
panoramic	hill.	 As	I	 stood	in	the	middle	 of	the	cornfield	 and	stared	up	at	the	hill
and	the	wall,	only	 one	thought	came	to	 mind:	How	 could	they	have	done	this	 to
their	 men?	 I	  could	  not	 understand	 how	  General	 Lee	 and	 his	  subordinate
generals,	such	as	Pickett,	 could	 have	been	so	monumentally	 reckless	 with	 the
lives	of	 their	 men.	Our	 tour	 guide	told	 us	that	 one	of	 the	Southern	generals—
James	Longstreet—seemed	to	recognize	the	insanity	of	the	head-on	assault	when
it	was	 first	 discussed,	but	instead	of	 falling	 on	 his	proverbial	 sword	 and	doing
the	right	thing	 for	 his	boys,	he	capitulated	 to	the	divine	 exhortations	of	 General
Lee.	“It	 is	God’s	will,”	  Lee	continuously	 reassured	his	subordinate	officers.	Half
of	the	 men	who	 started	Pickett’s	  notorious	suicide	 charge	ended	up	 killed,	  or
injured.	They	 died	for	 the	cause,	but	 they	were	killed	  by	their	 own	 leaders.	Of
course,	the	Southern	 officers	 had	no	 corner	on	 the	recklessness	market	in	 the
Civil	 War—the	  Union	 Army	  sent	their	 men	 to	 equally	 unthinkable	 deaths	at
Manassas	and	Fredericksburg,	to	name	but	two.
   On	 the	bus	ride	home	from	Gettysburg,	 I	wondered	why	 both	sides	fought	the
war	the	way	they	fought	 it.	Why	 did	they	organize	the	way	they	 did—fighting	 in
rank-and-file	 (box)	 formations,	 and	 always	 in	 the	 open?	Why	 not	 just	 create
small	teams	of	men	who	 infiltrate	 at	 night	and	find	 openings	in	 the	other	side’s
defenses?	And	why	 not	 use	 trees	and	terrain	 for	 cover	 while	  shooting	at	 the
enemy?	It	all	seemed	like	common	 sense	to	me.	Maybe	that’s	what	the	Vietnam
veteran	meant	when	he	told	me	that	Gettysburg	would	 help	me	understand	what
went	wrong	 in	 Vietnam.	  The	way	 both	 wars	 were	fought	 defied	 explanation,
because	the	decisions	made	around	the	 way	 they	were	 fought	 defied	common
sense.	The	pattern	of	poor	operational	decision-making	and	senseless	sacrifice	of
good	men’s	lives	 that	defined	Gettysburg,	 other	Civil	 War	 battles,	and	Vietnam
would	stay	tucked	 away	in	a	special	 corner	of	my	 mind	 throughout	my	 military
career,	and	remain	there	to	this	day.
   A	 few	 months	later,	 in	 April	 1980,	 an	event	occurred	that	 had	a	coagulating
effect	on	all	 of	my	 previous	life	 experiences.	While	 whiling	 away	time	 between
classes	in	the	SIU	 Student	Center,	a	news	flash	 interrupted	the	 program	on	 the
big-screen	 TV.	  The	  newscaster	 reported	  that	 the	  United	  States	 had	 just
conducted	an	abortive	hostage	rescue	mission	in	the	desert	of	Iran.
   In	 the	days	that	followed,	the	details	of	 what	became	known	as	the	Desert	One

37
Hostage	Rescue	Mission	  were	 revealed	to	 the	 nation.	 Planned	 and	executed
under	the	 utmost	 secrecy,	 eight	 helicopters,	 six	 C-130	 transport	 planes,	 and
ninety-three	 Delta	 Force	 commandos	 secretly	 infiltrated	  Iran	 to	 conduct	 the
hostage	rescue	mission.	The	plan	was	to	rendezvous	in	 the	middle	 of	the	desert
at	a	place	 called	Desert	 One,	fly	 on	 helicopters	to	 another	point	 called	 Desert
Two,	and	then	storm	 the	American	embassy	in	Tehran	 and	bring	home	the	U.S.
hostages.	But	Delta	Force	never	made	it	 to	Desert	Two	 or	 Tehran.	The	mission
was	aborted	after	three	of	 the	eight	helicopters	 developed	mechanical	problems
on	the	 way	 to	 Desert	 One.	 The	 mission	 ended	in	  disaster	when	 one	 of	 the
helicopters	that	did	 make	it	 to	Desert	One	collided	 with	 a	transport	plane	while
refueling	 on	the	desert	floor.	  Eight	 American	 warriors	 died	in	 the	inferno	 that
followed.	The	hostages	would	remain	in	captivity	 for	 another	eight	months.
   For	 the	 United	 States,	the	 operation	 was	 a	monumental	 failure.	 Follow-up
congressional	investigations	 revealed	 a	 surprising	 level	 of	 negligence	 by	 the
government	 agencies	and	 military	  leaders	 involved.	 Specifically	   noted	were
three	major	 deficiencies:	 (1)	 the	way	 the	mission	 was	planned	 and	the	 overly
complex	 plan	it	 produced;	 (2)	 the	 overdependence	on	the	 use	of	 ill-equipped
helicopters	and	their	 ill-trained	  pilots;	 (3)	 and	an	overemphasis	on	 operational
secrecy	among	military	  leaders,	which	  prevented	them	 from	 sharing	 mission-
critical	information	 with	 each	other.1
   The	 failed	Iranian	hostage	rescue	mission	was	a	Rubicon	moment	for	me.	The
awareness	that	brave	men	had	risked	and	given	their	 lives	in	 an	attempt	to	save
fellow	 Americans	  caused	me	to	 reflect	  for	 the	 first	 time	 on	 my	  own	 life.	 I
realized	what	a	great	life	 I	 actually	had,	and	how	 fortunate	I	was	 to	have	all	the
freedoms	and	 opportunities	 of	  growing	 up	 and	 living	  my	 life	  in	 the	 United
States.	I	also	felt	 equal	parts	of	 embarrassment	and	frustration.	 Embarrassment
that	 my	 country	 had	 failed	  such	 a	crucial	  mission	 on	 the	 world	  stage	and
frustration	 with	 the	way	 the	military	  planned	and	executed	the	 mission,	which
essentially	doomed	it	to	failure	before	it	 ever	got	under	way.
   Once	again	I	 asked	myself	how	 so	many	seemingly	bright	 people	could	make
so	many	bad	decisions.	 I	didn’t	  watch	the	 TV	 news	again	for	 almost	a	 month.
Instead,	I	went	on	 a	lot	of	 long	runs	 to	contemplate	what	my	 life	 was	all	 about,
and	how	I	might	 somehow	be	able	to	make	a	contribution	 for	the	greater	good.	I
was,	at	that	 point	 in	my	 college	 career,	an	accomplished	marathon	 runner	and
triathlete.	I	 spent	 most	of	 my	 time	 outside	the	 classroom	running,	 swimming,
and	biking	through	the	rolling	 hills	 and	forest	trails	 of	southern	Illinois.	 Within	 a
few	weeks	I	knew	what	I	 needed	to	do.

38
   I	  wanted	to	 pay	 something	back	 to	 my	 country;	 I	  wanted	to	 make	 a
contribution.	I	decided	to	join	the	military.	 Three	years	later,	after	completing
the	requirements	for	my	 bachelor’s	degree	and	attending	graduate	school,	I
signed	up	to	join	 the	 army	and	attend	Officer	 Candidate	School.	When	my
recruiter,	a	senior	army	noncommissioned	officer,	asked	me	what	motivated	me
to	join	the	army,	I	told	him	I	 wanted	to	make	sure	that	the	United	States	never
again	failed	in	an	important	mission,	and	to	make	sure	that	good	men	would
never	again	die	due	to	bad	decision-making.	Although	it	probably	sounded	a	bit
corny	at	 the	time,	 I	 added	“my	 goal	 is	 to	 save	lives,	not	 take	lives.”	 He
responded	by	asking	me	if	I	was	interested	in	joining	the	Army	Medical	Corps.
“No,”	I	told	him	with	great	officiousness.	“I	want	to	join	Delta	Force.”
   I	wanted	to	participate	in	the	most	sensitive	and	complex	missions	our	country
would	face.	I	 wanted	to	 operate	as	a	hybrid	 of	 James	Bond	and	a	Spartan
warrior.	I	 wanted	to	make	a	contribution;	I	 joined	the	military	 to	become	an
officer	in	Delta	Force.

39
                                                          2



                                   NATURAL	    SELECTION:1


                                GETTING	 INTO	 DELTA	 FORCE
	
	
	
	
	
I	had	been	stuck	in	the	Manzanita	vines	for	more	than	an	hour.	Thick	as	rope	and
growing	to	tangled	heights	of	ten	to	twenty	feet,	it	was	like	swimming	in	a	sea	of
a	thousand	pitchforks.	Thrashing,	contorting,	and	sometimes	crawling,	I	simply
could	not	find	 a	way	out	of	 the	endless	maze	of	vines.	Overburdened	by	the
seventy-five-pound	rucksack	on	my	back	and	overhurried	by	a	self-generated
time	constraint	in	my	head,	my	subconscious	was	attempting	to	build	a	strong
case	for	hopelessness.	If	I	don’t	get	out	of	here	soon,	I	won’t	have	the	time	or	the
energy	to	get	to	my	final	 point.	I	 quickly	 dismissed	those	thoughts,	recalling
what	one	of	my	mentors	had	told	me	before	I	arrived:	“Never,	ever	give	up.”	I
had	to	find	a	way	out	of	the	vines.
   “Stress	Phase”	is	the	 appropriately	named	final	phase	of	 the	Delta	Force
selection	process.2	Well	over	half	the	men	who	started	the	course	with	me	many
weeks	earlier	were	now	gone.	At	 the	beginning	of	this,	 the	final	 test	of	 the
course,	we	were	told	to	pack	a	rucksack	that	weighed	at	least	seventy	pounds
and	prepare	for	a	long-distance	movement	through	the	Appalachian	Mountains.3
There	was	no	guidance	on	how	long	the	movement	would	be	or	how	long	we
would	be	given	to	complete	it.
   For	 me,	Stress	Phase	started	at	2:30	A.M.	when,	in	 total	darkness,	I	was
dropped	on	a	dirt	trail	in	the	middle	of	 the	mountains	(aka	nowhere).	A	Delta
cadre	member	handed	me	a	piece	of	paper	with	map	coordinates	on	it	and	told
me	to	“Find	my	way	to	the	next	rendezvous	point	(RV),	and	take	all	instructions
from	the	cadre.”4	And,	oh,	yeah,	“Don’t	be	late,	and	don’t	be	light.”

40
   The	 rumor	whispered	among	my	 fellow	 selection	candidates	in	the	days	prior
had	it	that	the	total	 length	of	 the	movement	was	forty	 to	 fifty	 miles	 and	that	we
had	to	cover	the	distance	in	 less	than	seventeen	hours	or	we	would	fail.	 I	 didn’t
believe	it.	It	 just	didn’t	 seem	realistic	that	they	would	 make	us	move	that	far	and
that	fast,	with	 that	amount	of	weight	 on	our	backs	after	 all	we	had	been	through
already.	The	 previous	weeks	 of	 the	course	consisted	of	 a	 24/7	series	of	 long-
distance	land	navigation	challenges	across	some	of	the	most	austere	and	arduous
terrain	in	Appalachia.	 Each	day	the	weight	 of	 the	rucksacks	and	the	complexity
of	 the	 terrain	 increased,	while	  the	unspoken	 time	 standards	to	 complete	 the
courses	were	correspondingly	decreased.5	Along	the	way,	most	of	us	had	fallen,
twisted	limbs,	 and	gotten	lost	 more	than	a	few	 times.	The	 reward	for	 surviving
was	Stress	Phase.
   Over	 the	 past	fifteen	 hours,	I	 had	 navigated	up,	 over,	and	 through	boulder-
choked	gorges,	 densely	 forested	mountains,	 and	 bug-infested	 swamps,	 while
successfully	finding	 my	 way	from	 one	RV	 to	the	next.	 At	 each	RV,	the	routine
was	the	same.	Check	in	 with	 the	cadre,	receive	new	map	 coordinates,	and	then
head	off	 in	 search	of	 my	next	 destination.	 By	 midafternoon,	 I	 was	starting	 to
believe	the	forty-	 to	fifty-mile	  rumor	to	be	reality,	 and	the	reality	of	the	distance,
along	with	the	uncertainty	about	time,	 was	starting	to	take	its	toll	on	me.
   Physical	 and	mental	endurance	were	my	fortes.	For	the	past	three	weeks	I	was
certain	I	 had	 moved	as	 far	 and	as	fast	 as	anyone	else	 in	 the	course.	But	  my
background	as	a	marathon	runner	and	triathlete	 were	starting	 to	transition	 from
blessing	to	 curse.	The	 same	lean	and	 mean	physique	 that	had	 allowed	 me	 to
survive	and	thrive	 to	this	point	 was	beginning	to	 turn	against	me:	I	 was	wasting
away.
   The	 best	way	to	deal	with	 pain	 is	to	fool	 your	 brain.	It’s	 just	 around	the	next
bend;	I’m	 almost	 done;	okay,	 next	one	for	 sure,	I	 coaxed	myself.	 If	 I	 can	just
escape	this	never-ending	maze	of	vines	and	get	to	the	top	of	the	mountain,	 I	can
make	it	to	my	final	point.	 I	have	to	do	something—there’s	always	a	way.
   I	  eyed	 a	nearby	 birch	  tree,	 and	decided	 to	 take	 advantage	 of	 its	 natural
ladderlike	 limbs	 to	 climb	 as	 high	 as	possible	 and	hopefully	  spot	 a	path	 that
would	 lead	me	 out	 of	 the	vines	 and	 back	on	 track	 to	 my	 final	 destination.	 I
quickly	 mounted	the	tree	and	began	climbing	  skyward	without	 thinking	  to	take
my	rucksack	off	 first.	 It	 was	a	grueling	 climb.	 I	 had	to	pause	after	each	step	to
regain	my	breath.	After	 climbing	  as	high	as	the	girth	 of	the	 tree	would	allow—
perhaps	thirty	to	forty	 feet—I	 slowly	 sidestepped	onto	a	limb	 while	 keeping	my
left	hand	on	the	tree	trunk	and	my	right	 hand	on	a	thin,	spindly	 branch	above	my

41
head.	Out	in	 the	distance	I	 spotted	what	 appeared	to	be	a	 path.	I	 stood	on	 my
tiptoes	and	craned	my	neck	as	high	as	possible	to	get	a	better	look.	 That’s	when
it	happened.	The	spindly	branch	I	was	using	to	steady	my	stance	snapped	in	half,
allowing	  gravity	 to	  team	up	 with	  its	  friend	 fatigue	  and	knock	  my	 energy-
depleted	body	off	 balance	and	plummet	like	 an	upside-down	 turtle	back	 toward
where	I	started.	Fully	expecting	 to	break	my	back,	I	hit	 the	ground	hard.	I	was	in
shock.	Not	from	 the	fall,	 but	 from	the	 discovery	that	the	 same	vines	I	had	been
battling	against	for	 the	past	hour	had	suddenly	 changed	sides	from	adversary	to
ally	and	cushioned	my	impact	with	 the	ground.
   I	 checked	each	of	my	limbs	to	 ensure	that	nothing	was	poking	through	them.	I
was	okay.	Wait	 a	 minute	.	 .	.	something	 isn’t	 right.	 Maybe	 I	hit	 my	head.	 The
ground	 is	 moving.	 Is	 there	 something	 underneath	 me?	Then	 that	 something
started	screaming.
   What	the—?
   I	 quickly	 undid	one	of	my	shoulder	straps	and	struggled	to	turn	my	head	to	see
what	 this	 thing	 actually	 was.	 Walking	  for	 fifteen	 hours	 with	  a	seventy-five-
pound	rucksack	on	 your	 back	stiffens	 every	joint	 in	 the	body;	 I	 turned	like	 an
arthritic	old	 man,	head	and	upper	torso	as	one.	With	the	peripheral	vision	 of	one
eye,	I	spotted	a	tiny	 black	animal	 scurry	out	 from	 under	my	ruck.	 How	cool—a
baby	bear!	Then	my	 spider	senses	kicked	in.	Fifty	 or	 so	feet	to	my	rear,	I	 heard
the	spastic	scream	of	an	enraged	animal.	It	was	violently	thrashing	the	vines,	and
it	was	getting	closer.	Turbocharged	by	a	heavy	dose	of	fight-or-flight	  adrenaline,
in	one	 fluid	 motion	 I	 jumped	 up	and	 bolted.	What	 kind	 of	screwed-up	 luck	 is
this?	Instead	of	finding	 my	way	out	of	 the	vines,	I	wandered	into	 the	middle	of	a
black	bear’s	den—and	now	I’m	 gonna	get	my	ass	torn	apart.
   Holding	  my	rucksack	 in	front	 of	 me	as	a	dual-purpose	shield	 and	machete,	I
slashed,	pushed,	and	parted	vines,	plowing	 my	 own	 path	toward	 anywhere	but
there.	Adrenaline-drained	 and	out	 of	 breath,	I	 began	to	 rationalize.	 Maybe	the
bears	ran	in	the	other	 direction.	 Then	I	heard	the	distinctively	  immature	scream
of	the	cub—it	 was	right	behind	me.	“Get	 away	from	me,	bear,	beat	it,	get	lost!”	 I
was	verbally	 ejaculating	anything	 and	everything	 that	my	 completely	 frustrated
mind	 could	 conjure	 up	 in	 the	desperate	hope	 that	 something	 would	 deter	 or
distract	the	little	four-legged	 beacon	from	continuing	its	 pursuit.
   The	 vines	were	 beginning	to	 thin;	 I	could	 see	the	terrain	ahead	of	 me	again.
Off	to	 the	right	 I	spotted	a	trail;	 it	 appeared	to	be	going	in	 the	general	direction
of	my	 final	  point.	Another	  scream	from	 the	cub,	 now	perhaps	fifty	  or	 so	feet
behind	me.	A	 second	later	the	 mother	screamed	back—not	 a	roar,	it	 was	more

42
like	a	high-pitched,	 blood-curdling	 affirmation	 that	she	was	on	her	way,	 and	she
sounded	pissed.
   “Running	 for	 your	life”	 usually	 connotes	covering	a	lot	of	ground	fast.	While	 I
was	definitely	 moving	 fast—still	  spastically	swinging	 my	 rucksack	and	parting
the	vines	as	I	went—I	 wasn’t	 really	 covering	a	lot	 of	ground.	 I	guess	you	could
say	I	was	going	nowhere	 fast.	Why	hasn’t	the	cub	 or	the	mother	 caught	up	with
me	yet?	I	wondered.	I’m	probably	 moving	faster	than	I	think.
   My	  mind	was	 racing	to	 create	an	escape	plan.	If	 I	run	 toward	 that	 trail,	 the
bear	will	  easily	 catch	 up	with	  me	as	soon	 as	she	 breaks	free	 of	 the	vines.	 I
scanned	to	the	 left.	 A	 cliff,	 not	 too	 steep.	The	 terrain	 below	 it	 looked	 like	 it
sloped	away	just	enough	that	if	 I	jumped	off	 at	an	angle	I	 could	land	on	my	 feet
and	roll	 to	 cushion	 the	impact.	 The	 baby	 bear	wouldn’t	  be	able	 to	 make	the
jump,	and	maybe	that	would	 deter	the	mother	from	 continuing	 her	pursuit.	Trail
or	cliff?	 Screw	it:	 I’m	 going	for	 the	cliff.	 No	bear	is	 gonna	catch	me,	I’m	 gonna
jump.	I	cut	left	 toward	the	cliff,	  angling	my	 approach	ever	so	slightly	just	before
launching	myself	up	and	over	the	bramble	bushes	that	guarded	the	edge.
   It	  was	 a	magnificent	  leap,	 one	 I	 could	 likely	  never	 replicate	 without	  the
motivational	 stimulus	of	 an	angry	black	bear	on	my	 heels.	I	landed	on	the	slope
precisely	as	I	 had	hoped,	at	 an	angle,	and	feet	 first.	 But	instead	 of	rolling,	  my
strength-sapped	body	betrayed	me	 once	again.	 I	crumbled	 like	 a	 beanbag	and
immediately	 transitioned	 into	  a	cartwheeling	  carcass.	Arms	 and	 legs	flailing
violently,	 I	 rolled	end	over	 end.	After	 a	couple	of	 hundred	feet,	I	 plowed	into	 a
medium-sized	walnut	tree	and	came	to	an	abrupt	stop.	Once	again,	I	conducted	a
quick	 survey	 of	 my	 limbs.	 Everything	  still	 worked.	  What	 about	the	 bear?	 I
wondered	while	maintaining	 statuelike	stillness.
   Using	 the	tree	as	a	pivot,	I	pushed	myself	up	on	my	 knees	and	slowly	scanned
upward	toward	 the	 edge	of	 the	cliff.	  There,	 slightly	 occluded	 by	 the	bramble
bush	I	  had	 so	 magnificently	   launched	 myself	 over,	  was	 baby	 and	 mother
searching	the	hillside	 for	 my	 carcass.	As	so	often	happens	when	 you	stare	and
focus	directly	 at	another	living	  being,	the	 mother	abruptly	 snapped	her	head	in
my	direction	 and	locked	eyes	with	mine.	To	 my	simultaneous	horror	 and	shame,
I	discovered	that	she—was	a	pig!
   Not	 a	bear,	or	even	a	wild	boar,	but	a	freaking	pig!	 Dirty	 and	disgusting,	it	had
likely	 escaped	from	a	local	farm.	I	had	run	for	 my	life,	 and	jumped	off	 a	cliff,	 all
because	I	 had	 jumped	 to	 the	 conclusion	 that	 my	 life	  was	 endangered	by	 a
nonexistent	bear.
   The	 embarrassment	I	  could	 handle—I	 even	 smiled	 momentarily.	  But	 as	 I

43
assessed	my	predicament,	the	brutal	facts	of	my	 reality	 began	gut-punching	my
spirit.	My	 body	slumped	like	 a	tube	of	jelly—I	  may	have	just	blown	my	one	shot
at	getting	 into	 Delta	 Force.	My	 map—where	is	 my	map!	 I	frantically	  searched
the	area	around	me.	No	luck.	Then	I	looked	downward.	Past	the	tree	that	arrested
my	tumble	was	a	sheer	drop-off	 of	about	five	 hundred	feet.	At	 the	bottom	was	a
stream.	If	my	 map	went	 past	the	tree,	it	was	history.	 There	was	 no	going	down
for	me.
   Without	  a	 map,	there	 was	 no	way	 to	 know	  where	I	  was.	For	 sure,	 I	 was
woefully	 off	  course,	and	with	  each	passing	minute,	 I	 was	falling	  way	 behind
schedule.	We	had	been	given	 detailed	instructions	 for	 what	to	 do	if	 we	needed
assistance.	Those	instructions	presupposed	we	were	both	lost	and	 ready	to	give
up,	I	was	only	one	of	the	two.	Stay	calm—think!
   Okay,	 I	 got	caught	 in	the	 vines	because	I	was	trying	 to	 get	to	 the	top	of	 the
mountain.	From	 the	 top	of	 the	mountain,	 a	 long	ridgeline	  branched	off	 to	 the
east,	like	the	leg	of	a	crab,	directly	 connecting	the	mountaintop	to	my	final	 point.
If	 I	can	 get	back	 to	 the	top	 of	the	 mountain,	 then	locate	 that	 ridgeline,	 I	 can
follow	 it	like	 a	cookie	crumb	 trail	 for	 3.1	miles	 to	find	 my	final	 point.	I	 have	to
get	back	to	the	top	of	the	mountain.	 A	lot	 of	ifs	for	 sure,	but	the	only	failure	 is	 a
failure	to	try.
   The	afternoon	 sun	was	well	into	its	western	descent,	but	there	was	still	enough
light	for	 me	to	pick	 out	a	series	of	small	 trees	and	thick	bushes	to	use	as	anchor
points	to	 work	 my	 way	 back	 to	the	 top	 of	 the	cliff.	  Using	 every	 bit	 of	 body
strength	I	had	left,	I	 clawed	my	way	 back	to	the	top.	Leaping	 off	the	edge	of	 the
cliff	 was	a	 regrettable	split-second	decision	 that	took	 me	more	than	 an	hour	to
correct.	It	 was	getting	dark,	and	I	 still	 had	a	long	 way	to	 go	to	get	to	 the	top	of
the	mountain.
   After	  another	 thirty	 minutes	 of	 fast-paced	 meandering,	I	 arrived	 at	 what	 I
hoped	was	 the	top	 of	 the	 mountain.	 It	 was	dark	 now.	 I	 had	 no	 map	and	 no
flashlight.	 How	can	you	 tell	 you’re	 on	top	of	 a	tree-covered	mountain	 at	night?
The	topographic	definition	  of	a	mountaintop	 describes	it	as	the	point	 where	the
terrain	 around	you	 slopes	 downward	 in	 all	 directions.	  Hundreds	of	  hours	of
navigating	mountains	 in	 the	thickly	 foliaged	 jungles	 of	 Panama	had	taught	me
not	to	 depend	on	visual	 cues	to	 recognize	and	 identify	 terrain	 features.	In	 the
jungle	you	 can	rarely	 see	more	than	a	 few	feet	 in	 front	 of	you,	 so	even	in	 the
light	 of	 day	 you	can	 be	standing	 on	 the	top	 of	 a	mountain	 and	 not	 see	it	 or
recognize	it.	  To	 compensate	for	 the	 lack	 of	 visual	 cues,	 I	 trained	 myself	 to
navigate	with	my	 feet,	to	feel	instead	of	 see	the	terrain.	The	angle	of	your	feet	is

44
an	amazingly	accurate	indicator	 of	what	 type	of	terrain	 feature	you	are	standing
on.	My	  feet	were	 flat;	 when	 I	 walked	 a	few	 meters	 in	any	 direction	 my	 feet
angled	downward.	I	had	found	the	mountaintop;	now,	 where	was	that	ridgeline?
   I	 had	seen	the	last	of	the	sun	when	it	set,	and	it	was	to	my	 right.	The	ridgeline
I	needed	ran	down	the	eastern	side	of	the	mountain.	Using	slow,	 soft	baby	steps,
I	cautiously	 probed	the	 eastern	side	of	 the	mountaintop.	 Suddenly	my	 feet	felt
the	clear	hard-packed	flatness	of	a	ridgeline	trail.	I	had	found	my	 path.
   I	 checked	my	watch,	I	had	started	walking	 at	2:30	A.M.,	 it	was	now	7:00	P.M.
I	had	 been	moving	 for	 16.5	hours.	 I	 had	3.1	mountain	 miles	 between	me	 and
what	I	hoped	was	the	finish.	 If	 the	rumor	was	correct,	 I	had	thirty	 minutes	to	do
it.	As	 much	 as	I	 tried	to	 put	 a	positive	 spin	on	 things,	I	 was	almost	 assuredly
over	the	time	limit.	 It	didn’t	 matter;	 I	had	never	failed	a	finding	 mission,	and	this
was	not	gonna	 be	the	first.	 Follow	  the	path;	 it	 will	 take	me	to	 my	destination,
was	my	  mantra;	 it	 helped	 keep	 my	 mind	  off	 the	 pain.	 With	  arms	 hanging
lifelessly	at	my	 sides,	I	leaned	my	energy-sapped	body	forward	 and	broke	into	a
slow	zombielike	 trot.	Forty-five	 minutes	later,	I	saw	a	light.
   I	  was	hallucinating;	  the	 light	  appeared	to	 be	 a	cartoonish	 apparition	 of	  a
washing	machine.	 What	is	 a	 washing	machine	 doing	 out	here	 on	the	 trail?	 It
doesn’t	make	sense.	Keep	moving	 forward.	 It’s	 not	 a	 washing	machine;	 it’s	 a
man	with	a	red	penlight.	It’s	 one	of	the	Delta	cadres.
   “Color	   and	 number?”	 he	 asked	 dispassionately.	 It	  took	 me	  a	 couple	 of
seconds,	but	 I	 somehow	 remembered	 my	 coded	 identification.	  “Blue	  46,”	 I
answered.	He	wrote	 something	on	the	 clipboard,	 obviously	 my	time	 of	 arrival,
but	that	didn’t	  register	with	 me	at	 the	time.	 “Blue	 46,	drop	 your	 rucksack,”	he
commanded.	Oh	well,	I	 gave	it	 my	best,	I	thought.	 “Head	over	 to	the	fire	 to	get
warm.	 There’s	 hot	  soup	and	 Gatorade	 waiting	  for	  you.	 Welcome	 to	  Delta
Force!”



                              GUIDING-PRINCIPLE	            LESSON:


	
                                    Don’t	 Get	 Treed	 by	a	Chihuahua
	
It’s	been	said	that	there	are	no	mistakes	in	life,	 only	lessons.	Every	mistake	is	an
opportunity	 to	  ensure	that	 we	 never	 make	 it	  again,	 especially	 when	 future

45
consequences	can	be	 much	 more	 dire.	 When	 I	 saw	 the	 little	 black	  creature
through	the	 corner	of	 my	 eye,	my	 tired	 and	frustrated	 mind	 took	a	 shortcut.	I
decided	it	must	have	been	a	baby	bear	with	a	mother	not	 too	far	behind.	When	 I
heard	the	spastic	scream	of	the	animal	 in	 the	bushes,	I	decided	it	 had	to	be	 the
vicious	growl	 of	a	mother	 bear	instead	of	what	it	 actually	was—the	vicious	 oink
of	a	mother	pig.	 My	 contextless	response	was	to	run	for	 my	life	 and	jump	 off	 a
cliff;	 I	got	treed	by	a	chihuahua.
   Getting	  treed	by	 a	 chihuahua	 is	 a	metaphor	 for	 making	 decisions	 without
context.	Context	 is	the	 reality	 of	 the	situation	 around	us.	Without	  context,	our
minds	have	a	tendency	to	take	shortcuts	and	recognize	patterns	that	aren’t	really
there;	 we	 connect	 the	 dots	  without	  collecting	  the	 dots	 first.	  Overreacting,
underreacting,	and	 failing	 to	 do	 anything	 at	 all	 are	all	  symptoms	of	 “getting
treed.”	 When	you	 first	 read	 the	words	 bombing	 cars	 in	 the	previous	 chapter,
what	did	 you	think?	 Were	 you	treed?	A	 few	 seconds	later,	before	 or	after	 you
read	the	word	 snowball,	 you	likely	  realized	 it	didn’t	  make	sense	that	a	seven-
year-old	kid	would	 go	around	blowing	 up	cars,	so	you	climbed	back	down.	Time
and	common	 sense	work	 in	 tandem	to	 bathe	our	 minds	with	  reality-revealing
context.
   What	  is	 common	 sense?	It’s	  knowledge	 of	  patterns—both	 conscious	and
unconscious.	Getting	 stung	 by	 a	bee	hurts:	 it’s	  common	 sense	to	avoid	 little
black-and-yellow	 flying	  objects.	 We	 learn	by	 asking	 questions;	when	 dealing
with	uncertainty	 it’s	 common	sense	to	question	everything.	 The	act	of	 choosing
determines	success	or	failure	in	our	lives;	 freedom	of	choice	is	 common	sense.	I
had	seen	bears	run	 through	 the	wilderness	 before;	 I	 knew	 that	 a	man	 cannot
outrun	a	bear.	As	 I	 ran	for	 my	life	  at	a	vine-inhibited	  snail’s	pace,	I	 wondered
why	the	 bears	weren’t	catching	 up	to	 me.	It	 didn’t	 make	sense.	The	reason	the
bears	weren’t	 catching	 up	to	 me	 was	because	they	 weren’t	 bears—they	were
pigs.	But	 that	 didn’t	  make	sense	either.	 I	 didn’t	 grow	 up	 in	 the	 Appalachian
Mountains,	and	 had	no	 idea	that	wild	  man-chasing	pigs	 even	existed.	So	 how
could	 I	  have	 known	  it	  wasn’t	  a	 bear?	 Because	there	  was	 another,	 more
enlightening	pattern	 tugging	at	the	 shirttails	of	 my	 common	sense	as	I	fled	 that
day.	It	was	the	pattern	of	 being	treed	by	a	chihuahua—all	 those	times	in	my	 life
when	I	had	made	chowderheaded	decisions	without	 understanding	the	reality	 of
the	situation	around	me.	My	 common	sense	was	telling	 me	to	take	time	to	 look,
listen,	and	question	everything.	 Common	sense	provides	context,	and	context	 is
common	sense.
   Getting	 “treed	 by	a	chihuahua”	during	 Stress	Phase	almost	cost	me	entry	into

46
Delta	Force.	The	price	 I	alone	paid	 to	learn	the	lesson	was	nothing	 more	than	a
few	scratches	and	a	bruised	ego,	but	the	lesson	itself	would	prove	to	be	priceless.
In	 combat,	when	 leaders	make	 decisions	without	  context,	 the	cost	 is	mission
failure,	and	all	too	often,	 the	price	is	paid	with	 the	blood	of	their	men.	“Don’t	  get
treed	by	a	chihuahua!”	 Before	 making	mission-critical	  decisions,	always	ensure
that	you	have	context.	It’s	common	sense.

47
                                                          3



                                     GORILLA	     WARFARE:


                       IMAGINE	  THE	UNIMAGINABLE,	   HUMOR
                                        YOUR	 IMAGINATION


                                    North	  Carolina,	   Late	  ’90s


As	the	sun	rose	on	 an	unseasonably	warm	November	Friday	in	Fort	Bragg,
North	Carolina,	my	body	was	settling	into	a	comfortable	6:30-per-mile	pace	on
mile	number	two	of	a	ten-mile	run.	Sixty	miles	of	roller-coaster	sand	trails	bisect
the	hilly	Fort	Bragg	training	area	and	serve	as	access	corridors	into	the	otherwise
unmolested	pine	forests	and	swamps	that	define	the	area.	At	the	Unit,	every
operator	had	a	personal	responsibility	to	maintain	a	 rapier	level	of	 physical
fitness.	I	had	vowed	when	I	joined	the	military	that	I	would	always	strive	to	be
the	fittest	man	on	any	battlefield	I	stepped	foot	on.	I	was	still	confident	in	my
credibility	to	make	that	claim,	save	for	a	few	of	my	own	fellow	operators	in	the
Unit.
   At	 the	very	essence	of	a	Delta	operator	is	the	ability	to	think	creatively	and
make	adaptive	decisions,	but	to	take	action	on	those	decisions,	we	also	have	to
be	superbly	physically	fit.	Each	of	us	has	to	be	both	a	thinking	warrior	and	an
athlete	warrior.	On	this	day	I	was	in	touch	with	both	sides.	I	was	running	strong
and	hard	and	my	endorphin-saturated	brain	was	spawning	rapid-fire	ideas	and
insights	for	future	use.	Spastic	vibrations	against	my	abdominal	wall	brought	me
back	to	real	time	as	I	recognized	my	pager’s	code	for	a	real-world	mission.	I
made	an	immediate	U-turn	and	headed	back	toward	our	 compound.	As	my
curiosity	intensified,	I	shifted	gears	to	a	5:30-per-mile	pace.	There	are	few	things
in	life	more	motivating	than	a	mission.
   Once	inside	the	compound,	I	headed	to	a	secure	section	of	the	building	where
one	of	our	intelligence	analysts	was	waiting	for	me	with	a	packet	containing	my
official	orders	and	a	flight	itinerary.

48
   “You	  need	to	get	to	 Bosnia1	as	quickly	 as	possible;	it’s	 a	rapidly	 developing
situation,”	he	said.
   “Can	 you	tell	 me	what	the	mission	is?”	I	asked.
   He	 shook	his	 head.	“Anything	 I	 try	 to	tell	 you	 now	will	  almost	assuredly	be
outdated	by	the	time	you	complete	your	twenty-two-hour	 travel	itinerary.”
   I	 liked	his	logic.	 I’d	 rather	be	sure	I	was	aboard	the	next	thing	flying	 to	Bosnia
than	sit	around	talking	 about	information	 that’s	sky-rocketing	 on	the	irrelevancy
curve	with	 every	passing	second.	I	bolted	 out	of	 the	building	 and	hurried	 home
to	grab	my	prepacked	“Bosnia”	 suitcase.
   I’d	  been	to	Bosnia	 four	 times	prior	 to	 this	operation,	 including	 two	 tours	 of
more	than	one	hundred	days	in-country.	I	spoke	survival	Serbo-Croatian	and	was
well-versed	 in	 both	 the	 history	 and	 the	social	 dynamics	 of	  the	country.	  My
Bosnia	 suitcase	 contained	 specially	  selected	 and	 purchased	 East	 European
clothing	to	help	ensure	I	could	 blend	in	with	 the	local	populace.	It	also	contained
a	thirty-day	stock	of	 various	life-support	 items	for	 nutrition	 and	hygiene,	such	as
protein	powder	 to	maintain	 muscle	mass	and	 hand	sanitizer	to	 disinfect	 all	 the
little	 critters	that	were	much	more	 likely	 to	render	me	mission	ineffective	 than	a
bullet.	None	of	these	items	was	yet	available	in	war-ravaged	Bosnia.
   I	 arrived	at	the	tiny	 Fayetteville,	 North	Carolina,	 airport	and	checked	my	bags
to	 Atlanta,	  Georgia.	 Total	  time	 elapsed	 from	  pager	 alert	 to	  arrival	 at	  the
Fayetteville	airport:	 two	hours.



                                             Bosnia-Herzegovina


For	this	 mission,	 there	were	ten	 Unit	 members	flying	  into	 Bosnia.	 Due	to	 the
short	notice	for	making	 flight	 reservations,	we	each	flew	on	separate	commercial
flights	  from	  geographically	  separate	airports	  on	 the	 East	  Coast	 to	 get	  to
Sarajevo.	The	general	mission	 in	 Bosnia	was	 to	locate	 and	capture	individuals
known	as	PIFWCs.	 Pronounced	“piffwix,”	   PIFWC	 stands	for:	Persons	Indicted
for	 War	  Crimes.2	 All	   had	 committed	  crimes	 against	 humanity	  during	  the
Bosnian	War,	which	 occurred	between	1992	and	1995.3	The	religiously	 inspired
ethnic	conflict	 had	historical	 roots	dating	all	 the	way	back	to	 1389	and	involved
three	religiously	   defined	 factions	 within	  Bosnia	 and	 Herzegovina:	  Bosniaks
(Muslims),	 Serbs	 (Orthodox	 Christians),	  and	Croatians	 (Catholic	  Christians).
One	of	 the	most	 devastating	symptoms	 of	 the	deep-rooted	 animosities	among

49
these	groups	was	“ethnic	 cleansing.”	 According	 to	 the	United	 Nations	 and	the
International	Criminal	 Tribunal	 for	the	former	 Yugoslavia	(ICTY),	  Bosnian	Serb
forces	perpetrated	the	majority	 of	ethnic	 cleansing	incidents	against	the	Muslim
Bosniaks	during	 the	war.	 The	 Bosnian	Serb	government	 strongly	 denied	these
claims,	but	the	8,300	Bosniak	Muslim	 corpses	discovered	in	mass	graves	outside
the	town	of	 Srebrenica	proved	otherwise.	After	 exhaustive	investigations	 by	the
UN-sponsored	ICTY,	  many	 of	 the	high-ranking	  Serbian	political	  and	military
leaders	who	 had	ordered	and/or	 taken	 part	in	 ethnic	 cleansing	were	 officially
designated	as	PIFWCs	and	placed	on	the	UN’s	most-wanted	list.
   The	 war	 had	 ended	with	  the	 signing	 of	 the	 Dayton	 Peace	Agreement.	 To
ensure	all	 sides	abided	 by	 the	agreement,	 NATO	 created	 SFOR.	The	 United
States	wasn’t	the	only	country	involved	 in	SFOR	and	peacekeeping	operations	in
Bosnia.	Nineteen	other	 NATO	 countries	participated	 at	various	stages	and	with
various	levels	 of	  support.	For	 operational	 purposes,	Bosnia	 was	 divided	 into
thirds	 (see	Map	 2),	 with	  the	 British	 in	  the	northwest,	 the	 Americans	 in	  the
northeast,	and	the	French	in	the	 south.	While	 peacekeeping	and	nation	building
were	the	primary	 mission	 of	 SFOR,	every	 SFOR	soldier	 carried	the	 additional
responsibility,	if	 the	opportunity	 allowed,	of	locating	 and	capturing	PIFWCs.
   While	 we	were	always	 working	 in	close	cooperation	with	 our	European	allies,
one	of	the	main	 U.S.	military	  objectives	was	to	 make	contact	with	 and	develop
intelligence	sources	who	could	 provide	information	 on	 the	location	of	 the	“most
wanted”	PIFWCs.4	 This	required	 contact	with	 people	living	 in	both	 the	Serbian
and	the	Muslim	sectors	of	Bosnia.	Complicating	 our	task	was	that	both	sides	had
their	own	 police	 forces	that,	as	you	 might	 expect,	were	fervently	  loyal	 to	their
own	ethnic	brethren.	Wanted	 men	rarely	hide	 among	their	enemies,	so	to	locate
and	 capture	 the	 predominantly	  Serbian	  PIFWCs,	  we	 had	 to	  build	  source
networks	  and	  focus	  our	  operational	  resources	  on	  the	  inhospitable	  and
xenophobic	Serb	sector.
   Once	 on	 the	 ground,	our	 group	 linked	  up	 with	 twenty	 of	 our	 fellow	  Unit
members	who	were	already	developing	 the	situation	 from	 a	safe	house	near	the
Bosnian	town	of	 Tuzla.5	With	 smoke	lazily	  dancing	skyward	from	 its	 chimney,
the	safe	house	was	a	picturesque	stone	 cottage	nestled	into	 the	base	of	a	 large
grassy	mountain	overlooking	  the	town.	 As	 I	 drove	up	 to	the	 darkened	cottage
with	headlights	turned	off	 and	night	 vision	goggles	turned	on,	I	 took	a	second	to
appreciate	the	moment.	 This	 is	why	 I	 joined	 Delta—disguises,	 deception,	and
diversions,	 I	 thought,	 smiling	 with	  self-actualized	 satisfaction.	 After	  a	coded

50
knock	 on	the	 back	door,	 followed	  by	 an	exchange	of	 bona	 fides,	 we	 walked
inside	at	exactly	2:00	 A.M.	 Bosnia	time.	 The	energy	level	 throughout	the	house
was	electric.	 Although	 our	 rule	of	 thumb	 for	 international	 travel	 was	to	 rest	a
few	hours	 before	preparing	 for	a	 mission,	we	 did	 not	have	that	 luxury	 for	 this
mission.	The	enemy	always	has	a	vote.
   I	 threw	my	 suitcase	in	one	of	the	open	bedrooms	and	headed	into	the	dimly	lit
living	 room	 for	 an	update	 on	the	 situation.	 To	 prevent	anyone	on	 the	 outside
from	 seeing	 inside,	 the	men	 had	 taped	 a	specially	  designed	filament	  to	 the
windows	that	allowed	 ambient	light	 to	come	in	 but	prevented	light	 or	activity	 to
be	seen	from	the	outside.	Almost	thirty	 men	and	women	 from	various	 countries,
organizations,	and	units	were	assembled	in	the	living	room,	 a	truly	cosmopolitan
gathering.
   Our	 meeting	started	with	a	situation	 update	by	our	intelligence	analyst,	Glenn.
Thirtysomething	  and	 with	 jet-black	  hair,	  Glenn	 was	 straight	 out	 of	  central
casting	as	a	 prototypically	  happy-go-lucky	 Italian	  chef.	His	 hallmark	  was	his
ability	 to	immerse	 himself	 in	 a	situation	by	 locating,	 combining,	 and	digesting
mission-critical	 information,	  distilling	  the	 key	 nuggets,	then	 serving	 it	 up	for
sharing	with	 the	people	who	needed	it	 the	most:	the	operators	who	 would	carry
out	the	mission.
   He	 began	with	 our	raison	 d’être.	The	 highly	 detailed	information	  came	from
one	of	our	intelligence	 sources,	known	simply	as	4AZ.	 To	protect	the	anonymity
of	foreign	 intelligence	 sources,	the	only	person	who	 knows	the	true	 name	of	an
intelligence	 source	 is	  the	 individual	   case	officer	   who	 handles	 the	  source.
Everyone	 else	 just	 knows	  the	 source	 by	 his	  or	 her	 specific	  alphanumeric
designation,	in	this	case	4AZ.6	 4AZ	told	 his	handler	that	a	high-ranking	 PIFWC
would	 be	driving	 across	the	 Bosnian-Serbian	border	 near	the	town	 of	 Loznica
(see	Map	 2)	for	 secret	 meetings	on	 the	outskirts	 of	 Sarajevo.	 As	is	 often	 the
norm	 with	 travel	 itineraries	 of	 wanted	 men,	 the	meetings	 were	 not	 set	for	 a
specific	time;	rather,	they	 were	scheduled	to	take	place	during	a	forty-eight-hour
window	 at	a	time	 and	place	 of	the	 PIFWC’s	 choosing.	 We	only	 had	thirty-six
hours	until	his	travel	window	 would	 open.
   The	 PIFWC	we	would	 be	attempting	to	capture	was	one	of	the	most	notorious
war	criminals	 on	the	United	 Nation’s	most-wanted	 list.	Accusations	 against	him
included	 the	  murders,	 sexual	 assaults,	 and	 repeated	beatings	  of	 numerous
Bosnian	 Croats,	Bosnian	  Muslims,	 and	 other	 non-Serb	 civilians	  detained	 in
various	detention	camps	in	 and	around	 Bosnia.7	He	had	 full	 cognizance	of	 the

51
fact	that	he	was	both	wanted	by	the	United	Nations	and	that	he	would	 likely	 face
life	in	 prison	if	 captured.	This	 was	an	important	point	 to	understand,	because	as
any	cop	in	 the	world	 will	  tell	 you,	desperate	men	are	prone	 to	make	desperate
moves.
   Our	 intelligence	 source	4AZ	also	 reported	that	this	PIFWC	 normally	 traveled
with	 a	 security	 detail	 of	 four	 to	 eight	 highly	  trained	and	 highly	  experienced
bodyguards.	The	 PIFWC	 and	 his	 security	 detail	 would	 be	 driving	 across	the
border	on	a	seldom-used	rural	road	that	snaked	through	the	mountains.	Although
the	PIFWC	 was	likely	  using	this	 route	 to	avoid	 chance	run-ins	 with	 the	many
law-enforcement	 and	military	  organizations	 that	traveled	 the	 major	 highways,
the	lack	of	 traffic	  on	the	mountain	 road,	coupled	 with	 his	signature	late-model
multivehicle	 convoy,	would	 actually	 make	it	easier	for	us.	The	 specificity	 of	the
intelligence	and	the	 opportunity	 provided	by	 the	rural	location	 led	 us	to	believe
that	this	 would	  be	 the	best	 opportunity	 we	 would	  ever	 have	to	 capture	 this
individual.
   Although	  we	 had	 completely	  flexible	 rules	 of	  engagement	(ROE)	 for	  the
capture,	as	a	matter	of	 principle	 our	goal	 was	to	conduct	 all	capture	operations
without	 firing	  a	shot.	 This	 particular	 mission	 had	an	 additional	 complication:
4AZ	 mentioned	 that	 the	 PIFWC	 might	  be	 traveling	 with	  his	 daughter.	This
meant	at	least	two	 things.	 First,	whatever	 concept	we	came	up	 with	 to	 capture
the	 PIFWC	 would	  have	 to	 depend	 on	 nonlethal	 force	  to	 ensure	we	  didn’t
inadvertently	endanger	the	life	 of	his	 daughter.	Second,	to	ensure	that	we	didn’t
initiate	 an	uncontrollable	 gunfight	 with	 PIFWC’s	  security	detail,	 we	needed	to
achieve	total	surprise.
   The	 Bosnian	 countryside	 in	 this	 particular	 area	looked	 very	 much	 like	  the
Blue	Ridge	 Mountains	 near	the	East	Coast	 of	the	 United	 States.	The	medium-
sized	mountains	ranged	in	 size	 from	 two	 to	five	 thousand	feet	 high,	 and	were
covered	with	 coniferous	 trees,	and	dotted	with	  small,	family-owned	  farms	and
country	homes.	In	 these	types	of	rural	communities,	 everyone	knew	 and	looked
out	for	one	another.	As	a	result	 they	were	always	suspicious	of	 outsiders,	and/or
any	out-of-the-ordinary	 activities.
   To	 understand	the	on-the-ground	 reality	of	 the	area,	two	 of	our	 NATO	 allies
prepared	to	 head	 out	 to	  conduct	 what	 we	 referred	  to	 as	an	 environmental
reconnaissance.	It’s	 universally	  axiomatic	 that	 if	 two	  men	are	 seen	loitering
together,	or	 driving	 through	 a	close-knit	 community,	 they	 stand	out,	 and	most
people	automatically	 presume	they	 are	up	 to	 no	good.	 But	 send	a	man	 and	a
woman	out	 in	 the	same	profile	  and	people	barely	 give	 them	a	 second	glance.

52
One	of	our	mantras	in	the	Unit	 was	to	blend	in	anywhere,	and	I	 marveled	at	how
effectively	 this	couple	had	done	just	that.	The	male	had	taken	up	smoking	 cheap
East	European	cigarettes	and	had	styled	 his	long	 brown	 hair	 into	a	 greasy	and
slightly	 wispy	  look.	 He	 dressed	in	 the	 uniform	 of	 the	 Balkan	 male:	 a	 black
sweater	untucked	 over	 black	 polyester	 pants,	 topped	off	  with	 a	 loose-fitting
black	leather	jacket.	The	 female	was	dressed	as	his	hot	Serbian	arm	candy.	She
sported	a	pea	green	vinyl	jacket	and	a	short	gray	miniskirt,	 which	appeared	to	be
spray-painted	onto	 her	 lower	  torso.	Underneath	 she	 wore	 gold-tinted	 fishnet
nylons,	and	 black	high	 heels.	She	carried	 a	scarf	 to	 wear	on	 her	head	for	 use
when	 they	  drove	 through	  Muslim-controlled	    areas	where	  females	 usually
covered	their	hair.	 Her	 hair	color	 made	the	scarf	 more	than	just	 a	nice-to-have
cultural	 accessory.	 For	 some	 reason	never	 understood	 by	 any	 of	  us,	 many
Bosnian	 women	 at	  that	 time,	  dyed	 their	  hair	 a	  strange	 metallic	  red.	 We
sarcastically	referred	 to	the	 color	as	RNFN,	  which	 stood	for:	 red	not	 found	 in
nature.	In	the	finest	 tradition	 of	 making	personal	sacrifices	 for	the	greater	good
of	the	team	she	went	out	and	purchased,	then	actually	dyed	her	hair	 with	 RNFN
to	complete	her	montage.	I	had	no	 doubts	that	these	two	would	 be	able	to	blend
in	wherever	they	went	without	 creating	any	suspicion.
   The	  couple’s	  objective	  was	 to	  collect	  any	 and	  all	  information	  on	  the
environment	in	and	around	the	road	on	which	 4AZ	 told	 us	the	PIFWC	would	 be
traveling.	 To	 do	 this	 they	 would	 film	  the	 entire	 route	 with	 a	 covert	 camera
hidden	inside	 the	rearview	 mirror.	 Our	 tech	 people	rigged	 all	 of	our	 vehicles’
glove	compartments	with	 mini-laptop	 computers	called	 Librettos.	 The	Librettos
used	mapping	 software	 called	 Falconview,8	  which	 displayed	 both	 maps	and
satellite	photos	from	 which	 we	 could	zoom	 in	 to	or	 out	of	 as	needed.	Cutting-
edge	technology	in	the	late	’90s,	but	today	Moore’s	 Law	and	Google	maps	allow
us	to	 do	 the	 same	thing	 with	  better	 resolution	 for	 free.	 Our	 communication
technicians	also	 developed	 a	 clandestine	 antenna	that	 allowed	 us	 always-on
satellite	communications	for	 uploading	and	downloading	data	files	 and	messages
while	  on	 the	 move.	  Many	  of	  the	 tactics,	  techniques,	 and	 procedures	 we
developed	in	 Bosnia	 led	 to	 technological	  and	operational	 breakthroughs	 that
changed	the	way	we	conducted	clandestine	operations	around	 the	globe.	Aware
of	the	rapidity	  of	operational	 breakthroughs	at	the	time,	 many	of	 us	referred	 to
Bosnia	as	a	living	laboratory.
   While	 we	waited	 for	the	reconnaissance	team	to	return,	one	of	our	teammates,
Drago,d	schooled	 us	on	 the	 cultural	 dynamics	 of	 the	 capture	area.	 Born	 and

53
raised	in	Croatia,	he	served	time	in	the	Croatian	Army	 before	immigrating	  to	the
United	States	in	his	 early	twenties.	Drago	 still	 spoke	fluent	Serbo-Croatian,	and
had	spent	 the	 previous	 day	 talking	 to	 the	 locals	 who	  lived	 in	 the	 area.	 He
confirmed	 that,	 like	 the	 PIFWC,	 the	 vast	majority	  of	 people	 near	the	 border
crossing	were	 Serbian,	 and	they	 would	  not	be	 supportive	 of	 any	 activity	  by
outsiders,	especially	 those	trying	 to	 capture	 one	of	 their	 own.	 If	 they	 noticed
strangers	on	their	 land,	they	 would	 almost	 certainly	 call	 the	police,	 who	 were
also	closely	 tied	to	 and	supportive	 of	 the	PIFWCs.	 The	final	  point	 that	Drago
emphasized	was	that	the	Serbian	 police	force	 in	 the	area	should	be	 considered
both	unhelpful,	 and	 potentially	 hostile.	 If	 they	knew	 we	 were	operating	 in	 the
area,	they	would	 do	everything	 in	their	 power	 to	impede	us,	including	  drawing
their	  weapons	  and	  initiating	   a	  physical	  confrontation.	   Drago’s	   insights
underscored	that	to	 be	 successful	we	would	  have	to	 infiltrate	  the	xenophobic
Serb	area	without	attracting	any	attention.	Not	only	 did	we	need	to	come	up	with
a	concept	that	would	allow	 us	to	achieve	surprise,	we	also	would	have	to	do	it	 in
as	low-key	and	unobtrusive	a	manner	as	possible.
   Satisfied	  that	 we	 had	 a	 foundational	  understanding	 of	 the	 area	 we’d	  be
operating	in,	we	began	brainstorming	options	to	actually	 conduct	the	capture.
   “What	  about	a	broken-down	 vehicle	in	 the	middle	 of	 the	road	to	 make	them
stop?”	asked	Bruiser,	a	stocky	ex-football	player	from	 upstate	New	York.
   “Example?”	  someone	else	asked.	“Well,”	 said	 Bruiser,	“if	  we	block	 the	road
and	cause	their	vehicle	 to	 halt,	we	 can	leverage	lots	 of	 different	 techniques	to
disable	the	vehicle	 and	capture	the	 PIFWC	 inside.”	 He	paused	for	 a	second	to
think,	then	 added,	“The	 downside	is	that	 we’ll	 have	to	 find	 the	perfect	 spot	on
the	road	where	it’s	 narrow	enough	that	they	 can’t	use	the	shoulder	to	go	 around
the	broken-down	vehicle.”	 He	paused	again.	“It	also	takes	a	lot	of	 time	to	set	up,
so	we’ll	 have	to	 have	perfect	intelligence	 on	 when	he	is	 actually	 crossing,	and
I’m	 not	sure	that’s	realistic.	 I	 have	no	doubt	he’ll	 come	early	 or	late,	but	not	 on
time.”	We	 never	interrupted	Bruiser	while	 he	talked,	because	he	always	provided
both	the	pros	and	the	cons	of	 every	option,	 and	it	was	always	beneficial	 to	 hear
his	self-contained,	point	and	counterpoint	debates.
   Predator	 weighed	in	 next.	Rock-jawed	 with	 sandy-colored	brown	 hair,	 and	a
tightly	 muscled	 frame	without	  an	ounce	of	 excess	body	 fat,	his	 physique	 was
perfectly	customized	for	 combat-related	activities.	 He	could	lift	  his	body	weight
in	ways	that	 seemed	to	defy	the	laws	 of	gravity.	 I	 had	once	seen	him	scurry	up
the	side	of	 a	nine-story	 building	  in	Miami	  in	 seconds,	using	a	combination	 of
highly	refined	 world-class	climbing	  techniques	and	a	total	disregard	for	his	 own

54
well-being.	 On	the	 thinking	 side,	 Predator	was	one	of	 those	 guys	who	 always
came	up	with	points	that	made	me	ponder	why	in	 the	heck	I	didn’t	 think	 of	them
first.
   He	 got	up	 from	the	 couch	and	began	explaining	 that	prior	 to	coming	 over	 to
Bosnia,	he	had	 been	experimenting	 with	 a	new	 Austrian	 munition	 designed	to
blow	 open	 doors	from	  stand-off	 distances.	 It	 wasn’t	 a	 high-explosive	  round
(meaning	it	 didn’t	 produce	 any	shrapnel);	 instead	it	 used	blast	overpressure	to
force	the	 door	 open.	 The	round	 itself	  was	shaped	like	  a	giant	 corndog	 on	 a
twelve-inch	stick.
   “It’s	  easy	to	use,”	 he	explained	 while	 demonstrating	with	 an	actual	round	 in
his	hands.	“You	 just	 insert	the	stick	 into	 the	barrel	of	 your	 rifle,	 cock	the	 rifle,
aim,	and	fire	it	 like	 an	RPG	round.”	 Like	 many	of	the	men	in	 the	Unit,	 Predator
was	an	inveterate	tinkerer	who	seemed	to	be	on	a	never-ending	quest	to	discover
or	invent	 a	better	 mousetrap.	When	 guys	such	as	Predator	got	 a	new	 piece	of
equipment	or	technology,	they	would	 immediately	 turn	it	 upside	down,	flip	 it	 on
its	side,	dip	 it	 underwater,	and	 then	attempt	to	 break	it	 apart	and/or	 modify	 it.
Never	accepting	 anything	 at	 face	value,	 they	 believed	 that	 they	could	 find	  a
better	use	for	 or	improve	 on	 everything	 they	touched.	No	 one	told	 Predator	to
experiment	with	 this	 munition;	  he	did	 it	 because	he	believed	it	 might	 make	 a
difference	in	combat	someday.
   Predator’s	 tests	revealed	that	 with	 a	slight	 modification	  to	 the	warhead,	 the
Austrian	 round	 produced	 the	 same	effect	  as	a	 gigantic	 concussion	 grenade.
Concussion	grenades	are	used	to	momentarily	 stun	or	 disorient	 people	without
physically	 harming	them.	“In	  other	words,”	 he	continued,	 “if	 we	shoot	 it	at	 the
side	door	of	his	 vehicle,	the	blast	overpressure	will	 create	an	intense	concussion
that	will	  momentarily	 debilitate	 everyone	inside	the	 vehicle.	This’ll	  buy	 us	the
precious	seconds	we	need	to	close	in	from	our	hiding	 place	and	grab	the	PIFWC
before	his	security	detail	can	get	to	their	guns	and	start	a	shoot-out.”
   “How	  do	you	know	for	 sure	that	it	will	 really	work?”	 someone	asked.
   “I	 tested	it	on	three	different	 vehicles	last	week,”	he	quickly	 replied.
   “Uh,	  yeah,	but	how	 do	you	know	 it	 will	 concuss	real	live	 humans	enough	to
debilitate	them?”	I	 injected.
   “Well,	  a	couple	of	 the	new	guys	 volunteered	to	ride	 in	one	of	 the	vehicles	to
see	what	it	would	do	to	a	human,	and	it	worked	on	all	of	 them.”
   The	 mental	 image	 of	 that	 episode	gave	me	 pause.	It	 must	 have	brought	 a
pensive	look	to	my	 face,	because	everyone	in	the	room	was	staring	at	me	to	 see
how	I	 was	 going	 to	react.	 Although	 operators	were	 known	 to	 push	the	safety

55
envelope	in	 the	 name	of	 mission-oriented	 research,	they	 were	 rarely,	 if	 ever,
reckless.	The	Unit	 had	a	 matchless	safety	record,	especially	 given	 the	extreme
volatility	 of	what	 we	did	day	in	and	day	out	to	prepare	for	our	missions.
   When	 it	became	obvious	that	 I	wasn’t	 going	to	 ask	any	more	questions	about
the	rifle-grenade	experiments,	 Predator	continued.	“In	 the	tests	I	 conducted,	we
found	that	you	had	to	hit	the	side	door	panel	with	 a	direct	hit	 or	the	round	wasn’t
effective.	 Hitting	   the	 side	 door	 panel	  of	 a	 moving	  vehicle	  is	 a	 very	  iffy
proposition,”	 he	continued.	“We	found	 that	the	target	vehicle	has	to	be	slowed	to
twenty	miles	 per	 hour	or	 below	 to	ensure	a	 high	probability	  of	 success.”	This
would	be	a	challenge.	We	all	knew	that	the	Bosnians	drove	like	 maniacs	and	that
the	security	 detail	 would	 probably	 be	traveling	  closer	to	 sixty	 miles	 per	 hour
than	twenty.	  The	 consensus	was	 that	 the	 concussion	 round	 seemed	like	  an
effective	 nonlethal	 technique	but	 only	  if	 we	 could	 figure	 out	 how	 to	 get	the
target	vehicle	to	slow	to	twenty	 miles	per	hour	or	below.
   Tera,	 our	 communications	 specialist,	 breathed	a	loud	 sigh	 as	he	 set	up	 the
laptop	 computers	 and	 satellite	 antennae	for	  our	 worldwide	  communications
connectivity.	  His	  code	 name	 was	 short	  for	  Terabyte,	 which	  reflected	  his
monstrous	capacity	to	remember.	He	and	I	 came	into	the	Unit	 at	the	 same	time,
and	had	been	together	in	Colombia,	Somalia,	and	previous	tours	in	 Bosnia.	Like
many	of	 his	counterparts,	he	 could	have	left	 the	 military	 at	 any	time	 and	been
hired	at	 companies	such	as	Cisco,	Microsoft,	  or	 Google	for	 ten	 times	what	 he
was	making	 in	the	 military.	 But	 you	 can’t	bring	 war	 criminals	 to	justice	 while
you’re	working	 at	Microsoft,	 so	guys	such	as	Tera	stayed.
   As	  Tera	 connected	 the	 final	  USB	  cables	 to	 the	 router,	 he	 nonchalantly
interjected,	“I	 saw	a	movie	 once	called	Motel	 Hell	 where	they	got	 unsuspecting
people	 to	 stop	 their	  vehicles	  on	 a	 dark	  country	 road	  by	 putting	  life-size
cardboard	cutouts	 of	 cows	in	  the	middle	 of	 the	 road.”	 The	 comment	 was	so
random	  and	  so	  outrageous	 that	   after	  a	  pregnant	  pause	  of	  contextual
bewilderment,	 everyone	 in	 the	 room	 reacted	with	  a	 simultaneous	Mount	  St.
Helens-like	eruption	 of	laughter.	 Bruiser	blew	 an	entire	pressurized	mouthful	 of
Diet	Coke	onto	 the	coffee	table	in	front	 of	 him.	The	fact	 that	many	of	 us	were	a
bit	slap-happy	from	 jet	lag	was	likely	  to	blame	for	 much	of	the	craziness,	but	as
professional	comedians	will	 tell	 you,	vivid	 imagery	 ignites	the	most	intense	and
longest-lasting	laughter.
   Motel	 Hell	 was	a	bizarre	B	movie	 that	instantly	 attained	cultlike	 status	among
horror	 film	 aficionados;	 I	 too	 had	once	 seen	Motel	 Hell	 while	 watching	  late-
night	TV	 with	 some	friends.	I	remembered	marveling	at	the	simple	genius	of	 the

56
cardboard	cow	  ruse,	 but	 until	  that	 day	 in	  Bosnia,	 I	  had	 never	 considered
operationalizing	 the	 concept.	  As	 individuals	  began	 to	 compose	 themselves,
something	  interesting	  began	 to	  happen.	  A	  flood	   of	  ideas	  and	  insights
spontaneously	began	to	bubble	to	 the	surface.	“What	 if	 we	 add	a	good-looking
woman	to	the	broken-down-vehicle	 concept?	Maybe	a	blonde	with	 a	nice	 figure
would	 be	  best,”	 someone	 said.	 “How	  about	  an	 accident?	 We	 could	  have
someone	hanging	out	of	a	vehicle	with	 blood	all	 over	his	body.”	 “And	 the	good-
looking	 woman	  waving	 her	 hand	 for	  help,”	 said	 someone	 else.	Both	  ideas
seemed	to	have	potential,	so	we	used	each	scenario	to	put	ourselves	in	the	minds
of	the	security	detail	and	imagine	what	they	might	 do.
   Most	 of	 the	individuals	  in	 the	room	 had	extensive	worldwide	  experience	on
missions	we	called	protection	details.	On	a	protection	detail,	your	 sole	mission	in
life	is	 to	protect	a	very	 important	 person	(VIP),	 usually	in	 a	high-threat	country
such	as	Lebanon,	 Colombia,9	  or	 Bosnia.	 Our	 collective	 experience	 on	 these
types	of	 missions	 allowed	 us	to	 understand	how	 the	 PIFWC’s	 security	 detail
would	think,	 decide,	and	act	in	response	to	our	actions.	When	your	 mission	is	to
protect	someone,	 you	 have	a	 ruthless	 optic	 on	 the	 everyday	world.	  Security
details	don’t	 have	time	to	think	 about	life’s	 day-to-day	 trivialities.	 They	 have	to
get	the	person	they	are	protecting	 from	point	 A	 to	point	 B	 as	expeditiously	and
safely	 as	 possible.	 So	 whether	 it’s	  an	 accident	 or	 a	 good-looking	  woman,
security	details	have	no	time	to	debate	what	to	do.	There’s	only	 one	option:	keep
going!	 In	 fact,	when	 your	 life	 revolves	 around	 detecting	threats,	you	 get	 to	a
point	where	every	 vehicle	that	 is	broken	down	 or	otherwise	 blocking	 your	 path
instigates	a	higher	state	of	security	 consciousness	in	your	already	very	 security-
conscious	mind.
   The	 team’s	 assessment	was	that	neither	the	 blonde	 nor	the	 bloody	 scenario
would	cause	an	experienced	security	detail	to	stop	or	even	to	slow	down.	In	 fact,
most	of	the	men	believed	 that	these	scenarios	would	cause	the	security	detail	 to
speed	up	and	 begin	 evasive	maneuvers.	 But	 the	 concept	of	 using	 something
bizarre	 such	 as	cardboard	 cows	 to	  slow	 the	 vehicle	  seemed	to	 bridge	  our
thinking	from	 the	nuts	and	bolts	of	a	vehicular	 ambush	to	the	task	of	slowing	the
vehicle.	We	 were	 beginning	 to	recognize	 and	refocus	 our	thinking	  on	how	 to
slow	the	vehicle	 so	we	could	 use	nonlethal	force	to	 capture	the	PIFWC	without
harming	his	daughter.
   Then	 someone	asked	Tera	why	he	thought	those	cardboard	cows	in	the	movie
were	so	effective	in	 getting	people	to	 stop	and	get	out	of	 their	cars.	I	 was	about
to	question	why	in	 the	hell	we	 were	still	 talking	about	that	 crazy	movie,	but	like

57
everyone	else	 in	 the	 room,	 I	 quelled	 my	 urge	 to	 “get	 serious,”	 and	 listened
intently	 to	Tera’s	 response.	“Well,	  I	always	 figured	 it	 was	a	 good	example	 of
exploiting	  human	nature	 to	 accomplish	  your	 objective,”	  he	 explained.	 “The
cardboard	cows	looked	 surreal	 and	completely	 nonthreatening	 so	people	were
curious	to	see	what	they	 were	doing	 in	the	middle	 of	 the	road	late	at	night.	 It’s
the	same	behavior	 that	causes	traffic	  jams	on	 freeways	after	 a	fender	 bender.
Every	person	who	 passes	has	to	slow	down	to	 gawk	and	 try	to	 figure	 out	what
happened.	The	reason	they	slow	down	 is	curiosity.	 That’s	 how	we	learn	 in	life,
through	curiosity.	 We	can’t	 resist	its	powerful	 pull—even	 when	 it	doesn’t	 seem
to	make	sense.”
   Then	  Blade,	 a	 blond-haired	 reconnaissance	 expert	 and	 world-class	 surfer
spoke	up.	“How	 about	a	gorilla	 suit?”	 The	sun	was	just	 starting	to	light	 the	tips
of	the	mountains	outside,	and	once	again,	the	safe	house	erupted.	Bruiser	blurted
out,	 “How	  about	 a	 Bozo	 the	 clown	  costume!”	 “Oh,	  no	 that	 would	  be	 too
threatening—how	about	Bugs	 Bunny,	or	 a	French	maid’s	 outfit?”	 someone	else
added.	It	took	a	bit	 longer	this	 time,	but	 eventually	everyone	recovered	himself.
This	 time	 the	 insights	 that	poured	 forth	  were	all	  focused	on	 the	 operational
utility	 of	freakishly	 random	costumes.
   After	  a	few	 French	maid	forays,	 Bruiser	 was	the	first	 to	 reflect,	“A	  freaking
gorilla	suit,	that’s	 pure	magic.	Walk	us	through	it!”
   “Well,”	   said	Blade	 with	 a	cautious	 smile	that	 turned	serious	 as	he	began	to
explain,	“I’m	  thinking	 about	these	boys	driving	down	this	 lonely	mountain	 road.
They’re	security-conscious,	so	they’re	 all	probably	 looking	for	 the	usual	ambush
tricks:	broken-down	 vehicle,	fake	cops,	you	know	 the	deal.	But	if	 we	find	 a	spot
on	the	road	that	has	a	sharp	hairpin	curve,	 preferably	on	an	uphill	 grade,	simple
physics	will	 force	them	to	 slow	the	vehicle	down	 before	they	make	the	turn,	and
when	they	come	around	 the	curve,	there’s	 this	gorilla	 walking	  down	the	road.”
He	did	a	good	knuckle-dragging	 ape	walk	imitation	 as	he	continued.	“The	 shock
of	  seeing	 a	  freaking	   gorilla	  walking	   down	  the	  road,	  along	  with	   their
uncontrollable	 curiosity	 to	understand	what	 the	hell	 it’s	 doing	in	 the	middle	 of
Bosnia,	may	 just	make	 them	pause	a	couple	 of	 more	seconds,	which	 ought	 to
create	the	perfect	conditions	for	us	to	fire	the	rounds	and	conduct	the	capture.”
   Everyone	 was	 silent.	 “Okay,”	  I	 said,	 “so	 let’s	 put	 ourselves	in	 their	 shoes
again.	You’re	cruising	 down	this	lonely	 rural	road—in	 Bosnia,	I	might	 add—and
you	come	around	 a	curve	and	 suddenly	you	 see	a	large	ape	walking	 down	 the
road	toward	you?”
   “I	  don’t	know	 what	 I	would	 do,”	 said	one	of	our	 newest	team	members,	who

58
grew	up	on	a	sprawling	ranch	in	 Wyoming.	 “A	 gorilla	 walking	 down	the	road	in
the	middle	of	 the	night	 would	 be	so	mind-bogglingly	  weird	that	 I	don’t	 think	 it
would	fit	 any	 mental	model	I	 have.	But	 since	it’s	 not	really	 threatening,	I	 gotta
go	with	 Tera’s	point	on	 highway	gawkers:	 I	think	 I	would	 be	more	curious	 than
anything	else.	If	I	 were	driving,	I	 think	I	 would	lean	as	close	to	the	windshield	as
possible	 and	 then	  utter	 those	 famous	  last	 words	  of	  many	 a	  ruse	 victim
throughout	history,	‘What	 in	the	hell	 is	that?’	”
   “Exactly,”	  said	Predator.	“That’s	 the	exact	moment	we’ll	 nail	 the	vehicle	with
the	concussion	round,	then	move	in	and	capture	the	guy.”
   We	 quickly	 double-clicked	 our	satellite	Internet	connection	 and	typed	“gorilla
costumes”	into	 the	 search	engine.	 Our	 medic,	 Sticky,	 who	 was	 one	of	 those
Jeopardy!	  champion-like	   guys	   who	  seemed	  to	  know	   something	  about
everything,	suddenly	 opined,	“My	  experience	with	 gorilla	  costumes	has	taught
me	that	there	are	gorilla	 costumes,	and	then	there	are	gorilla	 costumes.	For	this
operation	to	succeed,	we	need	the	Ph.D.	of	gorilla	costumes!”
   Without	   looking	  up,	 Bruiser,	  who	 was	 sitting	  behind	 the	  laptop	 culling
through	the	Google	 search	results	replied,	“Thank	 you,	Professor	von	 Costume.
We	were	thinking	 of	getting	 a	plastic	mask	and	a	fake	banana!”	Although	 it	 was
a	blinding	 flash	 of	the	 obvious,	all	 of	 us	agreed	with	 Professor	von	Costume’s
point	on	the	importance	of	 costume	quality,	so	we	searched	for	the	most	realistic
gorilla	  costume	 available.	  After	  checking	  on	  availability	   of	  the	 suit	  and
overnight	trans-oceanic	delivery	  via	a	combination	 of	 commercial	 and	military
carriers,	we	agreed	to	continue	developing	the	concept	in	a	few	hours	after	 some
much-needed	shut-eye.	I	went	to	my	room,	 plopped	on	the	bed,	and	checked	out
of	the	Net.
   I	 woke	 a	few	hours	later	 to	the	obnoxious	 screeches	of	one	of	the	scrawniest
and	scarred-up	 roosters	I	 had	 ever	 seen.	Standing	 defiantly	 on	 my	 bedroom
windowsill,	  while	 staring	 straight	 at	me,	 the	war-ravaged	 rooster	didn’t	  seem
like	he	had	any	intention	 of	shutting	the	hell	 up.	I	grabbed	my	Glock	 from	 under
my	 pillow	  and	 sat	on	 the	 side	 of	 the	 bed	for	  a	few	  seconds	to	 collect	 my
thoughts.	Had	 we	really	  come	up	 with	 a	 concept	to	 use	a	 gorilla	 costume	 to
capture	this	guy—or	 was	it	 all	 a	crazy	dream?	 The	more	I	 thought	through	 the
unimaginable	concept,	the	more	I	 could	actually	 imagine	it.	 While	 staring	at	the
screeching	rooster,	I	 jacked	the	 upper	slide	 back	on	my	 Glock	 to	 make	sure	a
round	was	chambered.	I	slid	on	my	shower	slippers,	then	slowly	 shuffled	 toward
the	window,	 and	shot	 the	rooster	one	final	  glance	before	shouting,	 “The	 war’s
over,	chill	 out,	 dude,”	which	 he	did.	 So	I	 shoved	the	pistol	 under	my	 shirt	 and

59
stepped	back	out	to	the	living	room	to	imagine	some	more.
   Life	 in	 a	safe	house	meant	we	couldn’t	come	and	go	as	we	pleased,	especially
during	daylight	 hours.	Any	out-of-the-ordinary	 activity	 might	 tip	off	 the	locals	to
our	presence	and	intentions.	Therefore,	instead	of	rehearsing	the	gorilla	 costume
concept	on	a	road	with	real	vehicles,	we	could	 only	imagine	 it.	It	 was	during	our
imaginary	 rehearsals	in	 the	living	  room	 that	 morning	 while	  grazing	 on	fresh
bread	and	cheese	that	we	confirmed	what	the	cardboard	cows	revealed	to	us	the
night	 prior:	 slowing	  the	vehicle	  was	what	 we	 in	 the	 Unit	  referred	to	 as	 the
“decisive	 point”	 for	 the	capture	operation.	 The	definition	 of	 decisive	 point	is	 a
point	 in	 time	  or	 location	 where	 the	 success	or	 failure	  of	 your	  actions	 will
ultimately	 predicate	the	success	or	failure	of	the	entire	mission.	In	 other	words	it
wasn’t	the	 end-state	objective	(capturing	 the	PIFWC)	 that	 required	the	 priority
of	 our	 imagination	  and	 efforts,	  it	 was	 the	 enabling	  objective	 (slowing	  the
vehicle)	 that	we	 had	 to	 succeed	at	to	 give	 us	 any	shot	 of	 achieving	 mission
success.
   We	 also	realized	something	else:	given	the	criticality	 of	 slowing	the	vehicle	 to
the	success	of	 our	operation;	 we	 needed	to	 ensure	that	 we	had	 some	type	 of
backup	method,	or	 option,	in	 case	the	gorilla	 costume	didn’t	 work	 out	 the	way
we	were	 expecting	 it	  to.	 The	 capture	team	 immediately	  headed	back	 to	 the
drawing	 board.	 Within	  a	 few	 hours,	 they	 had	 designed,	tinkered	 with,	  then
developed	a	tire-puncturing	device	 to	slow	the	 vehicle.	The	device’s	 genius	was
its	simplicity	  of	design:	a	ten-foot	 by	 two-foot	 rectangular	strip	 of	flattened	 tire
rubber	 studded	with	  hundreds	of	  razor-sharp	 titanium	 spikes.e	 The	 titanium
spikes	came	off	 some	 dastardly	contrivance	 our	 logistics	 guys	 had	stashed	in
their	deployment	 bag	of	 tricks.	 The	rubber	mat	 came	from	 one	of	 our	vehicles
that	they	rendered	spareless.	That	night,	under	 the	cover	of	 darkness,	we	tested
the	spike	mat	on	the	dirt	road	that	snaked	through	the	hills	behind	the	safe	house.
The	spikes	proved	 to	be	wickedly	  effective.	 We	simply	  placed	the	mat	off	  the
side	of	the	road	and	used	a	thin	 nylon	cord	 to	pull	 the	mat	in	 front	 of	the	target
vehicle’s	path.	 We	discovered	that	the	 flattening	of	 the	tires	 provided	us	with	 a
simple,	 almost	  foolproof	  method	  of	  ensuring	 that	 we	  slowed	  the	 vehicle
sufficiently	 to	hit	 it	 with	the	concussion	grenade	and	initiate	 the	capture.	On	the
downside,	it	definitely	 wasn’t	as	cool	or	as	funny	as	the	gorilla	 costume.
	
	
The	next	 night,	  we	departed	 the	 safe	house	in	  a	menagerie	 of	 five	 Bosnian

60
vehicles,	and	headed	out	 to	the	 capture	site	for	 the	first	  night	of	 the	 PIFWC’s
forty-eight-hour	  travel	  window.	  Blowing	   snow	 and	 rain,	  which	  we	  called
“snain,”	 made	 the	 forty-mile	  drive	 to	 the	 capture	site	 take	 twice	 as	 long	 as
expected.	Staring	at	the	road	ahead	of	us,	with	 windshield	 wipers	wiping	 waves
of	snain	back	and	forth,	 I	 imagined	how	 the	PIFWC’s	 driver	 would	 react	to	the
sight	of	 a	 large	furry	  thing	 appearing	on	 the	road	 ahead	of	 him.	 The	 lack	 of
visibility	  made	it	almost	 impossible	 to	discern	if	 the	 thing	in	 the	middle	 of	 the
road	was	a	 man,	a	 gorilla,	 or	 even	a	 pig.	“This	  weather	isn’t	  fit	 for	 man	 nor
beast,”	 I	 begrudgingly	  concluded.	 Bruiser,	 who	  was	 sitting	 in	  the	 backseat
dressed	as	a	peasant	sheep	watcher,	half-jokingly	  replied,	 “We	 could	 give	 the
ape	an	umbrella,”	 but	 this	 time	the	 laughter	was	 subdued.	The	premise	 of	 the
gorilla	 suit	 was	to	 shock	the	vehicle’s	 driver	  into	slowing	  his	vehicle	 after	 he
spotted	the	 “freaking	  gorilla”	  walking	  down	 the	 road.	 If	 the	 driver	 couldn’t
recognize	it	 as	 a	gorilla,	  he	wouldn’t	  be	 curious,	 and	instead	 of	 slowing,	 he
would	likely	  see	the	gorilla	as	a	threat	and	either	run	 him	over	or	 open	fire.	 We
collectively	 agreed	that	for	opening	night	 there	would	be	no	gorilla	 costume;	the
spike	mat	would	take	center	stage.
   We	 stayed	in	position	 the	entire	 night.	The	 snain	turned	to	rain	 and	never	let
up.	There	was	no	sign	 of	the	 PIFWC.	Just	before	 sunrise,	we	peeled	out	of	 our
positions	and	headed	back	to	the	safe	house.	At	the	safe	house,	Tera	approached
me	with	a	melancholy	look	 on	his	face.
   “What’s	  up,	my	man?”	I	asked.
   “Panther,”	    he	  responded	 matter-of-factly,	    “with	    the	  weather	  forecast
predicting	more	of	 the	same	‘snain’	tonight,	 and	the	simplicity	 and	effectiveness
of	the	spike	mat,	I’m	 not	sure	we	really	need	a	gorilla	costume.”
   I	 laughed	 and	told	 him	I	 was	thinking	  the	same	thing.	 Although	 I	 loved	 the
gorilla	 costume	concept,	the	success	or	failure	 of	 our	mission	 depended	on	our
ability	 to	slow	 the	 vehicle;	and	 it	was	 hard	for	 the	gorilla	 to	 compete	with	 the
simplicity	 and	wicked	effectiveness	of	the	spike	mat.
   “Let’s	  talk	it	 over	with	 the	capture	team;	we’ll	  leave	the	decision	up	to	 them.
It’s	 always	good	to	 have	options,”	 I	 reflected	as	we	began	preparations	for	 our
second	and	final	night	at	the	capture	site.
   You’re	  probably	 wondering	what	 actually	 happened	on	that	lonely	 mountain
road	in	 Bosnia.	 As	 mentioned	earlier,	 the	 enemy	always	 has	a	 vote,	and	 this
PIFWC	was	no	different.	 He	changed	his	plans,	as	humans	so	often	do,	based	on
personal	reasons.	He	did	actually	come	across	the	border	at	a	later	date,	and	the
weather	 was	 cold	  and	  clear	 on	  the	  night	  of	  his	 capture.	  Unfortunately,

61
operational	  security,	  and	   ongoing	  cases	 against	  war	   criminals	   by	  the
International	Criminal	  Tribunal	 in	The	Hague,	 preclude	me	from	 discussing	the
specifics	of	 how	 the	mission	and	 the	PIFWC	 went	down.	 Allowing	  him	 to	 get
off	on	a	technicality	 would	be	unimaginable.
   I	 can	 tell	 you	this	 much,	 though:	 if	 you	 check	the	right	  Sasquatch	website,
you’ll	 find	 an	isolated	 dot	on	the	 site’s	worldwide	  map	representing	one	of	 the
only	reported	sightings	 of	a	mythical	 man-ape	creature	in	the	Balkan	Mountains
of	Bosnia.10
   Imagine	 that!


                                   GUIDING-PRINCIPLE	     LESSON:


	
                   Imagine	 the	Unimaginable,	  Humor	  Your	 Imagination
	
Why	 is	 imagination	  so	important?	  The	 evolution	 of	 man	 and	 our	 ability	  to
dominate	the	planet	is	due	in	large	 part	to	our	successful	ability	 to	imagine.	 The
ability	to	 imagine	previously	unimaginable	 uses	of	fire	and	water,	of	animals	and
plants,	and	of	 wood	 and	mud	 are	what	 saved	us	 from	 extinction.	 Imagination
allows	 us	 to	 break	 out	 of	 the	 prison	  of	 precedence	and	 free	 our	 minds	  to
recognize	patterns	and	options	that	we’ve	 never	been	able	to	 see	before.	A	free
mind	is	 such	a	beautiful	 thing	 because	it	allows	 us	to	say	and	 do	things	others
can’t	imagine.	 It’s	 how	we	 discover,	it’s	 how	 we	invent,	 it’s	 how	 we	innovate,
and	ultimately,	it’s	 how	we	adapt.
   I	 no	longer	 need	to	“imagine”	 using	 a	gorilla	 costume	to	slow	 a	vehicle	for	 a
capture	operation	because	I	already	imagined	it	in	Bosnia.	I	 can	see	it.	However,
as	you’ll	 discover	in	 later	chapters,	there	were	still	 other	“imaginative”	  uses	for
the	gorilla	costume	in	 my	future.	So	how	 can	we	see	into	the	future	and	imagine
the	next	 unimaginable	 application	 of	 fire,	 or	 water,	 of	 animals	and	 plants,	or
freakishly	random	costumes?	The	answer	is	funny.
   Cognitive	  science	confirms	 that	humor	 and	imagination	 are	indelibly	 linked.
11	What	 does	the	term	 Gorilla	 Warfare	 mean	 to	you	 now?	Did	 a	 slight	 smile
form	 on	your	 face?	The	 reason	it	formed	 was	 because	you	got	 it.	The	 mind’s
initial	 reaction	to	an	imaginative	solution	 is	a	smile	or	laughter.	This	occurs	even
when	the	solution	 itself	isn’t	 that	 funny.	We	 usually	smile	 instead	of	saying	 the

62
words	I	 told	 you	so	 because	it’s	 a	mini	 “eureka”	 moment	 when	 we’re	 able	to
make	an	insightful	  connection	 where	 none	previously	 existed.	 Next	 time	 you
solve	a	riddle,	 or	a	Rubik’s	  Cube-like	 challenge,	or	discover	 a	new	way	 to	use
some	crazy	 costume,	 keep	 a	 mirror	  handy	 and	take	 note	 of	  the	 smile	 that
naturally	 forms	 on	 your	 face.	 Humor	  is	the	 fertile	  field	  where	the	 seeds	of
imagination	 are	planted,	 grown,	 and	harvested	into	 imaginative	 and	 insightful
solutions.
   One	  of	 the	  best	 ways	 to	 get	  to	 the	 fertile	  fields	  of	  humor	 is	  through
outrageousness,	and	when	 it	 comes	 to	 making	 people	 laugh	 and	 developing
breakthrough	ideas,	 the	 more	outrageous	 the	better.	 Outrageous	 thoughts	are
barrier	busters:	 they	 wipe	 away	 the	vanilla	  mental	models	 stored	 in	 the	first
layers	of	 our	minds	 and	reveal	imaginative,	 out-of-the-box	 thoughts	 just	below
the	 surface	 of	  our	  consciousness.	Inside	  our	  blacked-out	 safe	  house,	 the
outrageously	 funny	  ideas	 of	  cardboard	 cows,	 clowns,	  and	 other	  costumes
sparked	our	 imaginations	 to	 discover	 new	 ways	 to	 slow	  a	vehicle,	  invent	 a
wickedly	 effective	 tire-puncturing	 device,	and	come	up	 with	 innovative	 options
to	conduct	a	 capture	operation.	When	 it	 came	to	finding	 solutions,	 we	realized
that	nothing	was	off-limits.	 There	were	no	thinking	 boundaries;	there	was	always
a	way!
   Make	 no	mistake	 about	the	importance	of	 humor	and	imagination	 in	 combat.
History	 has	proven	that	 it’s	 not	the	 quantity	 of	men	 or	the	 quality	 of	weapons
that	make	the	ultimate	difference;	it’s	 the	ability	 to	out-think	 and	out-imagine	the
enemy	that	 always	  has,	and	 always	 will,	  determine	 the	 ultimate	  victor.	  By
permitting	 oneself	 to	laugh	 at	 the	world,	  and	think	 outside	 the	 boundaries	of
ordinary,	normal	 thought,	brilliant	 new	 solutions	can	arise.	As	in	 the	case	of	the
gorilla	costume,	some	“wild”	  ideas	turn	out	to	be	practical	too.
   Imagine	 the	Unimaginable,	Humor	 Your	Imagination.

63
PART	2

64
                                                          4



      LEWIS	   AND	  CLARK	   DISCOVER	    OSAMA	   BIN	 LADEN:


                   WHEN	 IN	DOUBT,	 DEVELOP	THE	 SITUATION


                                        North	  Carolina,	   1998


When	I	arrived	at	work,	I	found	a	yellow	sticky	note	on	my	desk	with	the	words
Come	see	me	scrawled	on	it.	I	 grabbed	my	notebook	and	hurried	down	the
quarter-mile-long	marble	hallway	toward	 the	Unit	 commander’s	office.	The
commander	was	a	big	man.	At	six	feet	and	well	over	250	pounds,	his	cherubic
boy-from-Tennessee	face	made	him	look	much	younger	than	his	mid-forties.
Obsessed	with	weaponry,	he	was	always,	it	seemed,	either	cleaning	a	gun	or
sharpening	a	knife.	When	 I	 walked	into	 his	 office	 he	was	doing	 both.	He
motioned	for	me	to	sit.	Without	 looking	up	from	 his	desk,	he	flung	a	manila
folder	at	me.	Spinning	like	a	Frisbee,	it	landed	perfectly	in	my	lap.	“Pete,	I	don’t
have	a	lot	of	time	to	discuss	this	with	you,	but	I	need	you	to	look	at	this	target
folderf	and	come	up	with	some	recommendations	on	how	to	capture	this	guy.”
   Cracking	open	the	target	folder,	I	quickly	glanced	at	a	map	of	Afghanistan;
then	turning	the	page,	found	myself	staring	straight	into	the	icy	black	eyes	of	a
man	named	Osama	bin	Laden	(UBL).g	“Never	heard	of	this	guy,”	I	mumbled,
“but	I’ll	 get	cracking	on	it	right	away,	boss.	When	does	higher	headquarters	need
this	by?”	He	looked	up	at	me	with	the	sarcastic	look	he	always	used	when	he
talked	about	our	higher	headquarters.	“Right	away,	of	course.”
   “What	does	that	translate	to	in	actual	Julian	units?”
   “If	 they	knew	that	we’d	 all	be	a	lot	better	off,	 Pete.”	I	wasn’t	sure	what	he
meant	by	that,	but	this	looked	like	a	really	 cool	mission,	and	I	wanted	to	get
started.
   “Thanks,	sir.	Let’s	hit	 the	range	together	sometime	this	week,”	I	replied	as	I
pointed	at	him	while	heading	out	of	his	office	on	my	way	to	talk	to	one	of	our

65
intelligence	analysts.
   Dee	was	a	good-looking	 guy	in	 his	early	thirties;	 his	ethnic	origin	 appeared	to
be	a	mix	of	 African	 American	 and	Japanese.	In	all	the	years	I	knew	him,	 and	in
all	the	long	deployments	we	participated	 in	together,	he	never	once	mentioned	to
me	or	anyone	else	that	I	knew	of,	whether	he	was	either,	and	it	didn’t	 matter.	No
one	really	 gave	a	crap	 about	your	 background	 at	the	Unit;	  the	only	 thing	 that
mattered	was	how	competent	you	were.	You	could	be	from	 Venus	with	antennae
protruding	from	 your	 butt,	and	no	one	 would	think	 twice	 as	long	as	you	were	 a
solid	contributor	 to	 the	overall	 mission.	 Dee	was	a	superb	 intelligence	 analyst.
He	was	common-sense	smart,	and	he	had	a	real	 passion	about	always	ensuring
that	the	Unit	 operators	had	everything	they	needed	to	allow	 them	to	 accomplish
their	missions.
   I	  walked	 into	 Dee’s	 office	 and	 got	right	  down	 to	 business.	“What	 do	 you
know	about	Afghanistan?”
   “What	 do	you	want	 to	know?”	he	murmured	in	 his	soft-spoken	manner.
   “How	  about	we	start	with	everything	you	 got,”	I	 said.
   There	 was	no	need	to	 pretend	that	I	 was	any	kind	 of	 expert	on	 Afghanistan.
My	 knowledge	came	from	 distilled	  media	memories	of	 the	Soviet	 War	and,	 of
course,	 a	 few	  documentaries	 on	  Discovery	  Channel.	  In	  1998,	 UBL	   and
Afghanistan	  were	  not	  even	 close	  to	  being	  strategic	 priorities;	   the	  U.S.
government	had	its	hands	full	 with	 Iraq,	Bosnia,	 Serbia,	and	the	narco-terrorists
in	Colombia.	 Terrorism	 as	a	 threat	was	neither	 understood	in	 a	global	 context
nor	in	terms	 of	its	 potential	for	 causing	massive	loss	of	 lives—especially	 in	the
United	States.
   “What	  do	 you	 have	there?”	 Dee	 asked	while	  looking	 at	 my	 manila	 target
folder.
   “I	 got	a	mission,	Dee,	and	if	 you’re	up	for	 it,	you	got	one,	too!”
   He	 smiled	and	asked,	“I	heard	something	was	coming	down	on	this.	 Is	this	the
bin	Laden	mission?”
   “Yep,”	  I	 uttered	while	searching	through	 the	packet	for	some	kind	 of	mission
statement.	I	  located	 a	 long	 paragraph	 that	 came	 from	  some	alphabet	 soup
headquarters	 at	  the	   Pentagon.	 “Our	    task	  is	  to	   come	  up	  with	   some
recommendations	on	how	to	 capture	him.	 It	looks	 like	 he	is	in	 the	city	 of	Kan-
de-har”	(See	Map	3).	Dee	was	well	familiar	 with	 the	information.
   “Yeah,	 that’s	 correct;	he	 has	a	house	in	Kandahar	out	 near	the	airport.	 I	was
just	looking	 at	the	satellite	 photos	of	the	compound	 the	other	day.	Let	 me	put	a
few	target	packets	together	and	build	 some	map	boards	for	 you.	 Just	give	me	a

66
couple	of	hours	and	meet	me	in	conference	room	A.”
   “Sounds	  good,”	  I	 replied.	  I	 went	 back	  to	 my	 office	  and	 began	 reading
everything	inside	the	target	folder,	 and	anything	else	I	could	find	 on	Afghanistan
and	UBL.
   Most	 of	the	information	  we	had	back	then	was	based	on	information	provided
by	two	 ex-UBL	 acquaintances	turned	informants,	both	of	 whom	 had	passed	lie-
detector	tests	and	had	their	stories	corroborated	by	 other	sources.1	They	told	us
that	UBL	 and	 Al	 Qaeda	had	established	a	 formal	 military	 committee	 that	 was
currently	 planning	 operations	 against	 U.S.	 and	 Western	 interests	worldwide.
They	were	also	actively	 attempting	 to	obtain	 nuclear	material	to	 build	 a	WMD.
There	were	 direct	 links	 between	Al	  Qaeda	and	 the	attacks	 on	U.S.	 troops	 in
Yemen	and	Somalia	in	1992	 and	1993.	Al	 Qaeda	also	was	directly	linked	 to	the
plot	to	 blow	up	 planes	flying	 between	Manila	 in	the	 Philippines	and	the	 United
States	in	1994	 and	1995.	In	 February	 1998,	UBL,	  along	with	 other	 prominent
Muslim	 figures,	announced	the	now-notorious	 formation	 of	the	 World	 Front	for
Jihad	 against	Jews	 and	 Crusaders.	 They	 concluded	 that	  declaration	 with	  a
fatwahh	that	charged	every	 Muslim	 to	obey	“God’s	  order	to	kill	  the	Americans
and	plunder	  their	 money.”2	  I	 was	 amazed	 that	 I	 hadn’t	  heard	 any	 of	 this
information	 about	UBL	 before.	We	needed	to	do	something	about	this	guy.	 This
is	why	I	came	to	the	Unit,	I	thought.
   A	 few	hours	later	I	 walked	into	 the	conference	room.	Dee	had	transformed	the
room	by	 assembling	an	impressive	montage	of	 information	 for	 our	preparation.
Two	of	the	walls	 in	the	room	were	made	of	tackboard,	now	 covered	with	photos,
personal	dossiers,	and	 maps.	The	 other	 two	 walls	 were	 made	of	 whiteboard,
which	 allowed	 us	 to	 sketch	operational	 concepts	 and	to	 write	  key	 facts	 and
assumptions	that	would	need	to	be	addressed	as	we	brainstormed	ideas.
   I	 zeroed	in	on	a	three-foot-by-three-foot	 satellite	photo	labeled	“Tarnak	 Farms
(UBL	 compound).”3	“How	 do	we	know	 this	is	where	he	lives?”	I	 asked.
   Dee	 paged	through	one	of	the	 target	folders	and	responded,	“It	 looks	 like	 we
have	multisource	corroboration,	 to	include	individuals	 who	 have	actually	visited
him	 there.”	  Multisource	   usually	  means	 you	 have	  both	 signal	  intelligence
(intercepted	 phone	 calls)	  and	  human	 intelligence	  (people	  actually	  on	  the
ground).	Both	can	be	valuable	on	their	own,	 but	when	you	have	them	together,	it
usually	means	you	 have	 something	credible.	 Credibility	  is	 everything	 when	it
comes	to	intelligence	  sources,	so	you	 have	to	 know	 how	 reliable	 each	of	 the
sources	is	before	you	buy	into	the	supposition	the	source	is	portraying.

67
   “Visitors,	  like	who?”	 I	asked.
   “It	  looks	 like	  a	Saudi	 prince	 was	 one	of	  the	sources,	and	 the	 other	 is	an
unnamed	but	reliable	group	of	locals	on	the	ground.”4
   “Okay,	 find	 out	when	the	Saudi	prince	last	visited	 the	compound,	and	find	 out
who	the	reliable	source	on	the	ground	refers	to.”	 Dee	wrote	 both	requests	on	the
whiteboard	under	the	heading	“RFI,”	  which	 stands	for	requests	for	information.
“How	 about	signal	intelligence?	Are	we	listening	 to	his	cell	phone	calls?”5
   Dee	 paged	through	one	of	his	 information	 packets	and	answered	hesitatingly.
“I	 don’t	know	 the	specifics,	 but	I	 do	know	that	 the	cell	phone	intercepts	are	the
only	method	we	currently	 have	of	confirming	 UBL’s	 location.”
   “All	   right,	let’s	 find	 out	 how	often	 he’s	talking	 and	 how	quickly	  we	can	get
notification	 when	he	 is	talking.”	  Dee	nodded	in	the	 affirmative	 while	 he	added
the	requests	to	the	RFI	 list.	 At	 regular	intervals	 Dee	would	 aggregate	the	RFIs
and	input	them	into	 various	databases	to	see	what	information	 was	available	on
each	topic.	Incredibly,	  the	multitude	  of	 government	databases	were	not	and—
still	are	not—linked.	 Therefore,	finding	 key	 and	essential	information	is	still	 like
a	game	of	 go-fish:	 you	 have	to	 ask	the	“right”	  system	 or	you’ll	  never	 get	the
information	 that	may	make	the	difference	 between	mission	success	and	mission
failure.6
   Tarnak	 Farms	was	where	UBL	 lived	 with	his	 family.	 It	was	an	isolated	island
of	 homes	 conspicuously	 located	 in	 a	 sea	of	  desert,	a	 few	 miles	  outside	 of
Kandahar.	The	compound	consisted	of	 about	eighty	mud-brick	 adobe	homes,	in
rows	of	twenty,	which	 were	surrounded	by	a	bleached-white	ten-foot-high	 wall.7
The	nearest	man-made	 structure	was	 the	Kandahar	 airport,	 about	 half	 a	 mile
away,	which	the	United	States	had	funded	and	built	in	the	mid-1960s.8
   Dee	  had	 spent	a	 significant	  amount	  of	 time	  studying	 the	 compound	  by
comparing	time-lapse	images.	He	was	able	to	count	the	different	 outfits	 hanging
on	clotheslines	 each	day	 to	 determine	that	 there	were	 fewer	 than	twenty-five
people	permanently	living	 in	the	entire	compound.9
   Throughout	  the	day,	 a	number	 of	 operators	from	  different	 functional	  areas
within	 the	organization	joined	 us	and,	like	me,	the	complexity	 and	challenges	of
the	mission	quickly	  enamored	them.	Val	 was	the	most	 experienced	operator	to
join	 our	group.	 One	of	 the	fastest	and	most	 accurate	pistol	shots	in	 the	United
States,	he	 competed	 regularly	  all	  over	  the	 United	  States	 in	 national-level
competitions	 as	a	civilian.	  A	 big	 man	with	  thick	 brown	 hair	 and	a	 lightning-

68
quick	wit,	 he	and	I	 had	worked	closely	 together	in	 Somalia	and	Bosnia.	At	 that
time,	 Val	 was	 dating	 an	 attractive	 Swedish	girl	  who	 also	 happened	to	 be	 a
practicing	 nudist.	 Val,	 as	 you	 might	 expect,	 quickly	  converted	 to	 the	nudist
lifestyle	 while	 in	 the	 privacy	 of	 their	 home.	 Soon	 Val’s	 comfort	 with	  nudity
began	to	 spill	  over	 into	 his	 work	  life.	  In	 those	days	 when	 we	 traveled	 for
training,	 our	standard	operating	 procedure	was	 to	share	hotel	 rooms	 to	ensure
that	we	were	good	stewards	of	 government	money.	We	 had	to	request	a	special
exception	 to	 that	policy	  for	 Val,	  because	no	 man	 wanted	to	 share	 the	 tight
confines	of	a	hotel	room	with	 a	practicing	nudist.
   We	 spent	the	rest	of	 the	week	 immersing	ourselves	in	 everything	 we	had	on
Afghanistan	and	Al	 Qaeda.	We	had	many	questions:	How	often	 did	UBL	 stay	at
Tarnak	Farms?	 How	 would	  we	know	  when	 he	was	 there?	Did	  he	have	 any
routines—trips	 to	 the	 market,	 regularly	 scheduled	 meetings,	etc?	 How	 many
bodyguards	did	he	have?	How	 much	time	did	 he	spend	with	 each	of	his	wives?
Was	there	anywhere	 we	 could	 stage	from	 inside	 of	 Afghanistan?	 If	 not,	 how
would	we	 get	there—and	 more	important,	 how	would	 we	 get	there	in	 a	timely
fashion?
   Next,	  we	asked	for	 a	 point	 of	 contact	 in	 one	of	 the	surrounding	 countries,
preferably	 someone	we	 could	 contact	 to	 ask	 context-specific	  questions.	The
more	we	stared	at	 the	map	 and	information,	 the	 more	questions	we	 generated,
and	the	more	we	 began	to	realize	how	 much	we	 didn’t	 know.	 Val	 underscored
our	collective	 obliviousness	when	 Dee	randomly	 turned	to	him	 and	asked,	“So,
Val,	how	do	you	think	 we	should	capture	this	guy?”
   Val	  didn’t	 hesitate.	“Hold	  on	a	 second,	Dee.	Before	 I	answer,	 I’m	 going	 to
pull	 my	 pants	down	 and	do	a	 handstand.	Once	I’m	  up,	I	 want	 you	 to	draw	 a
smiley	face	 on	my	 ass,	because	the	only	way	 I	 can	answer	that	 question	is	by
talking	 out	of	 my	ass!”	 We	all	 got	 a	kick	 out	of	 Val’s	 use	of	 vivid	 imagery.	 It
was	humorously	 imaginative,	  and	he	 definitely	  got	his	 point	 across.	 Without
context-specific	knowledge	 of	what	was	actually	 happening	on	the	ground,	there
was	no	way	we	could	come	up	with	a	credible	concept	to	find	 and	capture	UBL.
   We	 wrapped	things	up	at	7:30	P.M.	on	Friday	 and	agreed	to	reconvene	at	8:30
A.M.	 on	 Monday	 morning.	 I	 was	dog	 tired.	 As	 so	often	 happened	during	 the
initial	  exposure	to	  new	 missions	 during	 my	  career,	I	  had	had	 a	 hard	 time
sleeping	that	 entire	week.	 Tossing	 and	turning	 all	 night,	 I	 just	 could	 not	stop
thinking	 about	 the	mission,	 constantly	 sorting,	 contemplating,	  and	generating
new	questions	and	insights.	I	knew	I	 couldn’t	 go	another	week	without	 sleeping,
so	I	 stopped	by	the	 Unit	 psychologist’s	 office	 on	 my	way	 out	 of	the	 building.

69
The	Unit	 psychologist	 (known	 as	 “the	 psyche”)	 plays	a	 prominent	role	 in	 the
Unit.	 To	 get	in	 the	 Unit	 you	 first	 have	 to	 pass	a	barrage	of	 oral	 and	 written
psychological	tests.10	To	 stay	in	 the	Unit	 the	psyches	were	 always	monitoring
our	performance,	but	they	didn’t	 do	it	 by	spying	on	us;	they	did	 it	by	being	there
for	 us.	Whether	 you	 had	a	 personal	problem—such	  as	the	death	 of	 a	family
member—or	 a	professional	 problem—such	 as	you	 didn’t	 want	 to	 be	a	 sniper
anymore—you	could	call	 or	talk	in	 person	to	one	of	the	psyches	at	any	time,	and
get	some	completely	nonattributional	advice	in	 return.
   When	 I	 explained	my	 dilemma,	the	 psyche	smiled	and	pulled	 a	book	 off	 the
shelf	behind	 his	 desk.	He	 opened	the	 book	to	 a	 two-page	chart	 depicting	 the
human	brain.	“Pete,	there’s	nothing	the	matter	with	you;	 it’s	all	 in	your	mind.”
   Oh	 boy,	I	thought,	here	we	go.
   He	 continued,	 “You	  need	to	 understand	 how	 the	human	 mind	 works.	 The
mind	has	three	 elementary	phases	it	goes	through	 when	 it’s	 thinking:	 saturate,
incubate,	and	illuminate.	  Although	 they	 generally	 occur	in	 order,	 all	 three	are
continuous	 processes,	so	 your	 mind	  is	 constantly	 cycling	  through	  all	 three
phrases.	The	  saturation	 phase	 occurs	 when	  the	  mind	 is	  first	  exposed	 to
something.	When	 you’re	 planning	 a	new	 mission	 you’re	 saturating	your	 mind
with	 facts,	  assumptions,	insights,	  and/or	 sensory	 cues—ergo,	 the	 saturation
phase.	The	next	phase	is	incubation.	This	 is	a	critical	 phase	if	 you	ever	want	 to
come	up	with	 something	 innovative.	 The	mind	 needs	time	 to	incubate.	 During
this	phase	the	mind	subconsciously	sorts	through	 all	of	 the	inputs	and	begins	 to
recognize	patterns	and	 snap	those	patterns	together	to	 come	 up	with	 concepts
and	ideas.	This	is	 why	 you	may	 have	heard	people	say,	‘I	  need	to	sleep	on	 it’
before	making	a	major	 decision.	It’s	 not	 the	sleep	per	se	that	they	need:	it’s	 the
time	to	allow	 their	mind	 to	sort	through	information	 and	search	for	patterns.	The
recognition	 of	 patterns	 that	occurs	 during	 the	 incubation	 phase	 produces	the
illumination	 phase,	also	known	as	‘eureka’	moments,	where	your	mind	 begins	to
translate	those	patterns	and	form	them	 into	actionable	 ideas.	Saturate,	incubate,
illuminate—it’s	  how	 the	mind	 works,	 and	it’s	  probably	 the	main	 reasons	why
you	have	lost	so	much	sleep	over	the	years.	The	best	thing	you	can	do	is	to	keep
a	 pen	 and	 paper	 by	 your	  bed.	 Writing	  down	  your	  thoughts	 while	  you’re
incubating	and	illuminating	  should	 help	to	 temporarily	 get	them	off	  your	mind
and	back	to	sleep.”
   “Geez,	 doc,	I	 was	kind	of	 hoping	for	 a	few	sleeping	 pills,”	 I	replied	 jokingly.
Actually,	 I	was	impressed.	“It	sounds	like	you’ve	 delivered	this	spiel	before.”
   He	 turned	and	put	 the	book	back	 on	the	shelf.	 “About	 a	hundred	times.	 This

70
Unit	suffers	from	 chronic	incubation-induced	 sleep	loss.”
   “I	 guess	that’s	a	good	thing,”	 I	replied,	“as	long	 as	we	also	suffer	from	chronic
illumination-induced	 wakefulness,	too.”
   “Go	 illuminate,	  my	friend,”	  he	countered,	as	he	put	his	hand	on	my	 shoulder
and	walked	with	me	out	 of	the	building	 into	the	warm	pollen-saturated	spring	 air
of	the	North	Carolina	twilight.



                                                         Week	  2


When	I	arrived	 at	the	compound	early	on	Monday	 morning,	 I	found	 Dee	hard	at
work	updating	 the	folders	and	satellite	photos	hanging	on	 the	walls.	Throughout
the	weekend,	the	various	government	databases	we	had	queried	had	been	spitting
out	answers	to	our	RFIs	 in	the	form	 of	 reports,	documents,	articles,	and	photos.
Once	everyone	 else	had	arrived	 and	 grabbed	a	 cup	of	 coffee,	 Dee	 began	his
update.
   Known	 colloquially	  as	“the	tribals,”	 there	was	a	group	of	Afghans	working	 for
the	U.S.	government	on	the	 ground	in	Afghanistan	 at	that	 time.11	Although	 the
information	 we	 had	was	 sketchy;	 they	were	 a	group	 of	 combat-hardened	and
experienced	anti-Soviet	 mujahideen	 fighters.	 Of	 perhaps	greatest	import,	 they
were	Pashtuns,	which	 is	the	same	tribe	 that	 inhabited	the	 areas	in	which	 UBL
was	living	 and	operating.	 The	tribals	 seemed	like	they	 definitely	 had	potential,
but	without	  more	information	  about	 their	 capabilities	 and	trustworthiness,	 we
had	no	 way	 of	 gauging	 whether	 they	 could	 provide	 us	 with	 any	 operational
assistance.	The	information	 on	the	tribals	 was	compartmented,	 meaning	only	 a
small	group	 of	individuals	  within	 the	 U.S.	government	 were	allowed	 access	to
the	information.	12
   We	  also	discovered	 more	 information	  to	 corroborate	 that	 UBL	  was	using
Tarnak	Farms	as	his	main	residence.	His	wives	and	at	least	some	of	his	 children
were	reported	to	be	staying	there.	UBL	  also	was	spending	a	lot	of	 time	 in	other
areas	of	Afghanistan	where	his	 Al	 Qaeda	training	camps	were	located.	The	 two
main	camps	were	 in	 the	mountainous	 regions	of	 eastern	Afghanistan	 near	 the
cities	of	Khowst	 and	Jalalabad	(see	Maps	3	and	5).	He	 traveled	most	frequently
from	his	home	near	Kandahar	to	the	training	camp	near	Khowst.	Khowst	 was	the
key	hub	for	 Al	Qaeda	in	those	days	due	to	its	 relative	proximity	  to	the	Pakistani
border	town	of	 Miram	 Shah,	which	 was	the	main	point	 of	 entry	for	 most	of	 the

71
Al	Qaeda	wannabes	from	around	the	globe.
   Although	  the	 distance	 between	 Kandahar	and	 Khowst	  was	 less	than	 four
hundred	miles,	it	was	a	twenty-hour	 trip	by	 car	when	the	weather	was	good.	The
road	that	connected	the	two	 towns	 was	a	road	in	 name	only.	 Pockmarked	with
bathtub-sized	craters	and	cracks,	 and	in	 many	 places	lined	 on	both	 sides	with
Soviet-laid	 minefields,	 the	 treacherous	journey	 was	an	 endless	series	of	 stop-
and-go	zigzags	 that	required	 intense	 concentration	by	 the	 driver	 and	 extreme
patience	by	the	 passengers	to	complete.	UBL	  usually	 made	the	excruciatingly
long	and	slow	journey,	 along	with	 his	security	 detail,	while	 traveling	 in	three	or
four	late-model	 Toyota	 Land	Cruisers.13	There	 were	all	 sorts	of	 speculation	at
that	time	 that	 for	 security	 reasons	UBL	 would	 sometimes	ride	 in	 the	 back	of
dilapidated	 pickup	  trucks,	 or	  in	 decrepit	 common-man	  vehicles.	 We	  never
bought	into	 any	of	 that.	UBL	 was	 raised	with	 a	silver	 spoon	in	his	 mouth,	and
the	privileged	 very	 rarely	have	 the	discipline	 to	 choose	the	hard	right	 over	 the
easy	wrong.	And	UBL	 proved	to	be	no	different.
   Terrorists	 are	by	 nature	paranoid.	 People	who	 are	constantly	 plotting	 to	 kill
other	 people	 have	a	 tendency	 to	 think	  everyone	 is	 just	 like	  them,	 so	 they
naturally	think	 everyone	 is	out	 to	get	 them;	it’s	 one	of	 the	reasons	why	 it’s	 so
hard	to	 catch	 a	psychopath.	 UBL’s	  paranoia	 was	inwardly	  focused.	 In	 other
words,	 he	believed	 that	 the	 greatest	 threat	 to	 his	 life	 came	 from	 Al	  Qaeda
insiders.	He	never	 shared	the	details	of	 his	travel	 plans	with	 anyone,	including
his	trusted	security	detail.	As	 a	result,	the	only	intelligence	 reports	that	specified
UBL’s	 locations	were	reports	generated	after	he	had	come	and	gone	.14
   Intelligence	 regarding	a	man’s	specific	 location	is	 incredibly	 perishable.	It	has
a	shelf	life	of	 hours	and	sometimes	minutes,	which	usually	has	evaporated	by	the
time	the	 intelligence	 gets	back	to	 someone	who	can	 actually	take	 action	on	 it.
The	 United	 States	 did	  not	 have	 any	 U.S.	  personnel	 on	 the	 ground	 inside
Afghanistan	in	the	late	’90s.	So	when	a	human	source	would	report,	for	 example,
that	he	had	just	seen	UBL	 drive	 into	 his	compound	near	Kandahar,	it	 would	 be
days	before	that	report	 was	communicated	 to	a	U.S.	 representative	in	a	 nearby
country	such	as	Pakistan.	UBL	was	constantly	on	the	move	and	undoubtedly	was
using	false	stories	about	his	travels,	because	in	some	cases	there	were	reports	of
him	being	in	two	 or	more	places	at	once.
   The	 United	 States	had	no	bases	in	central	 Asia	at	 the	time,	 and	the	distance
from	 the	nearest	“friendly	  country”	 base	in	 the	Persian	 Gulf	 to	Kandahar	 was
approximately	 a	 thousand	miles.	  Thus,	given	  the	distances	 from	 the	 nearest

72
potential	staging	 bases	to	the	locations	 where	UBL	  lived	 and	worked,	 and	the
minimal	time	 he	spent	at	any	of	those	locations,	it	would	 be	all	but	impossible	to
get	a	force	of	any	size	from	 anyplace	outside	of	Afghanistan	 into	Afghanistan	 in
time	to	successfully	capture	him.
   Dee	summed	it	 up:	“The	 time-distance	reality	means	we	need	to	put	ourselves
in	a	position	 on	the	ground	 where	we	can	take	him	 down	 when	the	opportunity
arises.”
   “When	  you	invent	 your	 crystal	 ball	 and	Teleporter,	 let	 me	know,	 because	I
want	to	be	the	first	to	invest,”	 Val	replied	 sarcastically.
   Dee	 didn’t	 blink.	 “Kidnappers	 study	the	patterns	of	 their	targets	to	 determine
the	best	place	and	 time	 to	snatch	them.	 They	 adapt	their	 plans	based	on	 their
victim’s	 patterns.	 Even	though	 this	 guy	 [UBL]	  is	 paranoid,	 he	has	some	 key
activity	 patterns	 in	 his	 lifestyle	  that	 we	can	 definitely	  hone	 in	 on.”	 He	 was
pointing	to	 the	locations	on	the	map.	“His	 home	and	family	 are	at	Tarnak	Farms
near	Kandahar.	His	key	terrorist	camp	is	in	 Khowst.	There’s	 only	one	way	to	get
from	one	location	to	the	other—the	long	 deserted	road	that	runs	between	them.”
   Eureka!	 Traveling	 from	 his	home	in	 Kandahar	 to	 his	main	terrorist	  camp	in
Khowst	was	an	organizational	 pattern	driven	by	his	duty	to	 check	up	on	and	give
guidance	 to	  his	  subordinates	  at	 his	  terrorist	   camps.	 Traveling	   with	  his
bodyguards	in	  three	 fully	 loaded	 Toyota	 Land	  Cruisers	 was	 an	 operational
pattern	driven	 by	 his	 real	 or	 perceived	paranoia.	  And	the	 amount	of	 time	 he
could	hang	out	 in	 the	austere	confines	of	 Tarnak	Farms	 and	tolerate	 his	 many
wives	and	kids	was	a	personal	pattern,	driven	by	his	family	 relationships	 and	his
own	psychology.	Tangled	all	 together,	the	interactions	 among	all	 these	patterns
are	what	drive	the	behavior	of	UBL
   “Hey,	  Panther,	snap	out	of	it,”	 Dee	 mumbled	while	 waving	 his	palm	 in	front
of	my	face.
   “Sorry,	  gents,	I	 was	doing	 the	 out-of-body	 thing.	 You	 guys	nailed	 it!	 Once
you	recognize	 the	 patterns	that	 inform	 the	 behavior	 of	 your	 enemy,	 you	 can
adapt	to	them,	and	your	enemy’s	toast!”
   “Okayyyyy,”	   Val	 replied	with	 a	wry	smile,	 “so	let’s	 get	a	team	on	the	ground
in	Afghanistan	and	start	making	some	toast.”
   The	room	 went	pensive.
   It	 was	 around	1:00	 P.M.	when	 one	of	 our	staff	 officers	 whose	job	 it	 was	to
work	  with	  our	  higher	  headquarters	 walked	  into	  the	  planning	  room	  and
announced	to	all	 of	 us	that	“Higher	  headquarters	has	just	called	 and	said	 they
want	to	know	 where	we	are	with	the	plan.”	 I	 looked	at	Val	 and	subtly	shook	my

73
head	to	deter	him	from	injecting	 his	handstand	metaphor.
   “We	  don’t	 know	 enough	 yet,”	 I	 explained.	 It	 felt	 odd	 saying	 those	words,
almost	as	if	it	 were	an	admission	 of	failure	 or	an	excuse.	I	 couldn’t	 articulate	it
to	 the	 staff	  officer	  at	 the	 time,	 but	  it	  just	 didn’t	  seem	 right	  to	 submit	 a
recommendation	at	this	point	 in	our	 process	for	such	an	important	 and	complex
mission.
   “They	  also	 told	 me	 to	 tell	  you	 to	 make	 sure	you	  include	 options	 to	 use
helicopters	 and	cruise	 missiles,”	  he	added	 as	he	 walked	 out	 of	  the	room.	  I
expected	he’d	be	 back	real	soon.	 I	could	 almost	 hear	our	higher	 headquarters’
indignation	when	they	heard	that	we	hadn’t	produced	a	plan	for	them	yet.
   The	 emphasis	on	helicopters	and	cruise	missiles	didn’t	 really	surprise	us;	they
were	becoming	 the	 default	 solution	 for	  all	 missions	 that	 required	 a	force	 to
actually	 spend	time	 on	the	 ground	 in	a	 hostile	 country.	 Unfortunately,	 we	 all
knew	that	 getting	approval	 to	 put	men	on	 the	ground	 in	 a	hostile	environment
such	as	Afghanistan	 would	 run	head-on	into	 one	 of	the	 modern-day	military’s
most	vexing	 institutional	 shortcomings:	 risk	 aversion.	Risk	 aversion	is	 a	direct
by-product	 of	 not	 understanding	what’s	 going	 on	 around	 you,	 and	by	 proxy,
another	version	of	 “getting	 treed	 by	a	chihuahua.”	 Back	 then	it	 didn’t	 seem	to
matter	how	important	 the	mission	was	to	 national	security;	 if	there	was	any	risk
that	a	man	 might	 be	killed	 or	 captured	during	 an	operation,	 the	operation	 was
deemed	not	politically	  worth	the	 risk.	Instead	of	 focusing	 on	the	opportunity	 at
hand,	risk-averse	leaders	get	 treed	by	 the	potential	 risk,	 and	fall	  victim	 to	 the
greatest	operational	failure	of	all:	the	failure	 to	try.
   One	 of	 the	 most	unfortunate	 by-products	 of	 risk	 aversion	 was,	and	 still	 is,
something	we	 called	 the	 footprint	 paradox.	 To	 obviate	 any	 risk	 to	 the	 small
number	of	men	needed	to	conduct	high-risk	operations,	the	upper	echelons	of	the
military	  believed	 they	 had	 to	 employ	  massive	 armadas	of	  helicopters,	 jets,
vehicles,	and	people	to	address	every	possible	contingency.
   Helicopter-centric	   planning	 was	 and	 still	  is	 the	 driving	  force	  behind	 the
footprint	 paradox.	 Heavy-lift	  helicoptersi	 work	 well	 when	 used	for	 what	 they
were	designed	and	developed	for:	inserting	or	 extracting	men	to	locations	 out	of
sight,	sound,	and	 line	of	 fire	 from	 the	 enemy	or	a	 target.	But	 they	were	 never
designed	for	the	role	they	played	in	 the	’90s	and	still	 play	today—as	all-purpose
assault	platforms.	The	Hollywood	  influence	doesn’t	 help.	The	music	 and	moxie
that	movies	 like	  Apocalypse	 Now,	 Blackhawk	 Down,	 and	 We	Were	 Soldiers
Once	 and	 Young	 orchestrated	to	  portray	 helicopter	  operations	 as	sexy	 and
sophisticated	obscures	one	critical	  common	 denominator	 detail	 connecting	all

74
three	stories.	The	 ill-advised	 use	 of	 the	helicopter	 was	 the	reason	that	 all	 the
valorous	 men	portrayed	 in	  those	movies	 got	 into	  the	problems	 that	 they	 so
heroically	  had	  to	  fight	   and	  die	  to	  get	  out	  of.	  Hollywood	   music	  and
cinematography	have	had	a	strong	influence	 on	the	misuse	of	 helicopters	in	 the
military,	 but	it	 was	the	military’s	  own	institutionalization	  of	risk	 aversion	in	 the
’90s	that	made	the	 helicopter	the	 default	solution	 for	 attacking	almost	 all	high-
risk	targets.
   Coordinating	  and	 setting	 up	the	 type	 of	 massive	 force	 package	needed	to
support	the	massive	armada	 of	helicopters,	 headquarters,	and	humans	required
contentious	diplomatic	negotiations,	and	were	all	 but	impossible	to	hide	from	 the
indigenous	populace.	As	a	result,	 the	time	frame	 to	put	the	 massive	footprint	 in
place	was	measured	in	weeks.	So,	in	the	case	of	UBL	and	Afghanistan,	 not	only
would	 we	 need	to	 know	  the	exact	 time	 UBL	  was	 going	 to	 be	at	 a	 specific
location,	we	 also	needed	to	 know	 it	 weeks	ahead	of	 time	so	 we	could	 get	the
massive	footprint	 in	place	 without	 tipping	 him	off	 that	 we	were	coming.	 When
policymakers	 were	 briefed	  on	 these	types	 of	  footprint-intensive	  plans,	 they
quickly	 shied	away	from	approving	 them	due	to	the	political	 volatility	 of	 staging
such	a	massive	force	in	 a	foreign	 country,	 and	the	ease	with	 which	 it	could	 be
misinterpreted	 as	  an	 invasion	  force.	  Paradoxically,	   it	  was	  the	 military’s
insistence	 on	 “zero-defect	  operations”	 that	  created	the	 requirement	  for	  the
massive	 logistics	 footprint,	   which	  in	 turn	  ended	 up	 making	  the	 operation
politically	 untenable.
   The	 type	of	 risk	 aversion	that	drove	 the	footprint	 paradox	 seemed	especially
counterintuitive	 to	us	in	 the	Unit.	 From	our	perspective,	we	 volunteered	for	this
way	of	 life	with	 full	  cognizance	of	the	risks	 that	went	along	with	 it.	 We	trained
our	bodies	 and	our	 minds	 to	 a	level	 that	 gave	us	 supreme	confidence	 in	 our
capability	to	 be	successful	in	any	situation,	anywhere	in	 the	world.	The	 question
that	high-ranking	  leaders	always	 seemed	to	 inject	 in	 any	 risk-averse-oriented
discussion	was,	“Is	it	 worth	getting	a	man	killed	 for?”	 Forty	 thousand	people	die
on	our	highways	each	year,	but	when	you	get	into	your	car	each	morning,	do	you
ask	yourself	 if	 driving	 to	 work	 is	 worth	 getting	killed	  for?	 The	main	 question
that	high-level	  leaders	should	 ask	is	 whether	 the	mission	 is	 important	 to	 our
country.	If	 the	answer	is	 yes,	then	we	in	 the	Unit	 had	no	issues	with	laying	 our
lives	on	the	line	to	 accomplish	it.	Could	 someone	end	up	getting	killed?	You	 bet
—we’re	 talking	  about	 combat.	 But	 we	 had	no	 intention	  of	 ever	 letting	 that
happen.
   “So	 helicopters	 are	out	 of	 the	question.	 What	 about	using	 cruise	missiles?”

75
Dee	asked	with	a	pregnant	smile	on	his	face.
   Val	 and	I	 had	spent	many	an	hour	 discussing	the	strengths	and	limitations	 of
the	cruise	missile,	which,	we	were	convinced,	 were	rarely	shared	with	high-level
political	 leaders	before	they	 were	forced	to	 decide	to	use	them.	 Val	 jumped	up
and	sauntered	over	to	the	map	 again.	“The	 use	of	cruise	 missiles	is	completely
dependent	on	the	target.	Almost	 all	 targets	can	be	 broken	down	 into	 two	main
categories	when	assessing	their	vulnerability	 to	 aerial	bombs:	 stationary	targets
and	moving	 targets.	Stationary	targets	include	 the	obvious—bridges,	 buildings,
and	bunkers.	Buildings	 don’t	 change	their	 minds	 about	where	they’re	 going	 to
stay	for	the	night,	 they	don’t	 get	caught	in	 traffic	 jams,	and	they	don’t	 get	up	in
the	middle	 of	 the	night	 to	 go	take	 a	piss.	So	 if	 you	want	 to	 destroy	an	 actual
building,	 bridge,	 or	 bunker,	 cruise	missiles	 are	 usually	 a	 pretty	 good	option.
Moving	 targets,	such	as	UBL,	 whether	on	foot,	 or	in	 his	Land	Cruiser,	 are	very
rarely	static.”
   “So	 probably	not	a	cruise	missile	target?”	Dee	pondered.
   Val	 paused	for	a	couple	 of	seconds	while	he	collected	 his	thoughts.	“Without
a	guy	on	the	 ground,	I’d	 never	consider	 using	cruise	missiles	 against	a	moving
target,	since	 there’s	 no	flexibility.	   A	  cruise	missile	 is	 on	 a	 monorail	 once	 it
begins	its	 firing	 sequence—it	 flies	 at	880	 kilometers	 per	hour,	 so	a	thousand-
mile	distance	 to	the	target	 in	Afghanistan	 would	 take	 about	one	hour	 and	fifty
minutes.15	Lots	can	happen	during	that	time!	 With	 no	one	on	the	ground	giving
a	signal	that	the	‘moving	  target’	 is	actually	 present	and	stationary,	versus	stuck
in	traffic	 a	mile	away,	or	 out	on	a	walk	in	 the	hills,	 you	are	basically	firing	 blind
and	hoping	 to	 get	 lucky!”	  He	 paused	again.	 “And	  I	 know	  you	 guys	 are	all
converting	those	kilometers	 per	hour	to	miles	 traveled.	Save	yourself	the	time,	 I
got	that	stat	from	an	article	in	Popular	 Science	.”	I	know	 I	was	impressed.
   “Easy,	 Poindexter,”	 Dee	jokingly	 murmured	 just	loud	enough	for	 everyone	to
hear.
   Val	 was	shaking	his	head	in	dismay	and	looking	at	the	floor.
   “Talk	  to	me,	Val,”	 I	said.
   “Panther,”	 he	responded,	“we	can	stare	at	these	maps	and	satellite	photos	from
now	until	  eternity,	 and	we	 can	come	up	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 mindless	helicopter
assault	or	cruise	missile	plans,	but	 none	of	them	will	  have	an	ice	cube’s	chance
in	hell	of	 actually	getting	this	 dude,	unless	we	can	get	some	people	over	there	on
the	ground.”
   “You’re	  right,	we	have	to	develop	the	situation,”	 I	added.
   “What	 do	 you	mean	by	‘develop	 this	situation’?”	 Dee	injected	 defensively,	as

76
if	our	comments	were	an	indictment	 of	the	intelligence	 portfolio	 he	had	prepared
for	us.
   I	  stood	up	 and	 moved	over	 to	 the	 satellite	 photos	and	 intelligence	 reports
hanging	on	the	 wall	 and	began	explaining,	 “No	 offense	 to	you,	 Dee,	but	 these
are	just	 pictures	and	 words	 put	 together	and	 interpreted	by	 some	intelligence
analyst	in	 D.C.	They’re	  snapshots	of	reality,	 frozen	 in	the	 past.	Not	 a	realistic
reflection	of	 what’s	 actually	happening	on	the	 ground	right	 now.	What	 we	need
is	superhigh-resolution	SA.”
   “Explain	  SA,”	he	asked.
   “Situational	   awareness.	It’s	  knowing	  what’s	  going	 on	  around	 you,”	  Val
explained.	Or	context	dressed	in	a	military	  uniform,	I	 wit-ted	 to	myself.	“This	 is
Afghanistan,	  and	   we’re	   talking	   about	  a	  way	   of	   life	   that	  is	   almost
incomprehensible	to	us.	 Trying	 to	come	up	 with	 a	credible	way	 to	 get	this	guy
from	 here	in	North	 Carolina	 is	 like	 asking	a	 caveman	to	put	 together	a	rocket
ship;	the	caveman	can’t	do	 it	because	he’s	been	living	 in	a	cave	all	 his	life,	 and
he	has	no	 idea	what	 a	 friggin’	  rocket	 ship	 is.”	 Val	 and	 Dee	just	 stood	 there
staring	at	the	satellite	photos	and	maps,	but	not	really	staring	 at	anything	at	all.	I
continued,	“But	 you	 know	 what?	If	 you	 let	 that	caveman	out	of	 his	 cave,	give
him	enough	time	 to	study	 and	play	around	 with	 those	rocket	ship	parts,	and	let
him	talk	 to	a	few	people	who	 know	what	 a	rocket	ship	is	 or	maybe	even	how	to
put	one	together,	the	caveman	may	just	be	able	to	figure	it	out.	He	needs	the	time
to	build	up	his	situational	 awareness	so	he	can	figure	it	out.”
   Up	 until	  that	 day	I	 had	 always	been	 a	bit	 uncomfortable	 with	  the	military
planning	process	but	never	could	put	my	finger	 on	what	was	actually	 so	illogical
and	 dysfunctional	  about	 it.	  The	 military	   uses	what	  they	 call	  the	 Military
Decision-Making	  Process	 (MDMP)	   to	  conduct	  all	  planning.j	  All	   military
planners	are	trained	to	 use	the	MDMP,	  from	 the	smallest	of	 small	 units	in	 the
field,	 to	  the	 massive	Pentagon	 staffs	 that	 prepare	 plans	 for	  the	 president’s
strategic	 decisions.	  It’s	   basically	  a	  comprehensive,	 step-by-step	  doctrinal
framework	 for	 decision-making	 and	planning.	 All	 of	 the	steps	are	supposed	to
occur	within	  a	ninety-six-hour	  period.	 The	way	 it	 usually	 works	 is	 that	 upon
receipt	of	a	mission,	the	organization	planning	the	mission	 sequesters	themselves
for	ninety-six	  hours	and	follows	  the	rigidly	  sequenced	step-by-step	process.	In
their	 race	to	 adhere	to	 the	 ninety-six-hour	  standard,	planners	 usually	 end	up
prioritizing	 completion	 of	all	the	steps	in	the	MDMP	 process,	over	the	product	(a
plan	that	 will	  actually	 work).	  As	 they	 race	to	 conform	 with	  the	process,	the
planners	are	forced	 to	make	 mission-critical	  decisions	regarding	 how	 they	are

77
going	  to	 conduct	  the	  operation,	 even	  though	  they	  don’t	  have	 sufficient
information	 or	 the	situational	 awareness	they	need	to	 understand	what	options
are	truly	  available	to	 them.	 At	  the	end	 of	 ninety-six	 hours,	 they	 produce	 an
elaborately	detailed	 plan,	 which,	 upon	 approval	 of	 the	commander	 in	 charge,
gets	locked	 in	 stone	in	 preparation	for	 execution.	 What	 you	 end	up	 with	 is	 a
caveman	trying	to	 put	together	a	rocket	 ship,	without	 the	time	 or	the	situational
awareness	to	figure	things	out.
   In	  the	case	 of	 the	UBL	  mission,	 we	 had	 no	 real	 situational	 awareness	or
context	inside	our	 “cave”	 in	 North	 Carolina.	Sequestering	ourselves	for	 ninety-
six	hours	and	 following	 a	 rigidly	 structured	 doctrinal	checklist	 wasn’t	 going	 to
get	us	any	closer	to	putting	 that	Afghan	 rocket	ship	together.	Like	 the	caveman,
we	needed	to	get	out	of	our	cave	and	build	context	on	the	ground	in	Afghanistan.
   The	 time	 aspect	was	especially	 profound	when	 I	 reflected	on	 what	 the	Unit
psych	had	shared	with	me	about	the	way	the	mind	works.	Saturate,	incubate,	and
illuminate.	 Time	 allows	  you	 to	 saturate	your	 mind	 with	  context,	 so	you	 can
incubate	and	recognize	 the	patterns	that	 produce	the	“eureka”	  moments,	when
insights	begin	to	form	into	 actionable	ideas.
   This	  was	an	 epiphany,	 and	 I	 felt	 a	 hell	 of	  a	lot	  better	 about	our	 current
planning	conundrum,	but	I	 also	had	a	stark	realization	that	even	we,	some	of	 the
most	highly	  trained	 and	 experienced	warriors	 in	  the	world,	  had	 no	 business
making	 recommendations	  for	  such	 an	 important	  mission	  when	  we	 didn’t
understand	the	on-the-ground	context	of	Afghanistan	and	UBL.	 We	were	experts
on	how	to	conduct	capture	operations	for	sure,	but	all	we	could	 do	was	provide	a
best-guess	recommendation	to	our	president,	and	that’s	no	way	to	make	strategic
life-and-death	decisions	that	could	change	the	course	of	world	history.



                                                         Week	  3


I	got	a	call	 late	Sunday	night	 on	the	secure	phone	at	my	residence	and	was	told
that	higher	 headquarters	was	 demanding	a	 plan	by	 noon	 on	 Monday	 so	 they
could	brief	  the	commanding	 general	 in	 the	afternoon.	 I	 skipped	 my	 morning
workout,	and	we	 all	met	 back	in	the	planning	 room	at	 6:30	A.M.	 It	 was	time	to
start	figuring	 out	 how	we	 could	get	 a	small	team	on	 the	ground	to	 develop	the
situation.	 We	 looked	  at	 all	 the	 surrounding	 countries,	 specifically	   Pakistan,
Uzbekistan,	 and	Tajikistan.	  We	 determined	 we	  could	 get	 into	 any	 of	  these
countries	via	commercial	 airlines	without	 drawing	 a	lot	 of	attention.	 The	border

78
between	Pakistan	 and	Afghanistan	  looked	 especially	 appealing	because	from
what	we	 were	learning,	 it	 existed	only	 as	a	line	 on	a	map.	 On	the	 ground,	the
border	region	was	just	an	isolated	frontier	of	rock-and	 snow-covered	mountains.
   Dee	opened	the	session	by	informing	 us	that	we	still	didn’t	 have	permission	to
talk	to	 anyone	in	 any	of	 the	surrounding	 countries’	 U.S.	embassies,	so	a	lot	 of
key	questions	remained	unanswered.	Although	 Dee	 was	clearly	 used	to	getting
stonewalled,	I	 was	sure	that	if	 we	could	 just	ask	the	 right	people,	 we	could	 get
whatever	we	needed.	There’s	always	a	way!	I	thought.
   I	   bumped	 Dee	  off	   the	  computer	  and	 opened	  up	  a	 new	  PowerPoint
presentation.	In	the	title	 space	on	the	first	slide	 I	typed	“Develop	 the	Situation.”
For	size	 of	 force,	I	 listed	 two	 to	 five	 men.	 We	 would	 cross	the	Afghanistan-
Pakistan	border	dressed	as	Pashtun	tribesmen,	 link	 up	with	  our	Afghan	 allies,
then	move	to	a	safe	house	in	the	Afghan	countryside.	 Our	time	at	the	safe	house
would	 allow	 us	to	 build	 situational	 awareness,	and	develop	options	 to	capture
UBL	 whenever	 the	 opportunity	  availed	 itself.	 We	 would	  dress	and	 comport
ourselves	as	Afghans	to	 blend	in,	 and	we	 would	 bring	 plenty	 of	money	 so	we
could	 buy	 things	 such	 as	 food,	 vehicles,	 weapons,	 and,	 of	 course,	 pay	 the
Afghans	to	assist	us.	Wait	till	they	get	a	load	of	this	 option!
   I	 sent	 it	 over	to	 our	 higher	 headquarters.	Thirty	 minutes	later	 it	 came	back
with	 a	note	attached	that	read,	 “This	 will	  never	fly	 with	 the	 CG	[commanding
general].”	Then	underneath,	as	if	to	underscore	why	it	would	 never	fly,	 was	a	list
of	short	questions:
   What	 will	  you	 do	 if	 you	 get	captured?	What	 will	  you	 use	for	 a	 believable
cover	 story?	 How	  can	  a	 couple	 of	  Americans	  blend	 into	  such	 a	 closed,
suspicious	culture?	 How	 will	   you	 find	 your	 way	 over	 the	 mountains	 on	 the
border?	(It’s	 some	 of	 the	roughest	 terrain	in	 the	 world.)	 How	  will	  you	avoid
detection	 on	 the	 border?	 And	  finally,	   how	 will	   you	 communicate	 without
satellite	radios	and	a	constant	resupply	of	batteries?
   Good	 points	 all,	I	 realized.	 “Damn,	 I	wish	 we	 could	talk	 to	 someone	on	the
ground	in	 Pakistan	and	Afghanistan,”	  I	 said	with	 frustration.	 We	 just	 couldn’t
credibly	 address	any	 of	 these	 concerns	without	  some	kind	  of	 on-the-ground
knowledge	to	back	us	up.
   Val	 wasn’t	 frustrated;	 he	was	furious.	 “How	  in	the	 hell	do	 they	think	 Lewis
and	Clark	 were	 able	to	 discover	the	 route	to	 the	 Pacific	 Ocean?”	None	 of	 us
wanted	to	look	like	 an	idiot	 by	trying	 to	answer	his	rhetorical	question,	so	we	all
just	kind	 of	sat	there	and	let	 him	 go	with	 it.	 “They	 had	no	idea	what	 they	were
going	to	 encounter,	 no	maps,	 no	intelligence,	  nothing,	 so	they	 did	 what	 they

79
knew	best:	 they	discovered!	 Those	 dudes	were	gone	 for	 three	years,	but	 they
couldn’t	 take	 three	years	of	 food,	 water,	 or	 equipment	with	  them.	And	 guess
what?	They	weren’t	 able	 to	pick	 up	 their	satellite	 radio	 each	night	and	ask	 for
guidance	or	 request	a	 resupply	 from	 headquarters.	They	  learned	and	 figured
things	out	as	they	went	along.”
   I	 could	 see	where	he	was	going	with	 the	Lewis	 and	Clark	 analogy,	and	 once
again	he	was	spot	on.	I	had	just	finished	reading	Undaunted	Courage	by	Stephen
Ambrose;	it	 was,	at	the	time,	 my	favorite	 book.	Thomas	 Jefferson	knew	that	he
had	to	take	action	to	 figure	out	 what	the	other	 half	of	 the	continent	looked	 like.
He	didn’t	 wait	 for	the	information	 to	 fall	 into	his	 lap;	he	put	together	a	corps	of
discovery,	re-sourced	 them	with	  whatever	they	 thought	 they	 needed,	and	told
them	to	go	west	and	“make	sure	they	let	him	know	 what	they	discovered	as	soon
as	they	got	back.	 They	didn’t	  spend	any	time	 obsessing	over	what	 they	would
have	to	do	at	the	other	end	of	 the	country,	or	 what	would	 happen	if	one	of	 their
men	were	 killed	 or	 captured;	they	 stayed	focused	 on	the	 situation	 in	 front	 of
them	and	adapted	as	it	unfolded.	They	got	smarter	with	every	mile	 they	traveled,
and	every	Indian	tribe	 they	encountered.	When	they	 came	to	a	fork	 in	the	river,
they	hedged;	they	always	 went	with	 the	fork	 that	would	 allow	 them	 to	take	the
most	additional	 forks.	 There	 was	no	timeline,	  and	there	was	 no	plan,	 because
Lewis	and	Clark	didn’t	 plan,	they	prepared.”16
   Everything	  was	 snapping	together.	 The	 Lewis	 and	 Clark	 expedition	 didn’t
have	a	five-hundred-page	plan	 detailing	 every	phase	of	 their	journey;	 they	 just
prepared	as	best	they	could,	and	then	developed	the	situation	as	they	went	along.
Now	we	just	had	to	figure	 out	how	to	translate	the	Lewis	and	Clark	 success	story
to	help	 us	get	 approval	 for	 our	 plan	to	 infiltrate	  and	develop	 the	 situation	 in
Afghanistan.	Of	 course,	there	was	one	major	 difference	between	then	and	now:
Thomas	Jefferson	wasn’t	risk-averse.
   Dee	 tapped	 on	 his	 watch	  to	 bring	 us	 back	 to	  the	 reality	 of	  our	 current
predicament—we	had	to	 meet	the	demands	of	 our	higher	 headquarters	and	put
together	some	kind	 of	acceptable	option.	 I	 figured	 I	would	 meet	 them	halfway
and	put	together	a	hybrid	 option	 that	was	contingent	on	 having	a	small	 team	of
two	to	 five	 men	on	 the	ground	 that	could	 build	 context	and	 then	provide	 real-
time	 information	   to	  a	 small	  raid	  force	  positioned	 somewhere	  outside	 of
Afghanistan.	 So	we	 brainstormed	how	 we	 could	infiltrate	  the	small	 raid	 force
without	 using	 helicopters	to	 get	 to	 the	target.	 Our	 maps	showed	massive	 dry
lakebeds	that	 pockmarked	 the	 desert	around	 Kandahar,	 within	 fifty	   miles	 of

80
UBL’s	 house	at	Tarnak	Farms.	17	Most	of	the	lakebeds	were	ten	kilometers	long
and	five	 kilometers	 wide	 and	 as	flat	 as	a	 pool	 table.	We	 determined	 that	 we
could	land	large	fixed-wing	 aircraft	 (C-130s)	on	these	dry	lakebeds	in	the	middle
of	the	 night	 without	 anyone	seeing	or	 hearing	us.	Once	 on	the	 ground,	the	 C-
130s	would	  regurgitate	 five	 to	 ten	 all-terrain	  vehicles,	 which	 included	 three
Toyota	Land	Cruisers	similar	 to	the	ones	UBL	 used	to	get	around.	If	the	Afghan
resistance	fighters	 were	available,	 we	 would	 link	  with	 them	 and	use	them	 as
guides	and	to	augment	our	force.	We	would	 then	drive	off-road	 across	the	desert
and	set	up	a	 hide	site;	 there	we	would	 have	 at	least	two	 options	that	 could	 be
modified	 in	 any	way	 required	based	on	 the	situation	 on	the	 ground.	Option	 A
was	to	drive	 to	UBL’s	  isolated	residence	at	Tarnak	Farms.	To	 achieve	surprise,
we’d	send	the	Land	 Cruisers	in	 the	lead,	driving	 right	 up	to	 the	entrance	of	the
compound	or	as	far	as	we	could	 go	undetected	before	initiating	 the	raid.	 Option
B	was	 to	 conduct	a	 roadside	ambush	of	 UBL’s	  vehicle	 convoy	 while	 he	was
traveling	 from	 Kandahar	to	 Khowst.	 This	 was	our	 preferred	 option	 because	it
provided	us	lots	of	 flexibility	  on	when	and	how	 to	execute,	and	it	would	 ensure,
to	 the	 highest	 degree	 possible,	 that	  no	 innocent	  civilians	  would	  get	 hurt.
Disguises,	deception,	and	diversions.	These	were	both	 highly	 workable	options.
I	quickly	 translated	the	concept	into	a	PowerPoint	 cartoon,	and	continued	to	add
details	all	the	way	up	to	the	10:00	A.M.	 deadline.
   At	 exactly	 10:00	A.M.,	 I	 let	our	 higher	headquarters	know	that	I	 was	sending
them	a	hybrid	course	of	 action.	We	called	it	 the	Lewis	 and	Clark	option,	 to	give
it	some	panache.	It	 took	 a	while	 to	 find	 someone	who	actually	 knew	 what	 we
were	working	 on,	 but	 we	finally	  found	 the	lieutenant	 colonel	 who	 had	sent	it
down	to	us	three	weeks	earlier.	He	 introduced	himself	 and	told	me	how	 busy	he
was.	“There	 is	lots	 going	on	 in	Bosnia,”	 he	 said.	When	I	 explained	why	 I	 was
calling,	he	interrupted	 me	and	said,	“Pete,	there’s	no	longer	 any	requirement	for
inputs	from	you	or	your	 team	on	that	mission.”18
   “But,	 sir?”
   “Pete,	 there’s	 no	 longer	 any	requirement	 for	 a	 concept.”	 He	sounded	 a	bit
irritated.	 Back	then,	 it	 wasn’t	 unusual	for	 real-world	  missions	like	 this	 one	to
appear	out	of	 nowhere	one	day,	and	 then	fade	away	 a	few	 days	later.	I	 wasn’t
really	 sure	 what	 to	 think	 as	 I	 hung	 up	 the	 phone.	Our	  concept	never	 went
anywhere.	I	felt	 a	bit	like	 the	guy	who	cups	his	hand	over	his	mouth	 to	smell	his
own	breath.	Was	it	me?	I	wondered.
   I	  was	 frustrated.	 But	  my	 feelings	  of	 frustration	  had	 nothing	 to	  do	 with

81
foreboding.	Instead,	 I	 considered	this	the	 holy	 grail	 of	 finding	 missions,	and	 I
didn’t	want	 our	country	to	fail.
   I	 passed	the	news	on	 to	 the	team,	and	without	  saying	a	word,	 the	 guys	just
shook	their	 heads	in	resignation	 and	started	taking	 down	the	maps	 and	erasing
everything	on	the	dry-erase	boards.	We	 kept	a	large	folding	 poster	board	with	 a
map	of	 Afghanistan	 on	 it,	 and	all	 of	 the	ideas	 and	concepts	we	 developed	in
manila	folders	pinned	 to	the	sides	of	 the	board.	Dee	kept	the	UBL	 board	folded
up	behind	his	 desk.	Three	years	would	 go	by	 before	we	would	 pull	 it	 back	out
and	once	again	direct	our	focus	on	Afghanistan	and	UBL.

82
                                                          5



                               THE	  EMBASSY	   BOMBINGS:


                     THE	ONLY	 FAILURE	  IS	A	FAILURE	 TO	TRY


                    Nairobi,	   Kenya,	  August	  7,	1998	(9:15	 A.M.)


Their	Al	 Qaeda	supervisor,	whom	they	knew	as	“Jeff,”	provided	them	with	a
comprehensive	step-by-step	plan	  for	  their	  mission.	 The	  plan	  included
surveillance	photos,	hand-drawn	sketches,	maps	of	the	city,	 and	a	timeline
covering	every	detail	of	their	mission,	including	how	many	seconds	the	traffic
lights	along	their	route	stayed	red.	They	were	strictly	forbidden	to	deviate	from
the	plan.	As	they	rounded	the	traffic	circle	in	front	of	the	embassy,	they	fixed
their	sights	on	the	rear	parking	lot	entrance	a	hundred	meters	to	the	north	of	the
compound.	The	truck	entered	the	U.S.	Embassy	parking	lot	and	immediately
accelerated	toward	the	drop-bar	gate	that	led	into	the	underground	garage	below
the	embassy	compound.	Twenty	feet	in	front	of	the	gate,	the	truck	screeched	to	a
stop.	The	passenger	jumped	out	and	ordered	the	security	guard	to	stand	up	from
his	chair	and	raise	the	gate.	Unimpressed,	the	guard	ignored	him.	Enraged	by	the
slovenly	guard’s	indifference,	the	hyped-up	passenger	quickly	became	unglued.
Things	were	not	going	as	planned;	the	passenger	panicked	and	began	throwing
concussion	grenades	at	the	guard,	firing	his	pistol	into	the	air,	and	screaming
expletives.	When	the	guard	ran	for	cover,	the	driver	also	panicked,	but	instead	of
simply	barreling	through	the	gate,	he	pulled	the	vehicle	up	parallel	to	it,	then
detonated	the	explosive	device	in	the	back	of	 the	truck.1	Unfortunately,	the
initial	grenade	blasts	and	gunfire	had	the	effect	of	bringing	people	in	the	nearby
buildings	to	their	windows	just	moments	before	the	detonation	of	the	vehicular
bomb.	This	natural	human	curiosity	cost	most	of	them	their	lives.	The	explosion
sheared	off	the	outside	of	the	U.S.	Embassy	compound	in	Nairobi	and	killed	213
people;	only	twelve	Americans	were	among	the	dead.	Minutes	later	a	similar
situation	unfolded	at	the	U.S.	Embassy	in	Tanzania.

83
   Within	   five	  hours	 of	  the	 African	  embassy	 bombings,	  the	 White	  House
situation	 room	 was	bustling	  with	 activity	  focused	 on	 rescuing	 survivors	 and
sending	relief.	One	floor	 above,	the	president	and	his	 national	security	 advisers,
who	 consisted	of	 the	 heads	of	 all	 the	 key	 agencies	involved	 in	 U.S.	 foreign
policy,	 began	assessing	the	situation	and	attempting	to	 piece	together	what	had
happened.	2	 The	  discussion	 quickly	  focused	 on	 the	  question	 of	 who	  was
responsible.	Sandy	 Berger,	the	 president’s	 national	 security	 adviser	and	 most
trusted	confidant,	  immediately	  established	a	 tightly	  compartmented	 planning
process	designed	to	 keep	 all	 planning	  secret.	Colloquially	  referred	 to	 by	 its
members	as	the	“Small	Group,”	 it	included	 the	only	individuals	  cleared	to	know
anything	about	the	 most	sensitive	issues	connected	with	 planning	a	response	to
the	embassy	bombings.	The	Small	Group	consisted	of	Berger,	like	 the	president,
a	career	lawyer	 and	politician;	 Secretary	 of	State	Madeleine	 Albright,	  a	career
Washington,	D.C.,	insider	and	academic;	Secretary	of	Defense	William	 Cohen,	a
career	politician;	 CIA	 director	 George	Tenet,	a	career	congressional	staffer;	the
chairman	of	 the	Joint	Chiefs	 of	 Staff,	General	 Henry	Shelton,	 a	career	military
officer;	  and	 National	   Security	 Council	   member	 Richard	  Clarke,	  a	 career
bureaucrat	in	Washington,	D.C.



                               Week	  1	(Post-Embassy	     Bombings)


Seventy-two	hours	after	the	bombing,	Kenyan	 police	detained	Mohamed	Rashed
Daoud	al	 Owhali,	 the	 Yemeni	 national	 who	rode	 in	 the	truck	 that	 carried	 the
Nairobi	 bomb.	After	 he	 panicked	and	started	shooting	 at	the	guard	and	 tossing
concussion	grenades,	he	did	what	 most	suicide	 bombers	do	when	 given	a	 split
second	to	reflect:	he	ran	away.	 In	his	sworn	 statement,	Owhali	described	the	Al
Qaeda-	affiliated	terrorist	 camps	that	he	attended	in	 Afghanistan	to	 prepare	him
for	the	operation.	He	also	underscored	that	only	bad	luck	and	the	terrorists’	 strict
adherence	to	the	overly	rigid	plan	 that	their	supervisor	Jeff	had	put	 together,	had
prevented	the	bombing	from	being	much	worse.
   For	 the	bomb	 to	have	achieved	maximum	 damage	against	its	intended	 target
(the	American	 embassy	and	its	 staff)	 it	 had	to	 detonate	in	the	 garage,	directly
under	 the	  embassy.	 But	  due	 to	  the	 compartmented	  nature	 of	  Al	  Qaeda
information	 exchange—the	two	terrorists	 were	briefed	 by	their	 superiors	on	the
actual	plan	 only	  three	days	 before	 they	 had	 to	 execute	it—they	  were	 never

84
provided	with	 any	latitude	for	 a	plan	B.	When	the	smallest	of	details	didn’t	 go	as
planned	(the	uncooperative	guard	not	responding	to	their	demands),	the	terrorists
weren’t	able	 to	go	with	 the	flow	  and	come	up	with	 alternative	 options	(such	as
simply	 walking	 up	 to	 and	raising	 the	 gate	themselves	after	 the	 guard	ran	 for
cover).	With	no	options,	 they	had	no	choices,	so	they	panicked	and	detonated	the
bomb	  prematurely.	  Perhaps	 the	  biggest	  break	 in	   the	 embassy	  bombing
investigation	was	 the	interception	of	 a	congratulatory	 phone	call	 from	UBL	  the
day	after	 the	bombings.	 3	The	 intercepted	phone	 call	 and	interrogation	 of	 the
captured	member	of	 the	 bombing	 team	led	 to	 the	inescapable	conclusion	 that
UBL	and	Al	 Qaeda	were	directly	responsible.4
   Sandy	Berger	 made	it	clear	to	 the	Small	Group	 that	they	needed	to	develop	a
plan	to	respond	to	the	bombings	as	quickly	as	possible.	With	the	question	of	who
being	firmly	  established,	the	 Small	 Group	quickly	  began	discussing	the	 what.
Specifically,	  what	   should	 be	  done	  in	  response?	 The	  Small	  Group	  met
sporadically	 during	  the	first	  week	 to	 accommodate	 the	 extraordinarily	  busy
administrative	 schedules	of	each	of	 the	principals,	 and	thus	were	 never	able	to
focus	on	the	situation	for	more	than	a	few	hours	at	a	time.	During	 that	first	week,
General	Shelton	briefed	the	group	on	a	plan	that	he	and	his	staff	 at	the	Pentagon
developed	for	 a	 large	military	  raid	 into	 Afghanistan.	 5	 Berger	 and	the	 Small
Group	quickly	  dismissed	 the	concept	 based	on	 the	massive	 size	of	 the	 force
required,	and	the	time	required	to	 assemble	the	force,	which	didn’t	 jibe	 with	 the
group’s	perceived	 need	to	do	 something	quickly.	  Berger	was	clearly	 frustrated
with	 the	lack	 of	 options	 and	would	  later	reflect:	  “What	 we	 needed	most	was
actionable	intelligence	on	bin	Laden’s	 precise	location.”	6



                                     Week	  2	 After	   the	 Bombings


On	August	17	the	Small	Group	met	again.	CIA	 director	George	Tenet	briefed	the
rest	of	the	 group	on	 new	intelligence	 that	claimed	 UBL	 and	a	 large	number	of
terrorist	leaders	were	going	 to	meet	at	a	camp	near	Khowst,	 Afghanistan.	 Tenet
claimed	 that	 several	hundred	 would	  attend.	Tenet’s	  PowerPoint	 presentation
showed	satellite	photos	of	seventeen	medieval-looking	 buildings	 carved	into	the
side	of	a	barren	ridgeline.	 Almost	 immediately	 after	seeing	the	photos,	National
Security	Council	 member	 Richard	Clarke	 leaned	over	 to	Tenet	and	 whispered,

85
“You	 thinking	  what	I’m	  thinking?”	  The	 director	 of	 the	CIA	  nodded	his	 head
sagaciously,	while	  mouthing	 the	 word	 “yes.”7	  They	 were	referring	  to	 cruise
missiles.	Smug	with	the	prospects	of	good	 idea	ownership,	the	Small	Group	saw
no	reason	to	consider	 other	options.	 There	wasn’t	 even	much	debate	about	 the
credibility	 of	 the	intelligence,	 which	was	purportedly	 predicting	 UBL’s	 location
three	days	in	  the	future.	 There	 also	was	 no	 mention	 that	 until	 this	 point,	 no
intelligence	 source	had	accurately	predicted	 where	UBL	  would	 be	as	many	 as
twenty-four	 hours	in	 advance.	The	recommendation	 to	the	 president	was	to	 go
forward	 with	  planning	  for	  a	 cruise	 missile	  attack	 whether	 there	 was	 firm
evidence	of	the	presence	of	UBL	and	his	lieutenants	or	not.8
   Although	  the	Small	Group	 possessed	a	basic	grasp	of	terrorist	doctrine,	there
was	a	 dearth	 of	 real-world	  experience	in	 counterterrorism	  operations	among
them,	and	none	of	the	 members	possessed	even	a	nanosecond	of	on-the-ground
experience	in	Afghanistan.9	 The	 strictly	 enforced	compartmentalized	 nature	of
their	planning	 process	prevented	 them	from	 exposure	 to	and	 interactions	with
those	who	understood	the	nuanced	context	of	UBL,	 Al	 Qaeda,	and	Afghanistan.
There	were	 reams	 of	 context-specific	  information	  available	  from	 the	 CIA’s
recently	  established	 UBL	   section,	  but	  that	 information	   also	  was	  tightly
compartmentalized	and	 was	not	 being	 shared	with	 either	 the	 Small	 Group	 or
with	the	other	government	agencies	involved	in	 the	planning	such	as	the	military
and	Department	of	State.10
   Based	primarily	  on	the	recommendations	of	 the	Small	Group,	 the	decision	to
use	cruise	missiles	to	strike	what	 were	now	being	 called	“the	bin	 Laden	camps”
near	Khowst,	 Afghanistan,	 and	a	pharmaceutical	 plant	in	 Sudan,	was	finalized
on	August	 20,	 1998.11	 The	goal	 of	 the	 operation,	officially	   called	 Operation
Infinite	  Reach,	was	 to	  prove	 that	 the	 United	 States	 would	 retaliate	  against
terrorists	and	 those	who	 supported	them.	 Later	that	 night,	 navy	 vessels	in	the
Arabian	Sea	launched	scores	of	cruise	missiles	at	the	two	targets.	In	all,	seventy-
six	 BGM-109C/D	  Tomahawk	 Block	  III	 cruise	 missiles	 were	 launched,	at	 an
estimated	cost	of	 $750,000	 apiece,	for	 a	total	 of	 $57	 million.	  12	Most	 of	 the
cruise	missiles	  successfully	 hit	 their	 predesignated	 targets,	and	 as	 expected,
destroyed	the	medieval-looking	  buildings.	 None	 of	 the	missiles	 came	close	to
hitting	 UBL	  or	any	 of	 his	 top	 lieutenants,	who	 weren’t	 anywhere	 near	either
location	at	the	time	the	missiles	struck	the	targets.
   The	 cruise	 missile	  response	wasn’t	 just	 inefficient	  and	 ineffective,	  it	 was

86
hugely	counterproductive.	Afterward,	  UBL	 and	his	key	lieutenants	realized	with
great	certitude	that	 they	were	the	 primary	 targets	of	the	 American	military	  and
technological	 juggernaut.	  As	 a	  result,	 UBL’s	   inward-facing	  paranoia	 went
global.	 After	 the	 cruise	 missile	 attacks,	 UBL	  stopped	using	 his	 satellite	 cell
phone,	which	up	 to	that	point	 had	provided	 the	only	 empirical	confirmations	  of
his	location	 or	intent.	 He	 also	stopped	traveling	 in	 his	obtrusively	 conspicuous
Toyota	Land	 Cruiser	convoy.	 UBL	 now	 knew	 he	was	a	wanted	 man,	and	men
who	know	they’re	 wanted	are	very	hard	to	capture.
   To	 the	 Small	Group,	 the	plan	 to	use	cruise	 missiles	worked	 fine;	 it	 was	the
intelligence	 that	 had	 failed.	  They	 doubled	 down	  on	 prioritizing	  “actionable
intelligence”	 as	the	precursor	for	 approving	 any	future	operations	against	UBL.
The	U.S.	 intelligence	  community	 officially	   defines	 the	concept	 of	 actionable
intelligence	 as	“an	awareness	of	 information	 that	 predicts	the	 location,	timing,
and	intentions	of	an	individual	 or	 group.”	 To	those	of	us	outside	the	intelligence
community,	  this	  definition	   is	 more	  appropriately	  matched	  with	  the	  term
clairvoyance,	and	common	sense	tells	us	that	there’s	no	such	thing.
   Having	  learned	 the	lesson	 of	 the	 cruise	 missile	 myth	 from	 the	 real-world
school	 of	 hard	 knocks,	  the	 president	 asked	 the	 Small	 Group	  if	  perhaps	a
commando	raid	was	possible.	The	compartmentalized	nature	of	the	Small	 Group
meant	that	President	Clinton	was	singularly	dependent	on	the	counsel	of	General
Hugh	Shelton	for	 all	 military	 advice	and	 options.	General	Shelton	informed	 the
president	that	“without	  actionable	intelligence	 on	 bin	Laden’s	 exact	location,	 a
commando	raid’s	 chance	of	failure	 is	too	 high.”	 Shelton	also	told	 the	president
that	the	use	of	 a	small	 commando	force	 was	“too	 Hollywood,”	   then	cautioned
the	president	 that	 he	 would	  go	 forward	  with	 “boots	  on	 the	 ground”	  if	 the
president	ordered	him	to	do	so;	however,	he	had	to	ensure	that	the	president	was
completely	 aware	  of	 the	  “large	  logistical	  problems	 inherent	  in	  a	 military
operation	such	 as	this	 one.”	The	 secretary	of	 defense,	William	  Cohen,	 would
later	tell	 the	9/11	Commission	 that	“the	 notion	 of	putting	 military	  personnel	on
the	ground	without	 some	reasonable	certitude	that	bin	Laden	was	in	 a	particular
location	 would	 have	resulted	in	 the	 mission’s	 failure	 and	 the	loss	of	 life	  in	 a
fruitless	effort.”13
   There	 would	 be	at	least	two	 more	prime	opportunities	 to	 capture	UBL	 in	 the
next	eighteen	months.	The	intelligence	 for	both	 operations	was	deemed	credible
by	both	 the	CIA	 officers	 working	  in	 the	region	 and	the	highly	  trained	Afghan
tribals	working	  inside	 Afghanistan.	 14	 Both	 opportunities	 involved	 options	 to

87
capture	UBL	near	Tarnak	 Farms.	The	Small	Group	subsequently	dismissed	both
opportunities	  because	they	  did	  not	  regard	 the	  intelligence	  as	 sufficiently
actionable	 to	 offset	  their	  concerns	 with	  the	 risks	  involved.	  Based	 on	 the
perceived	lack	 of	 actionable	intelligence,	 the	 Small	 Group	had	 concluded	that
there	were	 no	politically	  acceptable	 options	for	  attempting	capture	 operations
against	UBL	 in	 Afghanistan.	 The	 Small	Group	 believed	 that	unless	they	 were
provided	with	 the	 exact	time	 when	UBL	 would	 be	 at	a	specific	 location	 in	the
future	(actionable	intelligence),	 then	 approving	any	type	 of	operation	 to	capture
UBL	  was	too	  risky	 and	 thus	 too	 politically	   hazardous.	The	 Small	  Group’s
obsession	with	actionable	intelligence	had	turned	into	 an	intellectual	 straitjacket.
By	 narrowly	 defining	  the	target	 opportunities	 to	 a	specific	 point	  in	 time	 and
location,	 they	  were	 in	 turn	  making	  the	 actionable	 intelligence	  requirement
theoretically	 impossible	to	 satisfy.15	 They	failed	 to	 realize	that	 they	had	 time.
They	had	plenty	 of	 time	 to	build	 better	 situational	 awareness	and	discover	the
numerous	options	 and	 opportunities	 available	 to	 capture	 UBL	  prior	 to	 9/11.
From	 the	  first	  U.S.	  government	  planning	  session	 following	   the	 embassy
bombings	in	 August	 1998	to	 the	terrorist	 attacks	 of	September	11,	 2001,	they
had	more	than	three	years.
   In	 the	end,	the	Small	Group	decided	that	both	Afghanistan	 and	Al	Qaeda	were
impenetrable.	 They	 had	 overreacted	 by	 firing	  the	 cruise	 missiles;	 they	  had
underreacted	to	 the	 two	 additional	 prime	  opportunities	 to	 capture	UBL	  near
Tarnak	Farms;	and	in	 the	end,	they	 decided	to	do	 nothing.	 By	staying	 “small,”
secretive,	and	 compartmentalized,	 they	 made	 all	  their	 decisions	 without	  the
reality-revealing	 benefit	of	 context.	The	Small	 Group,	and	by	 default,	the	entire
United	States	government,	was	treed	by	a	chihuahua.

88
                                                          6



                       THE	  INFILTRATION	       OF	 AL	 QAEDA:


                     DISCOVERING	 THE	 ART	OF	THE	 POSSIBLE


                                              December	  1998


At	 a	lunch	 between	President	Clinton	and	Pakistani	Prime	Minister	 Nawaz
Sharif	in	 December	1998,	 the	Pakistani	prime	 minister	 reflected	that	 “the
Americans	had	wasted	their	money	by	 launching	so	many	expensive	cruise
missiles.”	He	 went	 on	 to	  say,	“They	  should	have	 sent	a	 few	  men	into
Afghanistan	with	briefcases	full	of	dollars,	and	they	would	have	gotten	the	job
done.”1
   Infiltrations	  into	 known	  terrorist	 havens	such	 as	 Afghanistan,	Yemen,
Lebanon,	and	Sudan	were	deemed	to	be	“far	too	risky,”	 one	knowledgeable
individual	 later	explained.	“Prior	  to	 9/11	 there	was	no	 willingness	 to	 put
Department	of	Defense	personnel	in	such	places.	No	such	request	would	have
been	authorized.”2	Unbeknownst	to	anyone	in	the	administration,	at	that	exact
moment	the	most	unlikely	of	American	infiltrators	was	taking	his	time	to	build
context,	and	recognize	the	patterns	and	options	that	would	ultimately	allow	him
to	produce	the	holy	grail	 of	 actionable	intelligence:	a	personal	meeting	with
UBL.
   When	he	left	 for	Yemen,	he	didn’t	 have	a	plan.	Pressed	by	his	mother	for
specifics,	he	told	her	“he	knew	what	he	wanted	to	do,	but	had	no	idea	how	he
would	do	it.”	At	this	point	in	his	life	he	had	made	up	his	mind	that	he	wanted	to
be	part	of	the	Islamic	fundamentalist	movement.	John	Walker	Lindh	was	a	tall,
dark,	and	gangly	seventeen-year-old.	He	was	also,	by	any	measure,	a	troubled
youth.	Born	  in	 blue-collar	 Maryland,	 and	transplanted	to	 the	 unobtrusive
opulence	of	Marin	County,	California,	he	was	never	quite	able	to	find	himself.	In
California	he	 moved	from	 school	to	 school.	He	suffered	from	 a	 variety	of

89
chronic	 illnesses,	 including	  an	 embarrassing	 gastrointestinal	 disorder	 in	  his
teenage	years	that	kept	him	in	the	 bathroom,	out	of	 school,	and	by	proxy,	 away
from	 other	kids.	 Isolated	from	 traditional	  teenage	social	networks,	movies	 and
the	Internet	became	his	social	 sanctuaries.	Surfing	through	 the	blogging	 worlds
of	 rap,	hip-hop,	  UFOWATCHERS,	  and	 CIA	  wannabes,	perhaps	it	 shouldn’t
come	as	a	surprise	that	somewhere	along	the	way	he	hyperlinked	into	the	virtual
black	hole	of	Islamic	 fundamentalism.	In	short	order	he	was	hooked.
   Although	  he	knew	 next	 to	nothing	 about	 the	Islamic	 religion	  or	culture,	 he
immersed	himself	 in	 whatever	 he	could	 find	 in	 the	 San	Francisco	 area.	As	 it
turned	out,	there	was	plenty.	He	began	by	attending	the	Mill	 Valley	 mosque	near
his	home,	where	 the	foreign	 Islamic	 network	 greeted	him	 with	 open	 arms.	He
established	contacts	 with	  numerous	 non-U.S.	  Arabs	 who	  were	 visiting	  the
United	States	for	a	variety	of	 reasons,	to	include,	in	the	case	of	most	of	them,	no
reason	at	all.	Many	 of	these	“students	of	 knowledge”	 extended	open	invitations
for	Lindh	  to	visit	 and	study	 with	 them	in	 Yemen	and	 Pakistan.	As	a	 result,	he
decided	he	 would	 travel	 to	 Yemen	 to	 study	a	 “pure	 form”	  of	 Arabic	  and	to
completely	 immerse	  himself	  in	 the	  Islamic	  culture.	 Based	 in	  part	 on	  the
recommendations	of	 his	 Arab	  contacts	and	 supplemented	by	 his	 own	 online
research,	he	decided	to	enroll	in	the	Yemen	Language	Center	in	Sana’a,	Yemen.
   Arriving	  in	 Yemen	in	June	1998k	with	 no	idea	what	 to	expect,	he	adapted	his
persona	based	on	his	own	best-guess	estimate	of	 how	to	 fit	 in.	 Calling	 himself
Suleyman	al-Lindh,	 he	dressed	in	what	 he	believed	to	 be	proper	Yemeni	 attire.
His	clothes	were	actually	 those	worn	 by	devout	Muslims	 from	 Pakistan	and	the
Indian	 subcontinent,	which	  is	somewhat	 akin	 to	 walking	  down	 the	streets	of
Buffalo	 in	December	 wearing	a	Hawaiian	 shirt.	 Recognizing	the	incongruity	  of
his	dress,	he	quickly	adjusted	his	attire	to	that	of	 the	locals.	The	clothes	were	the
least	of	 his	problems.	 His	 roommates	at	 the	 language	center	were	 an	eclectic
cohort	 of	  ex-pats	 from	 Canada,	 Northern	  Ireland,	 Great	 Britain,	   Australia,
Indonesia,	China,	 and	at	 least	two	 mysterious	 men	from	 New	 York	 State.	 He
didn’t	  get	 along	 with	  any	 of	  them.	 They	 nicknamed	 him	  Yusuf	  Islam,	 in
sarcastic	reference	to	 the	name	taken	 by	 folk	 singer	 Cat	Stevens,	perhaps	the
most	renowned	celebrity	convert	 to	Islam.	His	 fellow	 ex-pats	continued	to	enjoy
many	 of	 the	 social	 accoutrements	of	  the	 Western	way	  of	 life—specifically,
socializing	  and	 sex.	 Lindh	   had	 little	   patience	 for	  these	 types	 of	  secular
dalliances.	Rather	than	trying	to	change	the	unchangeable,	he	dropped	out	of	the
school	and	looked	elsewhere	for	a	better	fit	and	better	options.
   He	 began	probing	the	 off-limits	  sections	of	the	city.	 Sana’a	was	a	dangerous

90
place,	especially	 for	 a	foreigner	 without	  local	 guides.	Tribal	  kidnappings	 and
other	politically	 motivated	 killings	 were	common	in	 and	around	the	city.	But	 the
American	 teenager	pressed	on.	He	 eventually	 located	a	 Salafi	 mosque	on	 the
edge	of	town	and	began	attending	the	all-day	prayer	sessions.	Its	bleached-white
walls	and	complete	lack	of	 furnishings	reflected	the	sect’s	strict	 adherence	to	the
belief	 that	 any	 and	 all	 types	 of	 comfort	  items	 were	 heresy.3	The	 extremist
rhetoric	and	 connections	Lindh	 made	 at	this	 mosque	would	 eventually	 expose
him	to	 the	teachings	of	 a	fiery	 political	  leader,	Sheikh	al-Zindani,	 whose	 ideas
closely	paralleled	 those	of	 UBL.	 The	 connections	Lindh	 made	with	 al-Zindani
followers	formed	 key	nodes	and	pathways	he	could	tap	into	whenever	needed	as
he	continued	his	 journey	into	 the	deepest	bowels	of	 the	Islamic	 fundamentalist
network.	  Yet	  it	  wasn’t	  the	 connections	  he	 was	  making	  in	  the	 heart	  of
fundamentalist	Islam	 that	would	  ultimately	 lead	him	 to	 his	final	  destination	in
Afghanistan.	That	 option	would	 avail	 itself	 to	him	 upon	his	return	 to	California
in	May	1999.



                                               Yemen,	  May	   1999


In	May	 1999,	Lindh	 was	out	of	 money	and	out	of	 options	that	would	 allow	 him
to	continue	moving	 forward	 in	 his	quest.	So	 he	did	what	 many	teenagers	do	in
this	type	of	 predicament:	 he	returned	to	his	 parents’	home	 in	California	  to	buy
time	while	 he	figured	things	 out.	He	spent	the	next	seven	months	living	 with	 his
mother	in	 San	Francisco.	Although	  frustrated	by	 his	 geographical	and	cultural
separation	from	 the	heart	 of	 Islam,	it	 was	 here,	in	 the	placid	 wine	 country	 of
northern	California,	 that	he	would	discover	the	option	that	would	 ultimately	 pave
his	path	into	the	frontier	 areas	of	Pakistan	and	Afghanistan.	In	early	fall	1999	the
Mill	 Valley	  mosque	hosted	a	small	contingent	 of	 traveling	missionaries	 from	 a
group	called	 Tablighi	  Jama’at.	A	 Pakistani	 businessman	named	Khizar	 Hayat
was	a	member	of	the	group.	Hayat	and	Lindh	 hit	if	 off	immediately.	 They	talked
for	hours,	 and	before	leaving,	 Hayat	 invited	 Lindh	 to	come	 to	his	 home	in	 the
Northwest	Frontier	 Province	of	 Pakistan,	to	stay	with	 Hayat	 as	his	guest.	Lindh
recognized	the	invitation	as	the	opportunity	he	had	been	waiting	for.



                                                  February	    2000

91
Just	shy	of	 his	 nineteenth	 birthday,	 Lindh	 returned	 to	Yemen	 to	 continue	 his
religious	 studies	at	Al-Iman	  University.	 The	 cosmopolitan	student	 body	at	 Al-
Iman	consisted	of	five	 thousand	men	and	women	from	more	than	fifty	 countries,
including	 a	sizable	 contingent	 from	 the	 United	 States.	After	 seven	months	 of
study,	Lindh	called	 his	friend	Hayat	 in	Bannu,	Pakistan,	to	tell	 him	he	wanted	to
take	him	up	on	 his	offer	 and	continue	his	studies,	and	his	journey,	 in	Pakistan.4
On	 October	 15	  Hayat	 met	 Lindh	  at	  the	 Islamabad	 airport.	  The	 two	  men
immediately	set	out	to	 find	the	“best	 fit”	 madrassal	for	Lindh.	 Lindh	 rejected	all
of	them,	telling	 Hayat	that	for	 now	 he	would	rather	stay	close	to	Hayat’s	 side	in
Bannu	until	he	could	figure	 things	out.
   Bannu	 is	a	gateway	town	 into	 the	Northwest	 Frontier	Province	 (NWFP),	 one
of	the	last	truly	 nongoverned	sociogeographic	enclaves	of	significant	 size	left	on
the	 planet.	 Despite	 living	  in	  one	 of	  the	 most	 isolated	 and	 technologically
obsolescent	areas	of	the	world,	 Lindh	 was	able	to	locate	 an	Internet	café	in	 the
middle	of	Bannu,	where	he	began	e-mailing	his	 mother	every	Thursday	night.	At
times	 Lindh’s	  e-mails	 to	 his	  mother	 read	 more	 like	 a	 war	  correspondent’s
dispatches	from	  the	 front.	 In	  October	 2000,	 he	 shared	his	 thoughts	 on	 the
bombing	 of	 the	 USS	 Cole.	  At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 U.S.	  presidential	 election	 in
November	2000,	 he	 e-mailed	his	 mother	 and	 referred	to	 George	 W.	 Bush	as
“your	 new	president”	 and	added,	“I’m	 glad	he’s	 not	mine.”	 Although	 sending	a
message	could	sometimes	take	hours	on	 the	overburdened	copper	 wire	 dial-up
connection,	Lindh	 soon	became	known	as	something	of	 a	computer	whiz	 to	the
locals.	As	word	of	 his	skills	spread,	locals	began	bringing	their	computers	to	him
for	maintenance	and	repair.	Here	in	 the	most	secure	terrorist	sanctuary	on	earth,
the	inhabitants	 were	 handing	over	 their	 computers,	 and	by	 default	 their	  hard
drives,	to	an	 enterprising	American	 teenager	for	maintenance	and	repair.	 Lindh
was	once	again	plugged	into	the	World	Wide	Web,	and	he	was	communicating.
   Within	   a	 few	 months	 Lindh	  was	 able	 to	 locate	 and	 enroll	 in	  a	 Koranic
memorization	 school	 a	 short	 distance	 from	  Hayat’s	 home	 in	 Bannu.	  While
listening	 intently	  to	 his	 fellow	  students’	 Pollyannaish	 stories	 of	 the	 Taliban
movement	in	 Afghanistan,	Lindh	  became	enthralled	by	Taliban	 dogma.	Fellow
students	encouraged	him	 to	join	  the	Taliban’s	  movement	in	 Afghanistan,	 and
volunteered	information	  on	 how	to	 contact	 and	enroll	 in	 the	 terrorist	 training
camps	near	the	border	city	of	Peshawar	(see	Map	3).
   In	 June	2001,	Lindh	 bid	his	 friend	and	companion	 Hayat	farewell	 and	set	out
for	 the	 main	  terrorist	 training	  camp	 in	  Peshawar.	When	  he	 arrived	 at	 the

92
Peshawar	camp,	 the	 terrorists	 running	  the	 camp	 told	 him	  that	 it	 would	  be
difficult	 for	 him	to	 work	directly	 with	 the	Afghan	 Taliban	unless	he	could	speak
Pashtu,	Dari,	 or	 Urdu	 (dialects	 spoken	 by	 the	Afghan	  Taliban).	 Since	 Lindh
could	speak	only	 Arabic,	 the	 cadre	recommended	that	he	 join	 UBL’s	 Arab	 Al
Qaeda	forces	instead.	Lindh	enthusiastically	agreed.
   A	 few	 days	later	a	guide	arrived	 in	a	small	pickup	 truck	 to	drive	 Lindh	to	 the
Pakistani	border	 town	  of	 Torkham	  (see	Map	 3).	 To	  bypass	the	 perfunctory
border	 checkpoint	 in	  the	 valley	  below,	  they	 left	  the	 truck	  and	 climbed	 a
zigzagging	footpath	 up	and	over	the	sparsely	vegetated	hills.	 Once	at	the	top	of
the	 mountain	 they	  followed	  the	  path	 through	  the	 maze	 of	  towering	  rock
escarpments	that	 obscured	 the	 trail	 from	  below.	  Lindh	 had	 never	 hiked	  in
mountains	before.	Once	across	the	border,	a	few	 kilometers	inside	 Afghanistan,
the	guide	pointed	Lindh	 in	 the	general	direction	 of	the	nearest	Afghan	 road	and
instructed	him	 to	 find	 his	 own	 transportation	 (a	bus	 or	 a	taxi)	 to	 Al	 Qaeda’s
headquarters	near	the	Afghanistan	capital	of	Kabul.
   With	 only	 the	clothes	on	his	back,	and	a	small	bag	containing	his	 Koran	and	a
few	personal	items,	Lindh	 arrived	 at	Al	 Qaeda’s	headquarters	outside	Kabul	the
next	day.	After	  volunteering	 his	services,	he	was	quickly	  processed	and	issued
an	“assault	vest”	to	carry	canteens	and	AK-47	 magazines,	of	which	he	had	none.
After	putting	 the	vest	on,	the	Al	 Qaeda	cadre	informed	him	that	by	accepting	the
equipment,	he	 was	considered	 an	official	   member	of	 Al	  Qaeda.	Once	 again,
Lindh	readily	 agreed.
   From	 Kabul,	 Lindh	 headed	south	to	the	Al	 Farooq	terrorist	 training	camp.	Al
Farooq	was	just	west	of	Kandahar	and	UBL’s	  home	at	Tarnak	Farms.	The	camp
was	 teeming	 with	  activity:	  Saudis,	 Iraqis,	  Pakistanis,	 and	 Uzbeks	 were	 in
attendance.	Although	 the	 days	were	 long	 and	 strenuous,	the	 food	 rotten	 and
scarce,	and	living	 conditions	 overcrowded	 and	austere,	the	slightly	 built	 Lindh
endured,	and	at	times	even	seemed	to	thrive.
   UBL	  visited	the	camp	 at	regular	intervals,	 always	surrounded	by	five	 heavily
armed	Yemeni	bodyguards.	Although	 UBL	 appeared	sickly	 to	Lindh,	 he	always
took	time	to	 lecture	the	recruits	on	his	 latest	caliphate	dogma.	At	 the	end	of	one
these	diatribes	UBL	 extended	an	 open	invitation	 to	 any	 student	interested	in	 a
personal	meeting	 with	 him.	 An	 option	 he	could	 not	 refuse,	Lindh	  once	again
acquiesced.
   After	  a	cursory	pat-down	 by	the	Yemeni	 guards,	Lindh	 entered	a	dilapidated
shack	on	the	periphery	of	the	compound.	Inside	the	shack,	UBL	 sat	cross-legged
in	the	 middle	 of	 the	 dusty	floor.	  Lindh	 sat	 directly	 in	 front	 of	 him.	 The	 two

93
began	conversing	in	 the	universal	 small	 talk	of	 commanders	and	subordinates.
“Where	 are	you	from?”	  UBL	 asked	Lindh.	  “Ireland”	 was	 the	bizarre	 response
that	Lindh	 blurted	 out.	 Not	much	 is	known	 about	 the	rest	of	 the	conversation.
Did	UBL	 tap	into	Lindh’s	 on-the-ground	 knowledge	of	the	West?	Did	 he	bounce
ideas	and	concepts	for	 future	 terrorist	operations	 off	 the	unwitting	  Lindh?	 Did
UBL	 mention	  anything	 about	 the	 impending	 cataclysm	 less	 than	 sixty	 days
away?	Only	 Lindh	 and	 UBL	 know	 for	  sure,	but	 we	are	 sure	that	the	 British-
tutored	 UBL,	 the	 head	 of	 the	 most	 treacherous	terrorist	 organization	 on	 the
planet,	accepted	the	bizarrely	 shallow	 cover	 story	 of	Lindh	  without	 challenge.
We	know	 this	 because	after	the	meeting	adjourned,	 both	individuals	  continued
uninterrupted	toward	their	dates	with	destiny.
   Just	like	 that,	the	twenty-year-old	 Lindh	had	done	it.	 In	less	than	a	month,	and
without	  any	  external	  support	 or	  technology,	  the	  American	  teenager	 had
successfully	  infiltrated	    both	   the	   “impenetrable”	    terrorist	   sanctuary	   of
Afghanistan	 and	 the	 “impenetrable”	  terrorist	 cabal	 of	  Al	 Qaeda.	 Lindh	 had
developed	the	  situation	 all	  the	 way	 from	  California	  to	  Al	  Qaeda-occupied
Afghanistan,	where	the	holy	grail	 of	options—a	meeting	 with	UBL—had	 availed
itself	to	him.
   What	  might	 have	been	 if	 an	 actual	 U.S.	 government	covert	 operative	 had
replaced	 Lindh?	 The	  one-on-one	 meeting	 with	  UBL	  could	  have	 presented
numerous	additional	options.	Perhaps	the	operative	could	have	chosen	the	option
of	simply	 confirming	  UBL’s	 presence	by	 sitting	 passively	through	 the	meeting
and	siphoning	as	much	information	 as	he	could	draw	 out	of	 the	unwitting	 UBL,
after	which	 he	could	 have	communicated	 the	truly	  actionable	intelligence	 to	 a
ready	and	waiting	capture	force	poised	nearby.	On	the	other	hand,	the	agent	may
have	decided	that	the	one-on-one	meeting	presented	the	ultimate	 opportunity	 to
accomplish	his	overall	 objective,	 and	seized	the	moment	by	using	 something	as
simple	as	a	sharp	ballpoint	  pen	to	change	the	course	of	 world	 history.	 We	 can
only	imagine.
   John	 Walker	 Lindh’s	  unlikely	  journey	 may	seem,	 at	first	 pass,	like	  one	of
those	one	in	 a	million,	  it	 could	 never	happen	again	 stories	we	attribute	 to	 the
unlikely	 confluence	of	 luck	 and	happenstance.	But	Lindh	 was	not	alone.	 In	the
years	following	 September	11,	we	have	learned	that	more	than	a	few	American-
born	jihadists	 were	 behind	enemy	 lines	and	 inside	 Al	 Qaeda	during	 the	same
general	time	frame.
   José	Padilla,	 a	pudgy	Catholic	 kid	from	 Chicago	 with	 a	long	history	 of	street
crime,	followed	 a	path	similar	to	that	 of	John	Walker	Lindh.	 Building	 context	by

94
establishing	 contacts	  and	 discovering	  options	  through	  a	  mosque	 in	  Fort
Lauderdale,	Florida,	  Padilla	 would	 eventually	  seek	out,	 contact,	 and	join	  Al
Qaeda	completely	on	his	own.	Padilla’s	 travels	took	him	 to	Egypt,	Saudi	Arabia,
Afghanistan,	 and	 another	supposedly	 impenetrable	 country	 at	 the	 time,	 Iraq.
Then	there	was	Aqil,	a	troubled	Mexican-American	  youth	from	San	Diego	found
in	an	Afghan	 training	 camp	fraternizing	 with	 one	of	 the	men	accused	of	killing
journalist	  Daniel	  Pearl.	 Hiram	  Torres,	  also	 known	  as	  Mohamed	 Salman,
graduated	first	 in	 his	New	 Jersey	high	 school	 class	and	 briefly	 attended	Yale
before	dropping	 out	 and	heading	 to	Pakistan	 in	 1998.	He	 has	not	 been	heard
from	since.	According	 to	U.S.	News	and	World	 Report,	an	Algerian	 government
witness	claims	to	have	seen	“some	black	Americans”	 training	 at	Al	 Qaeda	bases
in	 Sudan	and	 Pakistan.	 Adam	 Gahahn,	 twenty-five,	  also	attended	 Al	  Qaeda
training	camps	in	 Afghanistan	 and	served	as	an	Al	Qaeda	translator.	According
to	the	FBI,	 he	also	was	associated	with	senior	Al	 Qaeda	lieutenant	Abu	Zubaida
in	Pakistan.	Last	seen	near	his	home	in	 Southern	California	 in	1998,	 as	of	2008
he	was	still	 an	active	member	of	 Al	 Qaeda,	living	 somewhere	in	the	 Northwest
Frontier	Province.5
   The	 first	 reaction	 of	 many	 when	 they	learn	 the	 details	of	 these	astounding
infiltrations	 is	“you	 couldn’t	 have	planned	something	like	 that!”	 That	reaction	is
as	profound	as	it	 is	 exactly	right:	 none	of	 the	American	 “jihadists”	  could	 have
planned	what	they	 ultimately	 accomplished—not	 because	they	couldn’t	 work	 a
plan,	but	because	when	it	comes	to	dealing	with	complexity,	 traditional	 planning
simply	 does	 not	 work.	  So	 how	 did	  they	 succeed	where	 our	 highly	  skilled
government	  planners	 so	  deftly	   failed?	  They	  used	  common	  sense—they
developed	the	situation!


                                   GUIDING-PRINCIPLE	     LESSON:


	
                                When	 in	Doubt,	 Develop	 the	Situation
	
Developing	  the	 situation	  is	  the	  common-sense	 approach	 to	  dealing	  with
complexity.	Both	 a	method	and	a	mind-set,	it	uses	time	and	our	minds	to	actively
build	context,	so	that	we	can	recognize	patterns,	discover	options,	and	master	the
future	as	it	unfolds	in	front	 of	us.
   It’s	 the	method	Lewis	 and	Clark	used	to	discover	a	path	to	the	Pacific;	 it’s	 the

95
mind-set	John	Walker	 Lindh	 used	to	explore	Islam;	 and	it	 was	both	the	method
and	the	mind-set	that	I	and	my	small	 team	of	Delta	thinkers	 used	as	we	searched
for	a	way	to	find	 UBL.	 Understanding	what	 you’re	looking	 for	 is	helpful	 but	not
required.	All	 that’s	needed	is	the	motivation	to	find	 your	path.
   Whether	 you’re	 discovering	 a	continent,	 exploring	 new	 directions	 in	life,	  or
searching	for	ways	to	solve	complex	 problems,	your	 thinking,	 like	that	of	 Lewis
and	 Clark,	  John	 Walker	  Lindh,	  and	 Delta	  Force	 should	  shift	 away	  from
traditional	 planning	processes	and	focus	squarely	in	 the	direction	 of	developing
the	 situation.	 Despite	 the	 perceived	 lack	  of	 structure	 involved,	  the	 relative
advantages	of	  developing	  the	 situation	  over	  traditional	  planning	  are	 both
significant	and	self-evident.	The	advantages	include,	but	are	not	limited	 to:
       1.	 Innovation:	   discovering	 innovative	 options	 instead	of	 being	 forced	 to
           default	 to	the	status	quo.
       2.	 Adaptation:	   freedom	of	 choice	and	 flexibility	  to	 adapt	to	uncertainties
           instead	of	avoiding	 them	because	they	weren’t	part	of	the	plan.
       3.	  Audacity:	    having	  the	  audacity	 to	  seize	  opportunities,	  instead	 of
           neglecting	 them	due	to	risk	aversion	and	fear	of	the	unknown.
	
   Innovation:	    Developing	 the	 situation	 optimizes	 our	 potential	  to	 recognize
patterns	and	discover	 innovative	 options	because	it’s	 synergistic	 with	 how	 the
human	mind	 thinks	 and	 makes	decisions.	As	 my	 Unit	  psychologist	 so	sagely
shared,	the	human	mind	 works	 in	 three	 elementary	phases:	saturate,	incubate,
and	illuminate.	  Time	 allows	 us	to	 saturate	our	 mind	 with	 context,	 so	we	 can
incubate	and	spark	 the	eureka	 moments	of	 illumination	  that	 connect	the	 dots,
snap	together	patterns,	and	discover	the	options	 that	allow	 us	to	find	 our	 paths.
When	we	 understand	that	 most	time	 constraints	 in	 life	 are	 self-generated,	we
understand	that	we	almost	always	have	time	to	develop	 the	situation,	whether	in
three	minutes,	three	weeks,	or	three	years.
   Think	  of	 developing	 the	situation	 as	enlightened	 procrastination.	 Instead	of
indecision,	going	 off	 half-cocked,	 or	doing	 nothing,	 we	understand	that	time	 is
an	ally	 that	allows	 us	to	actively	 build	 context	 and	uncover	 the	options	hidden
from	 those	who	 create	“traditional	  plans”	 based	on	 limited	 information	  that’s
frozen	  in	  the	 past—before	  most	  options	  and	  opportunities	  have	 availed
themselves.	Developing	the	situation	treats	life	like	 a	movie,	not	a	snapshot.
	
   Adaptation:	   Happenstance,	nature,	and	human	behavior	all	interact	within	 an
environment	to	 constantly	alter	 the	situation.	 No	environment	 is	ever	static.	 As

96
the	 environment	 around	 us	 changes,	 developing	 the	  situation	 allows	  us	 to
maintain	our	most	prized	freedom:	 the	freedom	of	choice—to	 adapt	our	thinking
and	decision-making	accordingly.
   Actively	  developing	 the	situation	 on	the	 ground	allows	 us	to	influence	 life’s
underlying	patterns	as	they	are	emerging,	so	we	can	create	and	explore	as	many
options	as	needed	to	find	our	path.	Options	beget	options;	think	 Lewis	and	Clark
with	every	 Indian	tribe	 and	every	fork	in	 the	river	 they	encountered.	Think	John
Walker	Lindh	  with	 the	acquaintances	he	made,	the	schools	he	enrolled	 in,	 and
the	terror	camps	he	haunted.	Think	 of	all	 the	successes	you’ve	had	in	your	 own
life.
   Developing	  the	 situation	  provides	 us	 with	  the	 freedom	 and	 flexibility	   to
choose	and	hedge	as	many	options	as	possible.	Options	provide	us	with	choices,
and	choices	allow	us	to	adapt	to	the	naturally	 unfolding	 opportunities	 in	front	 of
us	instead	of	being	 forced	to	 bypass	them	because	they	aren’t	 part	of	 the	plan.
This	means	we	 should	 feel	comfortable	 changing	 our	 minds	and	 our	 methods
and,	whenever	possible,	 hedging	our	 options.	 When	confronted	 with	 obstacles
and	uncertainties,	 both	 Lewis	  and	 Clark	 and	 John	 Walker	 Lindh	  constantly
hedged	their	options,	going	backward	at	times	when	things	 weren’t	working	 out,
to	find	 a	better	option	to	enable	them	to	continue	 on	their	way.	 Hedging	options
allows	 us	to	 buy	 time	 and	its	 offspring—context—by	   avoiding	 arbitrary	 time
constraints	that	lock	us	into	 a	single	choice,	such	as	firing	 cruise	missiles,	 when
we	aren’t	 sure	what’s	 actually	  going	on	 around	 us	and	we	 aren’t	 prepared	to
blindly	 commit.	Remember	that	the	act	of	choosing	determines	success	or	failure
in	life;	 freedom	of	choice	is	common	sense.
	
   Audacity:	   Audacity	 isn’t	 taking	 senseless	risks,	or	being	 rash;	it’s	 a	 natural
byproduct	of	developing	 the	situation	and	understanding	what’s	going	on	 around
us.	Audacity	 is	really	 just	 another	name	for	 courage	of	 our	convictions	 to	 take
action!
   Risk	  aversion	and	 fear	 of	 the	 unknown	 are	 direct	 symptoms	 of	 a	 lack	 of
context,	and	are	the	polar	 opposites	of	audacity.	The	 way	to	 deal	with	 a	fear	of
the	unknown	isn’t	 to	 avoid	it	 by	doing	 nothing,	 as	our	military	 and	presidential
planners	did	after	 the	cruise	missile	 strike	 in	the	 late	’90s.	 The	optimal	 way	 to
deal	with	 the	unknown	 is	to	 do	what	Lewis	 and	Clark,	 and	John	Walker	 Lindh
did:	take	action	to	develop	the	situation	and	make	the	unknown	the	known.
   Whether	 in	combat,	business,	or	your	personal	life,	 to	master	any	situation,	no
matter	how	 complex;	learn	 the	lesson	of	 Delta	Force,	 of	Lewis	 and	 Clark,	and

97
even	John	Walker	Lindh:	When	in	 doubt,	develop	the	situation!

98
                                                          7



                                      WALKING	     THE	  BOB:


                ALWAYS	 LISTEN	 TO	THE	 GUY	ON	THE	 GROUND


                                              February	   2001


Beirut,	Grenada,	Panama,	Bogotá,	Kuwait,	Mogadishu,	and	Sarajevo—plenty	of
hot	spots	had	come	and	gone	in	the	’80s	and	’90s;	each	had	different	missions,
different	enemies,	different	 terrain,	and	required	 different	skill	  sets	around
tactics,	techniques,	and	procedures.	In	the	spring	of	2001,	no	one	had	any	idea
where	the	next	strategic	priority	would	be	for	the	United	States.	I	had	no	doubt
that	collectively	we	were	as	highly	experienced	as	any	special	mission	unit	had
ever	been.	Nevertheless,	one	of	the	most	distinctive	aspects	of	the	Unit	culture	is
that	we	never	rest	 on	our	 laurels.	Past	success	counts	for	nothing.	All	 that
matters	is	how	well	we’ll	perform	on	the	next	real-world	mission;	as	a	result,	we
were	always	stretching	ourselves	to	reach	higher	and	higher	states	of	readiness
and	proficiency.	Once	we	were	able	to	run	the	obstacle	course	in	four	minutes,
we	started	working	on	three.	Once	we	could	hit	a	target	with	two	shots	from	150
meters	while	running	at	full	speed,	we	moved	back	to	two	hundred	meters.	Once
we	gained	proficiency	in	Serbo-Croatian,	we	moved	on	to	learning	Arabic.	And
so	it	went.
   In	 the	 Unit,	 we	 had	to	 prepare	for	 any	eventuality—anytime,	anywhere,
anyhow.	As	a	commander,	I	left	the	individual	skill	 training	to	my	 men;	they
didn’t	need	me	or	anyone	else	to	tell	them	what	they	needed	to	do	to	sustain	their
individual	skills	or	how	they	should	strive	to	get	better.	My	responsibility	was	to
focus	on	our	collective	training,	to	ensure	that,	as	a	group,	we	best	prepared	for
whatever	future	missions	might	come	our	way.	We	had	some	time	set	aside
during	 the	 upcoming	 summer	 for	  what	 we	  colloquially	  referred	 to	  as
environmental	training.1	Environmental	training	described	our	philosophy	of
ensuring	that	 we	 were	 prepared	to	  conduct	operations	in	  all	  the	 major

99
environmental	categories,	which	 we	defined	as	cold	weather,	desert,	jungle,	 and
urban.	 Although	  the	  foundational	  principles	  such	  as	 surprise,	 speed,	 and
simplicity	  were	similar	  in	 all	 environments,	 from	  an	operational	 perspective,
conducting	a	raid	 in	 an	urban	environment	 is	 very	different	 from	 conducting	 a
raid	in	 a	jungle,	desert,	or	 cold-weather	environment.	 In	an	 urban	environment,
in	a	 big	city,	 we	 wore	 Italian	 suits	with	 concealed	pistols.	 We’d	 “hide”	  in	 the
open	without	  attracting	 suspicion	by	 just	 standing	 in	 front	 of	 a	 building	  and
pretending	to	talk	 on	a	cell	phone	while	 waiting	 for	 the	right	 moment	to	initiate
the	 operation.	 In	 a	 jungle	  environment	 we	  would	 wear	  specially	 patterned
camouflage	with	 foliage	attached	while	 openly	slinging	 our	 weapons	across	our
bodies	to	 keep	them	 always	ready.	 Hiding	 in	 the	 jungle	 was	an	art	 form	 that
sometimes	required	lying	 deathly	still	 for	 many	 hours	in	mud	 or	swamps	while
poisonous	snakes,	frogs,	 and	an	assortment	of	 creepy-looking	  critters	 crawled
over	and	around	our	bodies.
   Even	 though	we	were	highly	 experienced	in	all	four	 environmental	categories,
I	believed	that	 the	four	basic	categories	might	 be	too	simplistic.	 There	 is	an	old
military	 maxim	 that	when	 you	 try	to	 defend	everywhere,	 you	defend	 nowhere.
Applying	 the	 same	maxim	 toward	 preparation	 for	 real-world	  contingencies,	 I
believed	there	had	to	 be	a	better	 way	to	 focus	our	 limited	 training	 time	 on	the
most	likely	 future	 mission	environments.	 I	asked	Predator,	who	 was	one	of	 my
team	leaders	 at	 the	 time,	 to	 put	 together	 a	 diverse	 group	 of	  operators	and
specialists	from	  both	 inside	  and	 outside	 the	 Unit,	 and	 spend	 a	 few	 weeks
thinking	  about	 and	 researching	 current	  hot	 spots	 around	 the	  world.	  Their
objective	was	to	 come	up	with	 a	 recommendation	on	the	 three	or	four	 areas	of
the	world	  they	 thought	 we	 had	 the	 highest	 probability	  of	 deploying	  to	 and
conducting	an	operation	in.	 Based	on	their	recommendations,	we	would	 attempt
to	discern	what,	if	 any,	environmental	 commonalities	they	shared,	then	structure
our	 upcoming	 environmental	 training	  to	 simulate	 those	same	 conditions	 and
environments.
   After	   two	  weeks	  of	  immersing	  himself	   and	 the	  team	  in	  the	  current
socioeconomic,	political-military,	  and	environmental	situation	 around	the	planet,
Predator	came	 back	 to	 me	 with	  his	 recommendations.	 To	 determine	 which
countries	inferred	the	highest	 probability	 of	conducting	 an	operation,	he	and	his
team	used	a	common	 hypothetical	 scenario,	that	of	 a	terrorist	 or	 revolutionary
force	gaining	 control	  of	 a	WMD,	  or	 a	high-ranking	  hostage,	and	the	 country
asking	the	United	States	for	assistance	in	mitigating	 the	situation.2	His	 top	three

100
most-likely	  list	  consisted	  of	  Colombia,	  Kashmir,m	  and	  Afghanistan.	  The
common	environmental	 denominator	 among	all	 three	regions	jumped	 out	at	 us
like	a	punch	in	the	nose.
   “To	  get	 to	 the	 bad	 guys	 in	  all	 three	 areas,	you	 have	 to	 go	 through	  the
mountains.”	Predator	summed	up	at	the	end	of	the	presentation.
   No	 one	 could	 remember	the	 last	time	 we	 conducted	any	 type	 of	 collective
training	 in	  the	 mountains,	 which	  made	the	 thought	  of	 doing	  it	 even	 more
appealing	to	me.	We	 knew	 what	we	 needed	to	do,	so	we	 began	exploring	 how
we	could	 do	 it.	 We	needed	to	 find	 a	location	 that	 would	 closely	 replicate	 the
common	environmental	  peculiarities	 of	 the	mountains	 in	 Colombia,	 Kashmir,
and	Afghanistan.	I	asked	the	team	to	ensure	that	the	location	they	 recommended
was	as	difficult	to	 operate	in	and	as	unforgiving	as	possible.
   “If	  it’s	 easy	to	move	through	and	operate	in,	then	the	president	can	get	anyone
to	conduct	the	mission!”
   Using	 maps,	almanacs,	and	the	Internet,	we	searched	for	mountain	wilderness
areas	the	world	 over.	Nepal,	 New	Zealand,	 and	Alaska	 all	 came	close,	but	the
corner	of	the	world	we	 chose	to	cavort	in	was	the	Bob	Marshall	Wilderness	 Area
in	Montana.	 The	Bob	Marshall	 has	it	 all:	 rugged	peaks,	alpine	lakes,	cascading
waterfalls,	 and	grassy	meadows	spread	throughout	 towering	 coniferous	 forests
and	massive	river	valleys.	 The	Bob	 Marshall	 is	one	of	 the	most	fully	 preserved
mountain	ecosystems	in	the	world.	 The	total	 landmass	is	1,535,352	acres.	Most
locals	simply	 refer	to	 the	area	as	“the	Bob.”	 As	 directed	by	 the	Wilderness	Act
of	1964,	 “No	 roads,	structures,	vehicles”	  or	other	 mechanical	contrivances	 are
allowed	inside.	 The	size	and	scenery	are	one	 of	a	kind,	 but	 the	Bob	 offered	us
something	else	that	no	other	wilderness	area	in	the	world	had:	grizzly	bears.
   The	  U.S.	  Forest	 Service	  claims	  that	  the	 Bob	  is	  home	 to	  the	  largest
concentration	of	 grizzly	 bears	south	of	 Kodiak,	 Alaska.	 The	 grizzly	 bear	is	 an
original	 resident	 of	  the	Bob.	  In	 much	 the	 same	 way	 that	 we	 would	  study,
understand,	and	respect	the	local	 populace	of	 any	foreign	 country	 we	operated
in,	we	took	 the	same	perspective	toward	the	grizzly	 bear.	The	best	way	to	 show
respect	to	a	grizzly	  is	to	 avoid	 it	 at	all	 cost.	With	  a	sense	of	 smell	a	 hundred
times	greater	than	that	of	a	dog,	a	grizzly	 will	  flee	when	it	 detects	a	large	group
of	humans	approaching,	but	 dense	brush,	heavy	winds,	and	grizzly	 cubs	can	all
increase	the	potential	 for	 human-bear	 confrontations.	 The	grizzly	  provided	 us
with	a	tangible	 reminder	of	the	 import	of	 knowing	 what’s	going	 on	around	us	at
all	times,	while	 also	requiring	us	to	exercise	strict	tactical	 discipline	 in	camp	and
during	 movement.	Not	 only	 was	 the	Bob	 a	 great	fit	 in	 terms	 of	 mountainous

101
terrain,	 but	 also,	if	  we	 could	 move	 a	 hundred	 miles	 through	 the	 mountains
without	being	detected	by	a	grizzly	 and	its	supersensitive	olfactory	sense,	we	felt
like	we’d	 be	well	 prepared	to	infiltrate	 unnoticed	past	Al	 Qaeda	in	Afghanistan,
or	the	FARC	guerrillas	 of	Colombia.
   A	 few	 days	later	 I	flew	 to	 Kalispell,	 Montana,	 with	 a	small	 team	to	conduct
what	we	 called	a	 pre-mission	 site	survey.	 First	 we	visited	 the	 National	 Forest
Service	offices	that	managed	the	Bob.	Even	though	these	were	public	lands,	they
were	clearly	 the	 local	 Forest	Service’s	 backyard.	 We	 just	wanted	 to	 let	 them
know	we’d	 be	cutting	through.
   Although	  we	were	eager	to	lay	eyes	on	the	terrain	 in	and	around	the	Bob,	 we
also	wanted	to	spend	as	much	time	as	possible	talking	 to	 the	locals	and	picking
their	brains	on	anything	and	everything	they	knew	 about	the	area.	The	mom-and-
pop	restaurants	in	rural	 Montana	are	great	 places	to	meet	people.	Not	 just	“Hi,
how	ya	doin’	 ”	in	 rural	Montana;	when	 people	introduce	themselves	to	you,	they
actually	engage	you	in	 real	conversations.	We	never	 told	anyone	we	 were	from
Delta	 Force,	 or	 the	 real	 reason	 we	 were	 so	 interested	 in	 one	 of	  the	 most
unforgiving	 wilderness	 areas	in	 the	 world,	 but	 we	 never	 lied,	 either;	 we	just
steered	the	  conversation	  away	 from	   both	  topics,	 by	  using	  ambiguity	   or
conversational	diversions.	 While	 eating	 lunch	in	 a	 diner	a	 few	miles	 from	 the
eastern	border	of	the	Bob,	 we	asked	our	waiter	 a	few	questions	and	soon	found
ourselves	engaged	 in	 a	 free-flowing	   give-and-take	 discussion	 involving	   the
entire	diner,	 with	 cooks,	customers,	and	custodians	all	 chiming	 in.	 Talking	 out
loud	to	the	entire	diner,	I	 explained	to	them	that	we	were	preparing	to	come	back
out	in	June	and	walk	 a	hundred	miles	 across	the	length	of	 the	wilderness.	Most
hemmed	and	harrumphed	with	  skepticism	regarding	 our	 ability	 to	 walk	 across
the	entire	length	 of	 the	Bob	 without	 local	 guides	or	 pack	animals	 to	carry	 our
supplies.	 They	  were	  even	 more	  skeptical	  about	 our	  desire	 to	  cross	  the
Continental	Divide	 in	 June.n	“June	is	 too	early.	 The	snow	 is	too	 deep.	There’s
only	a	handful	 of	 passes	that	a	human	can	use	to	cross	the	Continental	 Divide,
and	they’re	 completely	 covered	in	 snow	until	  early	July	 when	 the	snow	 melts
enough	to	allow	 for	navigation	 and	traction	 on	the	high-altitude	 ledges.”	Earlier
that	day,	 the	Forest	Rangers	 put	it	 more	 bluntly	 “The	 passes	aren’t	 navigable
until	early	July;	 don’t	even	try	 it.	You	 need	to	wait	for	the	snow	to	melt	 or	you’ll
walk	off	 of	a	cliff.”
   The	man	at	the	table	next	to	us	didn’t	 make	any	attempt	to	hide	the	fact	that	he
had	something	he	wanted	to	add.	When	 he	couldn’t	 contain	himself	 any	longer,
he	put	 his	fork	  down,	 pulled	 the	napkin	 off	 his	 shirt,	 turned	 in	 his	chair	 and

102
asked,	“Mind	if	 I	throw	 in	my	 two	cents?”	Dressed	in	a	dark	red	flannel	shirt	and
heavily	  faded	 blue	  jeans,	  he	 introduced	  himself	   as	 Walter	  and	  proudly
announced	that	he	was	sixty,	 though	 he	looked	 as	fit	 as	and	well	 preserved	as
most	forty-year-olds.
   “Don’t	   pay	too	 much	 heed	to	 the	 skeptics,”	 he	whispered	 matter-of-factly.
“Every	 year	a	few	backpackers	get	lost	and	die	around	them	passes,	so	they	just
want	 to	 make	 sure	you	 boys	 understand	 how	 dangerous	it	  is.”	 He	 grinned,
looked	around	the	restaurant,	and	then	continued,	“I’ve	  been	through	the	passes
in	spring	before;	it	 ain’t	 easy,	but	it	can	be	done.”	Then	he	reminded	us	why	 it’s
so	important	  to	 respect	the	 emotional	 intelligence	  of	 everyone	you	  come	in
contact	with.	 “I’ve	 been	awatchin’	 you	 boys	since	you	first	 pulled	 in	here.	You
ain’t	 no	 normal	 backpackers.	Most	  backpackers	snack	on	 fruit	  and	 nuts	and
move	around	 real	slow;	  they’re	 nice	 enough	folks,	 but	 they	 don’t	 really	 care
about	gettin’	anywhere	 in	particular.	 You	boys,	on	 the	other	hand,	you	look	 like
meat-eaters	to	me.”	 (I	 looked	around	 the	table	 and	noticed	 we	were	 all	eating
burgers,	but	that’s	 not	what	 he	meant.)	“You	 move	 with	 a	purpose,	and	you’re
asking	people	their	opinions	 ’cause	you	care	about	what	 you’re	gonna	be	doin’,
and	you	 know	 this’s	 the	best	information	  you	 can	get.	 I	reckon	 you	 boys	are
military	 and	you	got	reasons	for	goin’	up	in	them	crazy	mountains.”
   Talk	 about	pattern	 recognition.	 So	much	for	 our	 cover,	I	 thought.	“Well,	  sir,
you	guessed	right,	we	 are	in	 the	military,	  but	it	 usually	 takes	one	to	 recognize
one,	and	we’ve	been	watching	you,	too.	Someone	as	fit	and	observant	as	you	are,
I’m	guessing	you’re	 a	Vietnam	vet.”	 A	tobacco-stained	toothy	grin	 spread	across
his	face	like	 a	 puddle	of	 water	 while	 he	reached	across	the	table	 to	shake	my
hand.	“Special	  Forces,	 ’66	  to	 ’68.”	  I	  shook	 his	 wiry	  yet	  powerful	  callus-
encrusted	paw	and	replied,	“From	all	of	 us,	thank	you	for	your	 service;	it’s	a	real
honor	to	 meet	you.”	  After	 thanking	 us	 profusely	 for	 thanking	 him,	 he	turned
serious	again	and	asked	why	 we	were	 so	hell-bent	 on	crossing	the	 Continental
Divide	 before	the	snow	 melted.	I	 leaned	in	close	to	 him	and	 whispered,	“Same
reason	you	went	 to	 the	jungles	 of	 Panama	before	you	 went	 to	 Vietnam.”	 His
eyes	twinkled	while	 he	subtly	 shook	his	head	in	silent	 affirmation.	 “	 ’Nuff	  said,
what	can	I	 do	to	 help	you	 boys	out?”	 he	asked.	I	cut	 right	 to	the	chase.	“What
would	 you	say	is	 the	most	 important	 advice	or	 equipment	for	 getting	 over	 the
passes	before	the	snow	melts?”	He	 didn’t	 hesitate.	“Take	 snowshoes	with	 you;
the	snow	is	 still	 deep	in	 June,	and	it	 will	 be	soft	 and	heavy	 underneath	with	 a
hard	crust	on	the	surface.	Without	 snowshoes	it’s	like	 trying	 to	walk	 on	top	of	a
giant	apple	pie.”	He	 paused,	and	I	made	a	mental	note	to	order	a	piece	of	pie	for

103
dessert	so	I	could	better	understand	his	metaphor.	“The	snowshoes	will	keep	you
from	 post-holingo	 and	 getting	 stuck	 every	 time	 you	 take	 a	 step.	They	 were
lifesavers	for	 me	 when	 I	 was	up	 there	last	 spring.”	 All	  of	 us	stopped	 eating,
yanked	out	our	 pens	and	notebooks	from	 our	 cargo	pockets,	and	scribbled	 this
new	packing	 list	  item	 down	 for	 purchase.	Walter	  spent	the	 rest	of	  the	meal
telling	 us	about	 life	 in	 Montana—he	 loved	 it—and	  how	 much	he	 missed	the
good	old	 days	 in	 the	military.	  When	 we	 told	 him	 the	 tentative	 dates	for	 our
journey,	he	 gave	us	his	 phone	number	 and	invited	 us	 to	his	 ranch	for	 a	 steak
dinner.	After	  an	hour	 or	 so,	he	 stood	up,	 bid	 us	good	 luck,	 shook	 all	 of	 our
hands,	and	then	ambled	out	 the	door	to	 his	Chevy	 pickup	 truck.	 Someone	said
what	we	were	all	thinking:	 “What	 a	great	dude,	let’s	get	some	pie.”
   Before	 we	departed	for	 a	long	 car	ride	 to	the	edge	of	 the	Bob,	 we	headed	to
the	back	of	the	 restaurant	to	hit	the	 head.	On	the	wall	 of	the	hallway	 leading	 to
the	men’s	room	were	two	faded	eight-by-ten	 pictures.	I	recognized	the	thin	black
frames	as	government	 issue.	One	picture	 was	of	 a	 handsome	young	man	 in	 a
white	T-shirt	 standing	in	 front	of	 a	billowing	  wall	of	 intensely	green	jungle	 that
needed	no	location	 caption.	 The	other	 picture	 framed	a	 citation	 for	 the	 Silver
Star,	the	third	highest	award	 for	valor	 in	the	military.	  Walter’s	 name	was	on	the
citation.
   After	 laying	 eyes	on	the	exterior	of	the	Bob	we	headed	back	to	North	Carolina
to	make	final	 preparations	for	 what	we	 were	now	referring	 to	 as	the	long	walk.
Despite	the	doubts	 from	 all	 but	Walter	 that	we	 could	 make	it	 over	 the	passes,
there	was	no	hubris	behind	our	decision	 to	do	it	 anyway.	We	simply	 understood
the	 reality	  of	  real-world	  events:	  they	 happen	 when	  they	  happen	 without
consideration	for	snow	depth,	or	 temperature,	or	the	increased	complexities	they
infer.	 If	 a	real-world	  mission	 required	 us	to	 infiltrate	  up	and	 over	wilderness
mountains,	we	would	have	to	figure	out	a	way	to	 do	it.	There’s	always	a	way!
   One	of	 the	keys	to	survival	 in	the	wilderness	is	 quality	preparation.	If	 you	 fail
to	prepare,	 you	prepare	 to	fail.	  To	 prepare	for	 the	 Bob,	 we	 once	again	drew
inspiration	 from	 the	 Lewis	  and	Clark	  expedition,	 which	 had	 actually	 passed
through	the	northern	 sections	of	 the	Bob	 during	 its	journey	 in	 1805.	The	three
main	areas	of	our	focus	were	the	terrain,	the	weather,	and	the	supplies	we	would
need	to	survive.
   We	 spent	many	hours	studying	maps	of	 the	area	to	familiarize	 ourselves	with
the	 terrain	 we’d	  be	 passing	 over	 and	 through.	  We	 identified	  primary	  and
alternate	routes	from	  our	start	 point	 to	 our	 finish	 points—no	 easy	 task	when
you’re	 talking	 about	 a	hundred	 miles	 of	 mountain	 wilderness.	 Understanding

104
time/distance	estimates	is	 critical	 in	 the	mountains.	 If	 you	 try	 to	predict	 exact
distances	for	 each	day	 of	 travel,	 and	 then	attempt	 to	 rigidly	  adhere	to	 those
predictions,	 your	  team	 could	  end	 up	  being	 forced	  to	  move	 at	 night—an
extremely	dangerous	proposition	 in	grizzly	  country.	Most	 credible	 backpacking
guides	will	  tell	 you	 that	experienced	hikers	 can	generally	 cover	 ten	to	 twelve
miles	per	 day	in	 the	mountains.	 We	prepared	for	 ten	 to	twenty	 miles	 per	day,
with	an	understanding	that	 weather,	terrain,	and	the	unexpected	would	 all	result
in	our	moving	tenish	miles	 on	some	days,	and	twentyish	miles	on	others.
   The	 point-A-to-point-B	   route	 we	decided	 on	would	  require	us	 to	 walk	 and
climb	 somewhere	between	eighty	 to	 a	hundred	 total	miles	 depending	 on	river
and	snow	 levels.	 We	 would	 navigate	 up	and	 over	 four	 mountain	 ranges,	the
highest	of	which	was	on	the	Continental	Divide	 at	just	over	nine	thousand	feet.
   Weather	 was	the	biggest	wild	 card.	Not	only	 would	it	 affect	our	 time/distance
estimates,	but	also	 it	was	 the	driving	  factor	 behind	our	 packing	 loads	and	the
weight	we’d	 have	to	 carry.	The	 previous	year	it	 had	snowed	in	 the	Bob	 in	 late
July.	In	June	temperatures	normally	dip	 into	the	thirties	 and	forties	at	 night.	The
potential	for	the	deadly	onset	of	hypothermia	 is	high	anytime	you	get	cold-wet	 in
the	wilderness,	so	we	had	to	ensure	we	had	clothing	that	would	 allow	 us	to	both
stay	warm,	and	stay	dry.	Unlike	 Lewis	and	Clark,	 we	had	access	to	the	very	best
lightweight	 thermo-regulating	  clothing	 that	 science	and	 money	 could	 offer.	 I
packed	a	wardrobe	full	  of	Polartec	 fleece:	hat,	gloves,	 jacket,	and	pants.	Made
with	 the	specially	 treated	water-repellent	 fibers,	the	 fleece	offers	 more	warmth
for	its	 weight	 than	wool.	 I	 also	brought	 along	a	poncho	 and	a	pair	 of	 ultrathin
Gore-Tex	pants	that	would	allow	 me	to	stay	dry	while	moving	 in	rain	or	snow.
   Once	we	stepped	foot	into	 the	Bob,	what	each	man	carried	on	his	back	is	what
each	man	would	 have	 to	sustain	 himself	 for	 five	 to	 seven	days.	 As	such,	 we
tailored	 the	weight	 and	 size	of	 everything	  we’d	 be	carrying	  in	 an	attempt	 to
come	within	 a	pound	or	two	 of	forty	 pounds,	the	time-tested	ideal	weight	 for	 an
average-size	man	to	carry.	 I	 had	only	 violated	 the	forty-pound	 guidance	a	 few
times	in	my	long-distance	 backpacking	career,	but	the	pain	I	sustained	was	more
than	enough	to	convince	me	that	the	forty-pound	standard	is	right	on	target.
   The	 Unit	 offered	us	a	 wide	variety	 of	 backpacks	to	meet	almost	any	 mission
requirement.	Stored	in	 a	building	  that	could	 easily	pass	as	a	private	 REI	 retail
outlet,	we	 could	 pick	 or	 choose	almost	 any	 brand	or	 model.	 Most	 backpacks
weigh	four	to	 six	pounds	empty.	My	 choice	was	a	backpack	made	by	a	company
called	Kelty.	 The	 quintessential	long-range	mountain	 pack,	it	 uses	carbon-fiber
levitators	to	support	the	loads,	and	is	made	with	a	nearly	indestructible	space-age

105
material	called	spectra	fabric.	 Weighing	 1.8	pounds	empty,	 it’s	 also	the	lightest
backpack	ever	made.	At	  a	cost	of	 six	 hundred	dollars,	 the	 Kelty	 was	also	 the
most	expensive,	but	its	weight	is	well	 worth	its	price.	 I	would	 use	every	ounce	of
weight	savings	for	extra	food.
   When	 you	finally	 break	to	set	up	camp	after	a	long	day	of	 moving	through	 the
mountains,	 the	 need	for	  food	 completely	  consumes	the	 human	 animal.	 My
criteria	for	 food	 came	down	to	 this:	it	 had	to	 have	enough	calories	to	 meet	my
energy	requirements,	it	had	to	be	lightweight	 and	compact,	but	most	of	 all	it	 had
to	taste	really	 good.	My	 tried-and-tested	solution	 was	to	pack	 a	combination	 of
Mountain	 House	 freeze-dried	 meals	for	 breakfasts	 and	dinners	 in	 camp,	 and
heaps	of	high-calorie	trail	mix—heavily	  laced	with	M&Ms	  to	continuously	 graze
on	while	 moving	 throughout	the	 day.	I	 gauged	the	amounts	I	brought	 on	a	six-
thousand-calorie-a-day	requirement.	 I	  never	skimped	 on	 food.	 Whether	 on	 a
real-world	mission	 or	on	an	otherworldly	 backpacking	trip,	 if	you	 are	hungry,	all
you	think	about	is	how	hungry	 you	are.
   Most	 of	the	locals	and	guides	we	talked	to	 recommended	carrying	a	firearm	to
protect	 against	marauding	 bears.	 Some	 also	 recommended	Cayenne	 pepper-
based	bear	spray	as	an	 acceptable	alternative.	I	 chose	a	 Smith	 &	 Wesson	.44
Magnum,	that	 when	combined	 with	 specially	 made	265-grain	 full-metal	 jacket
bullets,	 appropriately	  earned	 its	  nickname—the	  hand-cannon.	 I	  based	 my
decision	on	practicality	 and	peace	of	mind.	I	 had	no	intention	of	 ever	shooting	a
bear	unless	the	bear	was	clearly	in	the	no-turning-back	 attack	mode.	If	 a	grizzly
bear	is	bold	enough	to	venture	 into	a	well-disciplined	  campsite	at	night,	there	is
clearly	 something	 wrong	  with	 the	 bear.	 The	 bear	 may	 be	 sick,	  injured,	 or
demented,	and	 it’s	  almost	  assuredly	 going	 to	  do	 whatever	 it	  takes	 to	 eat
something	or	 someone	in	the	 camp.	A	 revolver	 is	one	 of	the	 most	dependable
guns	ever	made.	It	 will	  shoot	 when	it’s	 wet,	 when	 it’s	 full	 of	 mud,	 when	 it’s
freezing	cold,	and	after	it	 tumbles	down	 a	rocky	cliff.	  A	can	of	pepper	spray,	on
the	other	hand,	is	a	can,	and	is	extremely	vulnerable	to	each	of	the	environmental
contingencies	mentioned	 above.	In	  theory,	 pepper	spray	 seems	like	 it	 should
work,	but	 empirical	proof	 of	its	 efficacy	 is	very	thin.	 I	did	 not	want	to	 go	out	of
this	world	  frantically	 pressing	 down	 on	a	 spray-can	nozzle	hoping	 the	 effects
would	kick	 in	while	 an	insane	grizzly	 munched	away	on	my	head.	If	a	grizz	 was
gonna	eat	me,	I	was	gonna	be	his	last	supper.
   Initially,	   not	everyone	 in	our	 group	 agreed.	At	 one	of	 our	 early	preparation
meetings,	a	couple	 of	the	 guys	dismissed	the	 need	for	 a	hand-cannon,	arguing
that	it	made	no	sense	to	carry	the	 extra	weight	of	 a	large	pistol	 and	bullets.	The

106
chance	of	 ever	even	 seeing	a	grizzly	  is	so	 small,	 they	exhorted,	 that	 it	 made
much	more	sense	to	save	weight	and	carry	a	can	of	 pepper	spray,	which	weighs
only	 a	few	 ounces.	The	heated	debate	went	 back	 and	forth	 for	 a	few	 minutes
until	Predator	interrupted	 with	the	clincher,	 “It’s	 not	just	 for	bear	protection,”	 he
let	on.	“We’re	 going	to	 be	out	in	the	middle	 of	nowhere.	Have	you	ever	seen	the
movie	Deliverance?”	 Everyone	ended	up	packing	a	pistol	 after	thinking	 through
that	scenario.
   A	 few	 real-world	 contingency	missions	 delayed	the	dates	when	we	originally
wanted	to	conduct	the	hike,	and	unfortunately,	 the	new	dates	meant	that	some	of
the	men	were	not	able	to	 join	 us.	Ironically,	 the	only	 time	 we	could	now	 fit	 the
hike	in	 was	during	our	 planned	leave	(vacation)	 period.	The	choice	 came	down
to	this:	leave	or	long	walk?	 It	was	a	no-brainer.	We	cancelled	our	vacation	plans,
signed	out	on	 leave,	then	 flew	 west	to	 Kalispell,	 Montana,	 the	gateway	 to	the
Bob.
   After	  checking	 into	 the	local	 Holiday	  Inn	and	 enjoying	 the	traditional	  “last
supper”	of	steak	and	beer	at	a	local	restaurant,	we	got	together	in	one	of	the	hotel
rooms	for	 our	 final	 coordination	 meeting.	 We	divided	 ourselves	 into	teams	 of
four	 to	five	  men.	Each	 team	had	a	 different	 start	 point,	 and	a	 different	 route
through	the	Bob.	 Two	 of	our	 logistics	 people	would	 coordinate	and	execute	all
“backside”	 support	for	 the	trip.	They	 would	 drive	each	team	to	their	 start	point,
and	then	pick	up	each	team	at	their	designated	finish	 point	over	a	hundred	miles
and	five	to	seven	days	later.
   Everyone	 was	excited,	but	I	also	detected	a	slight	air	of	apprehension	among	a
few	of	the	guys.	Once	some	of	them	actually	laid	 eyes	on	the	terrain	surrounding
the	Bob,	it	began	to	sink	 in	that	they	were	 about	to	walk	off	 the	edge	of	the	grid
and	into	 one	of	 the	most	 austere	and	hostile	wilderness	 settings	on	 the	planet.
Although	 the	actual	boundaries	of	the	Bob	 are	roughly	 a	hundred	miles	by	 fifty
miles,	 the	forests	 and	 national	 parks	that	 cocoon	 those	boundaries	 make	 the
distances	from	the	 interior	 of	the	 Bob	to	 civilization	  (roads	or	houses)	roughly
twice	those	numbers.	If	 anything	was	to	 go	wrong	while	 we	were	 in	the	interior
of	the	Bob,	we	 could	be	twenty-five	 to	 two	hundred	miles	 from	the	nearest	road
or	 vehicle.	 If	  someone	broke	 an	 ankle	 or	 blew	 out	 a	 knee,	 the	 other	 team
members	would	have	to	make	a	stretcher	out	of	branches	and	twine	and	carry	the
wounded	individual	 out	of	the	wilderness.	Every	 team	carried	a	first-aid	 bag	that
mirrored	the	 bags	we	carried	in	 combat.	Many	 of	 us	were	used	to	 severing	the
umbilical	 cord	 to	 civilization	  and	 hanging	it	  out	there	 for	 the	 mission—rural
Colombia	 came	to	mind—but	  for	some	 of	our	 newer	guys,	 this	was	 definitely

107
pushing	them	 out	of	 their	 comfort	 zone,	 which	 was	exactly	 why	 we	 chose	to
conduct	our	environmental	training	 in	the	Bob.
   During	 our	meeting	our	 logistics	guys	handed	out	the	supplies	they	had	picked
up	for	 us	 at	a	 local	 hunting	 store	that	 day:	fishing	  lures,	unscented	mosquito
repellent,	sunscreen,	water	purification	tablets,	and	fancily	 wrapped	energy	bars.
I	wanted	to	bring	 every	one	of	 these	nice-to-have	sundry	items	with	 me,	but	my
backpack	weighed	exactly	forty	pounds;	something	would	 have	to	give.
   At	 the	end	of	the	meeting,	we	each	went	back	to	our	 individual	 hotel	rooms	to
make	final	  adjustments	to	 our	 equipment	 and	settle	 in	 for	 our	 final	  night	 of
mattress-assisted	sleep.	Once	in	my	room,	I	went	right	to	my	backpack.	How	can
I	make	room	 for	 all	 this	new	stuff?	 After	 months	of	 thinking	 and	preparing	 for
the	trek,	I	 was	borderline	 obsessive-compulsive	about	the	weight	 of	my	 pack.	I
looked	at	 everything:	 food	and	 clothes	were	 definitely	 off-limits.	  Hmmm,	 do	I
really	need	these	snowshoes?	I	can’t	eat	’em,	they	can’t	keep	me	warm,	and	how
bad	can	it	be	in	the	passes?	Walking	on	a	piecrust	might	be	difficult	 for	Walter—
after	all,	 he	is	sixty	 years	old—but	with	 my	superior	 fitness,	I	 should	be	able	to
gut	it	 out.	I	 pulled	the	 snowshoes	off	my	 pack,	then	shoved	all	 the	new	 sundry
items	into	 one	of	 the	outside	pockets.	 Not	completely	 satisfied,	 I	 squeezed	out
half	of	the	small	 tube	of	Bacitracin	 (ointment	 for	cuts)	in	 my	first-aid	 kit,	 saving
maybe	another	 gram	of	  additional	 weight.	 My	  pack	was	 as	light	  as	it	 could
possibly	get.	I	was	ready	to	walk.	 Without	 taking	my	 eyes	off	my	pack,	I	 backed
into	 bed	and	faded	 into	 a	state	of	 fretful	  sleep.	The	snowshoes	were	 made	of
titanium	 and	weighed	less	than	two	 pounds.	What	did	 Walter	 say	was	the	most
important	 advice	 or	  equipment	for	  getting	 over	 the	 passes	before	 the	 snow
melts?	If	we	don’t	get	over	the	pass,	we	don’t	accomplish	our	mission!
   I	 shot	up	out	 of	bed.	You	friggin’	  idiot,	 the	snowshoes	may	not	be	edible,	but
taking	 them	 gives	me	 options	 for	  what	 is	 sure	 to	 be	the	 most	 difficult	  and
dangerous	portion	 of	our	 trek.	The	mission	 is	to	accomplish	 the	mission,	not	 to
do	it	  as	comfortably	  as	possible.	 I	 reattached	my	 snowshoes,	pulled	  out	 the
sundry	items,	and	laughed	at	my	foolishly	 juicy	rationalization	 while	 shaking	my
head	and	staring	at	the	bedside	clock.	It	 was	3:00	A.M.	 Wake-up	time	 was	4:30
A.M.	 for	the	 long	drive	 to	the	trailhead;	 I	kept	a	close	eye	on	 my	backpack	and
the	clock	for	the	rest	of	the	night.
   My	  team	 consisted	of	 five	  men:	Kap,	 Roy,	  Casanova,	Stu,	and	 me.	 Once
dropped	off	 at	the	trailhead,	 we	were	 all	 business.	There	was	no	pomp	 and	no
hesitation.	Each	man	hoisted	his	 backpack	over	his	shoulder	 and	onto	his	back;
cinched	 down	 the	 shoulder	 straps	as	 tightly	  as	his	 biceps	 could	  pull	 them;

108
buckled	the	thick	 waiststrap;	then	without	  uttering	a	word,	 began	moving	 south
down	the	trail	 toward	 the	interior	 of	 the	Bob.	 We	started	 slowly,	 but	gradually
picked	up	steam	to	a	pace	that	could	have	easily	qualified	 as	a	slow	trot.	 On	the
first	day	 of	any	long-range	 movement	it’s	 easy	to	get	lured	onto	 the	wrong	side
of	the	tortoise	 vs.	the	hare	debate.	Every	 mile	you	 put	behind	 you	today	 is	one
more	mile	you	 won’t	 have	in	front	 of	 you	tomorrow	 is	the	thought	process.	The
illogic	 of	 speed	is	intoxicating;	 to	 keep	it	 from	 going	 toxic,	 we	used	the	50/10
technique.	The	50/10	technique	breaks	every	 hour	into	 fifty	 minutes	of	 walking
and	ten	 minutes	 of	  resting.	 It’s	 designed	 to	 ensure	 regular	 monitoring,	  and
maintenance	of	the	feet,	and	to	prevent	 the	bane	of	all	 backpackers	and	soldiers
—the	blister.	The	ten-minute	 rest	period	each	hour	ensures	each	person	has	time
to	check,	massage,	and	elevate	his	feet.	When	friction	hot	spots	begin	to	form	on
the	feet,	the	 ten-minute	 break	allows	 you	 to	address	the	 hot	spots	with	  Band-
Aids	or	 new	socks	before	the	hot	spots	turn	into	 the	pleasure-ending	penance	of
a	blister.	The	bonus	aspect	of	the	ten-minute	rest	period	for	me	was	that	it	served
as	a	mini-sanctuary,	 always	 just	 a	few	 minutes	 up	ahead,	where	 I’d	 have	 the
opportunity	 to	stop,	relax,	 and	smell	 the	proverbial	 roses,	while	 reveling	in	 the
visual	grandeur	of	one	of	the	last	great	remnants	of	primeval	America.
   Our	 objective	for	 the	first	day	was	a	place	called	Schaefer	Meadows.	The	map
depicted	Schaefer	Meadows	as	a	large,	open	meadow	where	three	creeks	joined
and	dumped	into	 the	 middle	 fork	 of	 the	Flathead	 River.	 We	 figured	 the	most
expeditious	route	to	 get	there	was	to	 follow	 the	 river	 until	 we	bumped	into	 the
three	 creeks.	 Warmer-than-normal	  June	  temperatures	 created	 heavier-than-
expected	snow-melt,	which	 resulted	in	the	river	 running	 much	higher	 and	faster
than	we	had	anticipated.	Our	original	route	had	us	crossing	back	and	forth	across
the	normally	 placid	 knee-deep	river,	 which	 now	 roared	white	 at	 well	 over	 six
feet	deep.	Less	than	ten	miles	into	our	 hundred-mile	movement,	without	 anyone
saying	a	word,	we	changed	course.	Instead	of	crossing	back	and	forth	 across	the
raging	river,	 we	would	 do	 what	orienteering	 aficionados	call	 handrailing:	 we’d
use	the	river	 as	a	handrail,	and	 conduct	the	entire	 first	 day’s	movement	 on	the
north	side	of	the	river.
   We	 started	walking	at	seven	in	the	morning;	nine	 hours	later	we	estimated	that
we	 had	 meandered	eighteen	 brush-beating,	 skin-scratching,	 energy-depleting
riverbank	 miles.	 At	 four	  in	 the	 afternoon	 we	 rounded	what	 seemed	like	  the
thousandth	bend	in	 the	 Flathead	River.	  Peeking	as	we	 rounded	 the	bend,	 we
were	optimistic	 that	we	 would	finally	  lay	eyes	on	 our	destination.	We	 were	not
disappointed.	In	front	of	 us	lay	the	open	expanse	of	a	pristine	subalpine	meadow,

109
spangled	yellow	  from	  end	 to	 end	 with	  gently	  swaying	 spring	 wildflowers.
Gazing	across	the	meadow,	we	were	surprised	to	see	a	well-maintained	log	cabin
that,	judging	by	the	horse	parked	in	front,	 appeared	occupied.	Just	as	I	pulled	out
my	map	to	 double-check	the	location,	 the	cabin	door	swung	 open	and	out	ran	a
blond-haired	woman	gleefully	 screeching	at	the	top	of	her	lungs,	“Backpackers!”
   As	  she	 rapidly	  closed	 the	 distance	  across	the	  spangled	meadow,	  blond
ponytail	 bucking	 up	and	down	 behind	her	 head,	we	stood	 frozen	in	 a	herd-of-
deer-in-headlights	trance.	 “Welcome,	 backpackers,”	 she	hailed	 as	she	arrived,
while	 vigorously	  pumping	 each	of	 our	 sweatsopped	and	 swollen	 paws.	 “My
name	is	Sue.	I’m	the	forest	ranger	for	 the	Schaefer	Meadows	station.	You’re	 the
first	backpackers	I’ve	 ever	seen	out	here,”	 she	gleamed.	No	one	responded.	We
just	stared.	Her	 golden-blond	 hair,	 blue-green	 eyes,	and	tan-clean	complexion
combined	to	give	her	an	outdoorsy	natural	beauty,	but	it	 was	her	gregarious	self-
confidence	 and	happy-go-lucky	  demeanor	 that	 made	her	 naturally	  gorgeous.
“Come	 in,	 come	 in,	 it’s	 so	 great	to	 see	people,”	 she	 repeated	as	she	started
walking	  back	 to	 the	 cabin	  in	 her	 ultra-drab	  one-size-fits-all	  National	  Park
Service	uniform	 that	she	wore	 with	 such	pride.	 As	we	 walked	with	 her	 toward
the	cabin,	I	made	a	mental	note	to	file	 the	scenario	away	for	potential	future	 use.
Here	were	five	 heavily	 armed	 and	heavily	 grizzled	 Delta	operators	 completely
disarmed	by	  the	 charm	 and	 effervescent	 exhortations	 of	 an	 attractive,	  self-
assured	blond	forest	ranger	in	the	middle	of	the	wilderness.
   We	 followed	 her	up	the	 steps	onto	the	porch	and	inside	the	 cabin	like	 a	litter
of	puppies.	 After	 sitting	 each	of	 us	down	 around	a	lacquered	picnic	 table,	 she
immediately	 began	 chopping	  fresh	 oranges	 into	 quarters	 and	 passing	 them
around	the	table.	 We	devoured	them.	 She	pulled	 a	cookie	 jar	full	  of	chocolate
chip	cookies	off	 the	countertop	and	implored	 us	to	eat	as	many	as	we	liked.	 We
destroyed	them.	Once	 we	digested	our	 astonishingly	 pleasant	predicament,	we
actually	began	to	converse.
   “Where	 are	 you	from?	 How	 long	do	 they	make	 you	stay	out	 here	alone	like
this?	Have	 you	 ever	 been	married?”	 Casanova	didn’t	  get	 his	nickname	 from
some	random	 or	  arbitrary	 event	 as	 some	 of	 the	 guys	 in	  the	 Unit	 did;	  his
nickname	was	well-earned,	 self-explanatory,	 and	still	 relevant.	A	 good-looking
guy	who	 purported	 to	 be	some	infinitesimal	  fraction	  of	 an	obscure	American
Indian	tribe,	 he	had	a	hairdresserlike	proclivity	  for	 conversing	with	 women.	 He
was	suavely	attempting	to	develop	the	situation	 for	his	 personal	special	mission.
But	 for	 every	 leading	 interrogative	 with	  which	 Casanova	probed,	 Roy	 and	 I
countered	with	 questions	about	the	 environment.	 “Have	 you	 been	down	Dolly

110
Varden	Creek	lately?”	  “How	 deep	is	 the	snow	on	 Pentagon	Mountain?”	 “How
about	on	Spotted	Bear	Pass?”	Maybe	 it	was	the	 fact	that	we	 still	 had	well	 over
eighty	miles	 of	never-before-seen	river	 valleys	and	mountains	 in	front	 of	 us,	or
maybe	it	 was	the	 what-if-she-were-your-little-sister	  syndrome.	 I’m	 not	 exactly
sure.	Whatever	the	case,	while	 Roy	and	I	 were	thinking	  how	lucky	 we	 were	to
run	into	a	friendly	 forest	ranger	full	 of	 on-the-ground	insights,	Casanova	seemed
singularly	focused	on	how	 running	into	 a	friendly	 forest	ranger	might	 allow	 him
to	get	lucky.
   Roy	 spread	out	 his	map	 on	the	 picnic	 table,	showed	 her	our	 planned	route,
then	asked	her	what	she	thought	and	whether	she	had	any	suggestions.	She	was
politely	circumspect	 in	choosing	her	answers.	“That’s	probably	 the	route	I	would
have	come	up	 with	 if	 I	 had	never	 been	out	 here	before,	but	 let	 me	show	 you
some	other	options	you	might	 want	 to	consider	for	 getting	to	 your	destination.”
Stu	 had	spent	 a	 lot	  of	 time	 back	  at	 the	 Unit	 calculating	  the	 time/distance
variables	for	our	“planned”	 route.	 A	forty-three-year-old	 steely-eyed	Italian	 with
jet-black	hair	 and	a	body-builder	 physique,	Stu	 looked	like	 a	cartoon	caricature
of	a	superhero.	His	specialty	was	languages;	he	could	speak	at	least	five	fluently.
As	Ranger	Sue	discussed	her	recommended	changes	to	our	routes,	Stu	began	to
pace	around	 the	room	 and	 wipe	 his	 palm	 across	his	 face.	 When	 Roy	 began
tracing	her	 newly	 recommended	route	on	 his	map,	I	 thought	 Stu	was	 going	to
blow	out	one	of	 his	signature	forehead	veins.	Years	before	most	of	 us	arrived	in
the	Unit,	 there	 was	an	unspoken	 philosophy	 that	unless	someone	had	 put	one
foot	in	 front	 of	 the	other	 in	the	 Appalachian	mountains	 (Delta	 Selection),	they
weren’t	 qualified	  to	  override	 someone	 who	  had.	 The	 last	 vestiges	 of	  that
philosophy	 lived	 on	 in	 a	handful	 of	 old-timers	 like	  Stu.	To	 Stu,	 she	was	too
young,	 too	 female,	 and	 too	 inexperienced	 to	 override	  what	 he	 had	 already
decided	was	 best	for	 the	 team.	To	 the	 rest	 of	 us,	that	 antiquated	 philosophy
simply	 didn’t	 make	 sense.	As	it	 turned	out,	 she	was	one	 of	 the	last	 people	to
cross	the	passes	before	the	heavy	snows	sealed	them	shut	in	late	September.	She
knew	the	lay	of	the	land	like	 the	back	of	her	hand.
   “Do	 you	think	 we	can	get	over	the	passes?”	I	asked	her.
   The	 room	went	quiet,	and	she	used	the	pregnant	pause	to	perfection	while	she
looked	thoughtfully	  at	each	of	us,	 then	smiled	and	declared,	 “Normally	  I’d	 say
no;	the	snow	 is	still	  ten	to	 twenty	feet	 deep	in	 some	places,	there’s	no	 trail	 to
follow	 or	terrain	to	 read,	and	you’ll	 be	post-holing	with	 every	step	you	take.	But
judging	by	 your	fitness	levels,	equipment,	 and	experience,	I	definitely	 think	 you
guys	can	 make	it.”	  Casanova	smiled	 suavely;	he	 almost	assuredly	 considered

111
Sue’s	comment	as	a	positive	affirmation	that	she	thought	he	had	a	nice	body.
   Sue’s	  insightful	  inputs	 went	  beyond	 just	 the	 mechanics	 of	  distance	 and
direction.	“Don’t	  walk	 along	the	 west	side	of	 the	creek,	it	 won’t	 be	worth	 your
while:	 all	 you’ll	   see	is	 pine	 trees.	If	  you	 walk	 on	 the	 east	side	 you’ll	  have
unfettered	views	  of	 the	cliffs	  that	 line	 the	 west	 side	 of	 the	 creek;	 there	are
usually	lots	of	bighorn	 sheep	out	grazing	during	this	time	of	the	year—”
   “What	  about	bears?”	Casanova	interrupted.	 The	rest	of	 us	smirked;	 this	was
the	first	time	 he	came	up	for	air	to	 ask	a	question	that	actually	had	something	to
do	with	our	trek.
   She	answered	cautiously,	 “I	 see	you	guys	are	armed,	which	 is	smart;	 as	long
as	you	 maintain	 good	camp	 discipline	 you	 shouldn’t	  have	any	 problem.	 One
whiff	 of	 the	 five	 of	 you	and	 any	bear	in	 her	 right	 mind	 will	 hightail	  it	 in	 the
opposite	direction	way	before	you	 get	a	chance	to	see	her.”	We	must	really	smell
like	shit,	I	thought	as	I	attempted	a	nonchalant	whiff	 of	my	right	 armpit.
   “You	   need	 to	 be	 especially	  cautious	 on	 switchback	  trails	 going	  up	 the
mountain	on	this	side	of	 the	pass,”	she	added	with	emphasis,	while	pointing	 to	a
spot	on	the	map	called	Switchback	Pass.
   “That’s	  where	the	spring	sun	melts	the	deep	snow	first	and	uncovers	the	berry
bushes.	The	bears	are	still	thin	at	this	time	 of	year	and	they’re	 on	an	unrelenting
quest	to	find	 the	tastiest	and	freshest	berries.”	She	continued,	 “If	 you	 don’t	pay
extra	close	 attention	on	 the	 switchback	 trail,	 you	 could	 easily	surprise	 a	bear
that’s	preoccupied	with	 feeding.	since	you’ll	  be	downhill	 from	 her,	it	 will	 make
you	seem	smaller	 and	much	more	 vulnerable	 to	attack.”	 We	 told	 her	we	 were
planning	to	take	Spotted	Bear	Pass,	which	was	farther	south	than	Switchback.
   “Well,	  I	think	 you	guys	can	get	through	either	of	those	passes,”	she	replied.
   “Hey,	  thanks,	that’s	really	 good	 info,”	 I	 said	as	I	started	to	 fold	 up	my	 map.
We	had	been	talking	for	more	than	two	 hours,	and	we	needed	to	set	up	our	camp
before	it	 got	 dark.	 Roy	 and	 I	 stood	to	 cue	 the	others.	 I	 shook	her	 hand	and
thanked	her	profusely,	 while	  Casanova	covertly	 copied	his	 cell-phone	 number
along	with	“call	 me”	 on	a	napkin	and	left	in	on	the	counter.
   We	 set	up	our	camp	about	half	a	mile	downriver	 from	 Ranger	Sue’s	cabin	at	a
spot	where	the	meadow	collided	with	 the	river.	The	 meadow	provided	a	soft	and
smooth	moss-covered	surface	on	which	we	could	erect	our	two-person	tents.	The
temperature	plunged	into	the	high	 thirties.	We	 built	a	small	 fire;	 then	each	of	us
pulled	up	a	 rock	or	 a	log	to	 sit	on	 and	do	what	people	have	 been	doing	around
fires	since	the	dawn	of	 time:	gaze	dreamily	 at	the	hypnotic	 dance	of	orange	and
blue	flames	while	 discussing	the	events	of	the	day	behind	and	what	 to	expect	of

112
the	day	ahead.	Inevitably,	 the	conversation	 always	looped	 back	to	Ranger	Sue.
We	didn’t	 stay	up	long;	we	were	all	 dog	tired.	Usually	 it’s	 hard	to	fall	 asleep	the
first	 night	 in	 the	wilderness.	 The	uneven,	 rock-covered	ground	 limits	  position
options,	and	it	takes	time	 to	adjust	one’s	senses	to	the	natural	commotion	 of	the
nocturnal	wilderness.	Luckily,	 I	 fell	 asleep	right	away,	waking	 only	once	when	I
thought	I	heard	Casanova	getting	up	to	stoke	the	fire.
   The	 next	day	we	followed	 Ranger	Sue’s	advice	and	walked	along	the	east	side
of	Dolly	  Varden	 Creek	while	 marveling	 at	 the	massifs	 and	massive	limestone
cliffs	 that	rimmed	our	valley-bottom	 route.	Bald	 eagles	and	bighorn	sheep	dotted
our	day.	While	 the	rest	of	 us	savored	the	scenic	splendor,	Stu	stewed.	Intrigued
by	his	seething	silence,	 I	asked	him	 if	 something	was	bothering	 him.	He	 didn’t
answer;	he	was	boiling.	One	of	the	most	highly	 educated	and	worldly	individuals
I	had	ever	worked	with,	 he	surprised	all	 of	us	that	he	just	could	 not	get	over	our
wholesale	dumping	 of	 his	 planned	route.	 The	fact	 that	 we	took	 Ranger	 Sue’s
advice	over	 his	was	 too	much	 for	 him	 to	 swallow.	 Stu’s	 ego	had	usurped	 his
common	sense.	With	 each	passing	mile,	 as	it	 became	more	and	 more	obvious
that	his	 route	would	 have	 taken	us	twice	 as	long	 and	revealed	 half	 the	scenic
splendor	as	 Sue’s,	 Stu	 slowly	  began	to	 simmer	  down.	 By	 4:00	  P.M.,	 after
covering	more	than	twenty	 magnificent	 miles,	we	 decided	to	stop	for	 the	day	to
set	up	 camp.	Stu	 and	 I	 went	 off	 to	 forage	 for	 firewood.	  While	 foraging,	  he
uttered	his	first	words	of	 the	day,	“I	 saw	four	bald	eagles	today;	that	was	really	a
great	route.”	Time	and	common	sense	strike	again,	I	thought.
   While	  sitting	 around	the	fire	 that	night,	 our	iridium	  satellite	 phone	rang.	We
carried	the	iridium	 phone	so	 the	Unit	 could	always	 reach	us	in	case	of	an	alert.
When	it	 rang,	we	all	 perked	up	with	 the	same	thought:	a	mission.	 The	caller	on
the	other	end	said	 only	 one	word—it	 was	 a	code	word	 followed	 by	 Roy’s	 and
my	names.	Translation:	 Roy	and	I	 needed	to	get	back	to	 the	Unit	 as	quickly	 as
possible.	 Without	  saying	  a	 word,	  we	  unfolded	  our	 maps,	 turned	  on	  our
headlamps,	and	began	assessing	our	 options.	 It	 didn’t	  take	long	 to	 recognize
what	 we	  needed	to	  do.	 If	   Roy	 and	  I	 crossed	 the	  Continental	 Divide	   at
Switchback	Pass	instead	of	at	Spotted	Bear	Pass,	we	could	shave	forty	miles	(or
two	to	 three	day’s	 travel)	off	 the	 route,	and	if	 things	 went	smoothly,	 we	 could
get	back	to	North	Carolina	in	less	than	seventy-two	hours.
   To	 ensure	that	we	could	use	every	available	second	of	daylight	for	 movement,
we	woke	 up	before	sunrise	and	 began	packing	our	 gear.	We	were	 a	tad	shy	of
thirty	 miles	 and	 one	 Continental	 Divide	  away	 from	 our	  pickup	 point.	 After
chugging	down	 a	piping	hot	 cup	of	 joe,	Roy	and	I	 shook	hands	with	 the	rest	of

113
the	team	and	headed	off	on	our	own	toward	Switchback	Pass.
   Switchback	 is	a	colloquial	 term	for	the	natural	 zigzag	pattern	used	to	move	up
or	down	 a	steep	grade.	It’s	  the	pattern	 animals	use	to	 walk	 up	 or	down	 steep
slopes,	 and	 it’s	  the	 time-tested	  physics-based	 pattern	 used	 to	  design	 and
construct	mountain	 roads	 the	world	  over.	 The	 switchback	 trail	 leading	 up	 to
Switchback	Pass	was	the	 longest	and	 steepest	switchback	that	 either	Roy	 or	 I
had	ever	encountered.	Pausing	at	the	base	and	gazing	skyward,	 it	reminded	 me
of	something	I’d	 once	seen	in	a	Dr.	Seuss	book.
   The	 majority	of	 the	three-hour	trek	up	the	never-ending	switchback	went	by	 in
a	 monotonous	 blur.	  We	 plodded	 upward	  at	 a	 steady	 step	 pace	 while	  the
temperature	climbed	to	an	unseasonably	balmy	seventy-five	degrees.	The	weight
of	our	packs,	combined	 with	 the	thin	air	 and	the	dehydrating	 heat,	began	to	sap
us	of	our	strength	and	breath.	I	was	suffering	 from	 severe	crocodile	bite	on	both
shoulders,	while	 Roy	  battled	double	 blisters	 on	 both	 his	 feet.	 We	 were	in	 a
perpetual	state	of	fidgeting	to	find	 relief.	Then	we	froze.
   The	 birds	that	had	been	chirping	away	 a	few	seconds	before	went	mute.	Most
outdoorsmen	recognize	 this	 antipattern	 as	 an	 alarm:	 a	 predator	 is	 nearby.	 I
strained	to	hear,	see,	or	smell	anything	 out	of	 the	ordinary.	 A	 subtle	procession
of	pebbles	tumbled	 down	the	mountain	 from	 the	trail	 a	few	switchbacks	 above.
Roy	and	 I	 simultaneously	 swung	 toward	 the	movement	 while	 unbuckling	  the
retention	snaps	on	our	holsters.	Ranger	Sue’s	 admonition	was	 still	 fresh	on	our
minds;	we	 weren’t	 thinking	 we	might	 have	surprised	 a	bighorn	 sheep.	Rapidly
scanning	the	mountain	above	us	by	reversing	the	path	of	the	tumbling	 pebbles,	a
hundred	feet	above	we	spotted	the	 massive	hindquarters	of	 a	grizzly	 lumbering
up	and	away	 toward	the	 snow-covered	alpine	 sanctuary	near	the	peak.	What	 a
magnificent	sight.	 The	grizzly	 slowed	 as	she	approached	the	tree	line,	and	then
glanced	back	over	her	 shoulder	while	 shaking	her	 head	in	what	 appeared	to	be
angry	disgust.	 We	 had	 seen	a	grizzly	  in	 the	 best	of	 all	  sighting	 scenarios—
running	 away	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction	 from	  us.	Spotting	  the	grizzly	  was	 a
wonderful	 thing—every	  outdoorsman	yearns	 to	 see	one	in	 the	 wild—but	  the
elation	of	the	moment	 quickly	 evaporated	when	it	dawned	on	us	that	 the	grizzly
was	not	equally	elated	to	 see	us.	Those	berries	weren’t	just	 nice-to-have	sundry
items	to	her;	 they	were	 life-sustaining.	 We	had	 just	come	between	her	 and	her
berries.	To	the	grizzly,	we	were	trespassing.
   Following	  standard	antigrizzly	 protocol,	 we	 stayed	where	we	were	 for	a	few
more	minutes,	and	then	began	talking	loudly	 and	moving	 upward	along	 the	trail
with	 extreme	caution.	 We	 wanted	to	 make	sure	 there	wasn’t	 a	 hidden	animal

114
carcass	stashed	out	of	view	that	might	 cause	the	grizzly	 to	 come	charging	back
to	protect	it	from	 us.
   After	  another	hour	of	 zigzagging	 and	looking	 over	 our	shoulders,	we	 finally
arrived	at	the	top	of	 the	mountain.	The	most	common	reason	why	hikers	 get	lost
and	perish	 at	 high	 altitude	  is	 that	 the	 tops	of	  most	 high-altitude	 mountains
consist	of	  byzantine	 series	 of	 outcrop-pings,	 corridors,	  creekbeds	and	 other
strange	terrain	features	that	can	befuddle	even	the	most	 experienced	navigators.
To	 navigate	 effectively	  in	 mountainous	 terrain	 you	 have	 to	 be	 able	to	 read
terrain.	The	 term	reading	 terrain	 describes	the	ability	  to	match	 the	terrain	 you
see	in	 front	  of	 you	 with	  the	 terrain	 depicted	 on	 the	 map.	 Both	 Roy	 and	 I
considered	ourselves	experts	at	reading	terrain.	But	to	read	something,	you	 have
to	be	able	to	see	it,	and	all	 the	terrain	on	top	 of	this	 mountain	was	ensconced	in
twenty-foot-deep	snow.
   “Let’s	  rock	 and	roll,”	  Roy	 uttered,	 as	we	stepped	off	  the	boulder	 and	sunk
down	to	our	 waists	in	the	snow.	 Warrior	 pride	isn’t	 easily	dissuaded;	we	tried	 a
few	more	 steps.	No	change—with	  each	step	our	legs	 would	 sink	three	 to	four
feet	deep,	and	 then	require	 a	strength-sapping	 struggle	 to	pull	  them	free.	 We
were	post-holing	 through	the	piecrust.	 Screw	this!	 We	 turned	around	and	did	 a
half-walk,	 half-breaststroke	back	to	the	boulder	shore.	This	was	why	 we	brought
the	snowshoes,	I	gladly	 admitted	to	myself	 as	we	began	slipping	 our	 boots	into
the	bindings.	  Just	as	 I	 was	 putting	  my	 second	snowshoe	 on,	 we	 heard	 the
unmistakably	throaty	growl	 of	 a	grizzly	bear	(given	 the	altitude	and	the	terrain,	I
was	almost	positive	it	wasn’t	 a	pig).
   “What	 the	hell	 was	that	about?’	Roy	whispered.
   “Not	 really	 sure,”	I	whispered	back,	“but	 let’s	get	moving.”
   With	  the	titanium	  snowshoes	on	our	 feet,	we	 pranced	across	the	piecrusted
surface	like	astronauts	walking	 across	the	moon.	This	 is	what	 Alaskans	call	 the
great	counterintuitive	axiom	 of	the	north:	 with	the	right	 equipment,	it	 is	easier	to
move	in	the	mountains	in	the	winter	 than	in	the	summer.	The	hard	crust	over	 the
deep	snow	allowed	us	to	move	directly	 across	the	uneven	boulder-strewn	terrain
below	it.	 The	normally	 treacherous-to-cross	high-mountain	 streams	and	ravines
were	completely	 covered	in	 snow,	so	instead	of	 having	 to	search	for	 a	fjord	 to
cross	safely	and	dryly,	we	were	able	to	 walk	on	top	and	over	 them	while	staying
directly	on	our	line	 of	march.
   Within	  a	couple	 of	hours,	 and	just	before	 we	lost	 the	sun,	Roy	 and	I	 passed
over	and	through	 the	top	of	 the	Continental	 Divide.	 After	  taking	a	 few	“happy
snaps”	to	record	the	moment,	we	paused	to	look	behind	us	at	the	mile-long	maze

115
of	snow-covered	terrain	we	had	just	 traversed.	We	felt	good	about	ourselves	and
about	what	we	 had	just	accomplished.	But	 while	 staring	at	 the	snowshoe	prints
that	traced	 our	 path,	 we	 realized	 we	 couldn’t	  have	 made	 that	 path	 without
Walter’s	sage	advice,	nor	would	 we	have	had	the	opportunity	 to	wear	his	advice
if	it	 weren’t	 for	 Ranger	Sue’s	sagacious	“watch	 out	for	 grizzlies	 while	 walking
on	the	switchback”	advice.
   I	 pulled	 out	my	acetate-covered	map	and	used	a	stubby	grease	pencil	to	write
the	words	Always	 listen	 to	the	guy	 on	the	ground	 across	the	top.	 With	 the	sun
disappearing	fast,	we	rapidly	 descended	the	east	side	of	the	divide,	aided	by	 the
law	of	 gravity	  and	a	noticeably	 receding	 snowpack.	Within	  minutes	 we	came
upon	 a	magnificent	  hundred-foot	 iced-over	  waterfall,	  its	 motionless	 exterior
betrayed	by	the	roar	of	a	jet	 engine	revving	at	 full	 throttle	underneath.	Darkness
settled	in.	 There	 was	no	 need	to	 move	 any	 farther;	 the	base	of	 the	 waterfall
would	make	a	fine	 campsite	for	our	 last	night	in	 the	Bob.	After	 building	 a	small
fire,	we	 cracked	open	a	 flask	of	 Knob	 Creek	 Kentucky	 Whiskey	 that	Roy	 had
saved	for	just	such	a	moment.	We	passed,	sipped,	and	savored	a	few	shots	while
laughing	about	 who	had	won	 more	 of	the	 “which	 way	 to	go”	 debates	that	had
punctuated	the	entire	day.	 The	light	 from	 the	 full	 moon	 made	the	snowcapped
peaks	and	the	pine-forested	valley	 below	us	glow	 like	 an	Ansel	 Adams	picture.
Although	neither	of	 us	ever	mentioned	the	grizzly	bear,	it	was	never	far	from	 our
minds	that	night.	 We	 stayed	up	most	of	 the	night	 sipping	 whiskey,	 stoking	 the
roaring	fire,	and	talking	 about	life.
   The	next	 day	we	walked	twenty-two	 miles	to	our	designated	rendezvous	point,
where	one	 of	 our	  support	 guys	was	 waiting	  in	 an	 SUV	  with	 tickets	  and	a
recommendation	for	the	quickest	way	to	get	back	to	North	 Carolina.
   Over	 the	next	three	days,	all	of	the	other	teams	made	it	up	and	over	the	passes,
experiencing	  trials	  and	 tribulations	   similar	  to	  the	  ones	 Roy	   and	 I	  had
encountered.	There	was	even	another	grizzly	bear	encounter.	It	would	turn	out	to
be	some	of	the	most	valuable	training	any	of	us	had	ever	experienced.


                                   GUIDING-PRINCIPLE	     LESSON:


	
                              Always	 Listen	 to	the	Guy	 on	the	 Ground
	
We	spent	a	lot	of	time	preparing	for	 our	journey	through	the	Bob.	We	studied	the

116
history	of	 the	area,	we	 studied	the	terrain	 and	weather	patterns,	we	 studied	the
animals—especially	  the	 grizzly—and	   we	  applied	  the	 intellectual	  rigor	   of
scientists	to	 our	 selection	 of	 food,	 clothing,	 and	 survival	 equipment.	 But	 the
most	profound	 insight	 we	took	 away	from	 the	Bob	 came	from	 our	interactions
with	 Walter	and	Ranger	Sue.	When	 it	 comes	to	understanding	what’s	 going	on
around	you,	there’s	no	better	external	 source	of	reality-revealing	 context	than	to
always	listen	to	the	guy	on	the	ground.
   “Guy	 on	the	ground”	 is	a	metaphor	for	 the	people	who	are	actually	interacting
with	 the	 environment.	 Whether	 on	 the	 front	 lines,	 the	 front	 office,	  or	 in	 an
isolated	forest	ranger	outpost	 in	Montana,	 they’re	 your	best	external	 source	for
understanding	the	reality	 of	the	situation	 on	the	ground.	 Listening	 is	just	that—
listening—it	  doesn’t	 mean	 abdicating	 responsibility	  or	 doing	  everything	 the
individual(s)	 says,	although	you	might—it	  only	implies	 that	you	listen	 to	him	 or
her	as	one	of	your	primary	inputs.
   The	 type	of	knowledge	that	makes	guys	on	the	ground	like	 Walter	and	Ranger
Sue	so	valuable	 is	 called	 tacit	 knowledge.	 Tacit	 knowledge	 is	 contextualized
knowledge	of	people,	places,	ideas,	and	experiences.	It	involves	knowing	how	 to
obtain	desired	endstates,	knowing	what	to	do	to	obtain	 them,	and	knowing	when
and	where	 to	 act	on	 them.	 It’s	  knowledge	 in	 practice	 that’s	 developed	from
direct	 experience	  and	 action,	  and	 usually	  is	  shared	 only	  through	  highly
interactive	 conversation,	 storytelling,	  and	shared	 experience.	Like	  the	 orphic
advice	from	 the	Vietnam	 veteran	I	 befriended	in	 college:	“If	  you	want	 to	learn
about	what	went	wrong	in	Vietnam,	 you	can	find	the	answer	at	Gettysburg.”
   Tacit	 knowledge	 is	a	web	 of	networked	 and	multidimensional	 knowledge;	 as
such,	it	is	 also	difficult	  to	articulate	 or	write.	 (Imagine	 trying	 to	teach	someone
how	to	 swim	 over	 the	telephone	or	 e-mail.)	 Thus	you	 usually	 need	to	 do	two
things	to	access	it:	you	 have	to	seek	out	and	make	face-to-face	contact	 with	 the
source,	and/or	you	have	to	ask	context-specific	 questions	to	uncover	it.	“Walter,
what	would	 you	 say	is	 the	most	 important	 technique	or	 equipment	for	 getting
over	the	passes?”	“Ranger	Sue,	do	you	 think	we	 can	make	it	 over	the	passes	in
current	conditions?	What	about	bears?”
   If	 someone	has	enabling	information	 that	can	contribute	to	 accomplishing	our
goals,	we	 must	be	 willing	  to	add	 their	 talents	and	 their	skills	  to	our	 own,	 no
matter	how	different	 that	person	is	from	us.	Even	if	 it	implies	 that	everything	we
planned	or	thought	 we	 knew	was	 incorrect.	 To	do	 this	we	 must	be	 capable	of
divorcing	 ourselves	from	 our	 emotions.	 Pride	 and	hubris	 are	two	 of	 the	most
common	derailers	of	 a	person’s	 common	sense.	Despite	the	obvious	 lifesaving

117
utility	 of	 Ranger	Sue’s	advice,	 Stu	had	a	 hard	time	 getting	over	 our	wholesale
dumping	of	 his	planned	route.	To	 Stu	it	 was	a	de	facto	admission	 that	a	young,
blond,	noncombat-tested	female	was	 better	qualified	 to	provide	 mission-critical
advice	to	 our	group	 than	he	was.	 For	leaders,	this	 is	one	of	 the	 key	virtues	 of
internalizing	 this	 guiding	 principle.	 It	 allows	 us	to	 recognize	that	it’s	  okay	for
our	initial	 thought	process	and	decision	to	be	wrong.	In	fact,	 until	we	 get	on-the-
ground	input,	we	 should	expect	that	most	of	 what	we	think	 we	know	 will	  likely
turn	out	 to	be	incorrect	 or	incomplete.	 This	 mind-set	allows	 us	to	maintain	 our
most	prized	freedom,	the	freedom	of	choice	to	change	our	minds	and	liberate	our
thinking	from	 the	common-sense-blocking	emotions	of	pride	and	hubris.
   Whether	 the	president	of	the	most	powerful	country	 in	the	world,	 or	a	member
of	a	 team	moving	 through	 the	Montana	 wilderness,	 the	lesson	is	 the	same:	to
make	optimal	decisions	you	have	to	have	context,	and	the	best	external	source	of
reality-revealing	  context	 is	 to	 always	 listen	  to	 the	 guy	 on	  the	 ground.	 It’s
common	sense!
	
                                                        Postscript
	
   After	 missing	 2002	and	2003	because	of	Afghanistan	and	Iraq,	 some	or	all	 of
us	returned	to	the	Bob	in	2004,	2005,	2006,	and	2009.	Many	 of	the	original	 Unit
members	who	took	part	in	the	training	 in	2001	have	since	left	or	 retired	from	 the
military,	  but	 continue	 the	 tradition	  each	year	 with	  current	 and	 former	 Unit
members	and	 an	ever-growing	  cohort	 of	 their	 corporate	 friends.	 If	  you	 ever
decide	to	 walk	 “the	 Bob”	  keep	 an	eye	 out	for	  our	 group;	 we’ll	  be	the	 guys
listening	to	the	guys	on	the	ground!

118
                                 PART	        3




The	operative	assumption	today	is	that	someone,	somewhere,	has	key	information
or	a	better	idea;	and	the	operative	compulsion	should	be	to	find	out	who	has	that
information/idea,	learn	it,	and	put	it	into	action—fast!
                                                                                     —JACK	WELCH

119
                                                          8



                              CALM	   BEFORE	   THE	 STORM:


                                 THE	 MAN-HUNTIN’	  PROJECT


                                           June-August	   2001


With	some	middle-of-the-night-assistance	from	the	Unit	travel	agent,	Roy	and	I
used	planes,	brains,	automobiles,	and	good	ol’	shoe	leather	express	to	get	from
the	border	of	the	Bob	back	to	North	Carolina	in	just	a	bit	under	twelve	hours.
Lewis	and	Clark	would	 have	been	impressed.	As	was	always	the	case	at	the
Unit,	the	only	expectation	I	had	when	I	got	back	was	to	expect	the	unexpected.
And	in	that	regard,	this	mission	did	not	disappoint.
   It	 turned	out	that	 I	was	called	back	to	 participate	in	a	 collaborative	effort
between	the	U.S.	military	and	civilian	defense	contractors.	Where	the	idea	came
from	I	was	never	told,	but	the	unstated	objective	was	to	see	if	we	could	figure
out	a	way	to	 improve	the	process	for	finding	solutions	to	the	military’s	 most
difficult-to-solve	operational	needs.	Although	I	must	admit	I	was	bit	perplexed	at
first	about	having	been	yanked	out	of	the	Bob,	and	almost	getting	munched	by	a
bear	in	the	process,	the	more	I	thought	about	the	potential	of	the	project,	the
more	excited	I	got	about	participating.
   Historically,	 this	type	of	solution-focused	collaboration	between	the	military
and	 civilian	  defense	 contractors	 has	 generated	some	 evolutionary	  and
revolutionary	results.	It	was	during	a	collaborative	effort	 to	improve	military
radar	systems	around	1946	that	an	enterprising	scientist	noticed	that	the	candy
bar	in	his	pocket	had	melted	while	he	tested	a	new	vacuum	tube.	After	placing
some	popcorn	kernels	near	the	same	tube,	he	watched	with	a	eureka	sparkle	in
his	eye	as	 the	kernels	swelled,	popped,	then	gave	birth	 to	 the	 idea	of	 the
microwave	oven.1	When	military	and	civilian	 scientists	needed	a	solution	to
make	the	sharing	of	information	between	computer	systems	at	various	defense-
sponsored	universities	more	convenient,	they	collaborated	to	develop	the	mother

120
of	all	 military	 inventions;	 what	the	Pentagon	officially	 dubbed	the	“Intergalactic
Network,”	  but	 is	 now	 known	  worldwide	  as	the	 Internet.	 When	 the	 military
needed	a	device	to	help	its	ships	and	planes	safely	navigate	 around	the	globe,	it
was	a	collaborative	effort	 between	scientists	in	the	air	force,	 navy,	and	a	leading
defense	contractor	that	led	to	the	invention	 of	the	GPS	navigation	 system	that	is
almost	ubiquitous	today	in	our	cars,	airplanes,	and	cell	phones.2
   All	   three	 defense	contractors	 I’d	  be	 working	  with	  had	 research	facilities
spread	around	the	outskirts	 of	the	 Greater	Los	Angeles	 area.	Only	a	 few	hours
after	setting	 down	 my	backpack	 and	locking	 my	 hand-cannon	in	 my	 weapons
locker	at	the	Unit,	 I	headed	back	to	the	airport	to	catch	a	plane	to	Los	 Angeles.	I
was	accompanied	by	 a	 savvy	 acquisitions	 officer	 who	 had	 spent	most	 of	 his
career	as	a	fighter	 pilot	 until	 he	 experienced	a	life-flashing	  incident	 during	 an
engine	flameout	while	 flying	 a	night-training	 mission	 over	the	desert	southwest.
He	landed	his	plane,	hung	up	his	flight	 suit,	and	changed	career	paths	to	become
a	defense	acquisitions	officer.	 Our	 itinerary	 had	 us	spending	one	full	  day	with
each	company.	 Each	 company	 had	 put	  together	 a	 cross-functional	 team	 of
engineers	and	scientists	 they	referred	 to	 as	project	 design	teams.	 Each	of	 the
three	design	teams	consisted	of	 various	 types	of	 engineers—design,	electrical,
aeronautical.	You	 name	it,	they	 had	degrees	for	it.	 Our	 day-long	 agendas	were
set	up	as	openended	sessions	that	would	 first	 expose	unmet	operational	 needs,
and	then	focus	on	collaboratively	brainstorming	 potential	solutions.
   This	 was	the	first	 time	I	 had	ever	directly	 interacted	with	 defense	contractors,
and	they	immediately	 impressed	me	with	their	 dedication	and	passion.	“We	 live
to	discover	and	develop	ways	to	keep	you	 guys	safe	and	help	you	to	accomplish
your	missions,”	 they	told	 me	repeatedly.	I	 noticed	 that	everyone	was	going	 out
of	their	 way	 to	thank	 me	for	 participating.	 They	seemed	almost	uncomfortably
appreciative	of	my	 presence	and	input—so	much	so	that	during	 our	lunch	 break
on	the	first	day,	I	 asked	a	fiftysomething	 engineer	named	Stan	why	my	presence
was	such	 a	 big	 deal.	 Stan	was	 a	 Vietnam	 veteran	 who	 had	 worked	 for	 the
company	for	  more	than	 twenty	 years.	 Along	  the	way	 he	 had	participated	  in
numerous	  breakthrough	  projects,	   including	   the	   development	  of	   stealth
technology.	Stan	didn’t	  need	time	to	 mull	 over	 his	answer.	“Oh,	 you	 wouldn’t
believe	how	bad	 it’s	 gotten	since	they	initiated	 the	defense	acquisition	 reforms.
We’re	not	 allowed	to	contact	guys	 like	you	 to	get	feedback	anymore,	so	we	end
up	 developing	  technologies	  that	 aren’t	  what	  you	  guys	 really	  need.”	  His
frustration	progressed	to	anger.	“Instead	 of	calling	 someone	like	 you	for	 advice
when	we	run	into	a	design	issue,	we	end	up	guessing	what	the	technology	should

121
do	and	how	it	should	perform.	 Without	 feedback	from	the	guys	who	are	going	to
use	our	stuff,	we	 end	up	wasting	government	 money	instead	of	 saving	it,	 and	it
takes	us	twice	as	long	to	get	a	project	right.”
   Enacted	in	 1994,	the	intent	 of	the	 defense	acquisition	reforms	was	 to	prevent
the	unwarranted	influence	of	 the	defense	industry	on	the	military’s	 weapons	and
technology	 acquisition.	 The	 cause	 célèbre	for	  enacting	 the	 reforms	 was	 the
notorious	six-hundred-dollar	  toilet	 seat.	The	 six-hundred-dollar	 toilet	 seat	was
supposed	to	be	prima	facie	for	 what	happens	when	the	military	  and	the	defense
industry	collude	 with	 each	other	 for	 reasons	of	self-interest	 instead	of	 national
security.	The	 supposedly	overpriced	 toilet	 seat	became	the	rallying	 cry	 around
which	 Congress	and	some	media	 outlets	 allied	 to	 ensure	that	the	 government
would	never	again	get	ripped	off	 by	 licentious	defense	contractors.	The	problem
was,	as	Stan	explained,	“neither	 the	politicians	 nor	 the	media	 ever	checked	the
facts	around	why	the	toilet	 seat	actually	cost	six	hundred	dollars.”	 The	legend	of
the	notorious	toilet	 seat	surfaced	when	 twenty	 navy	planes	had	to	 be	rebuilt	 to
extend	their	  service	life	  in	 the	 late	 ’80s.	 The	 onboard	 toilets	 on	 the	 planes
required	a	uniquely	 shaped	fiberglass	 form	 (toilet	 seat)	that	also	had	 to	satisfy
strict	 military	   design	 specifications	 for	  vibration	  resistance,	fire	  retardance,
weight,	and	even	durability.	 Unfortunately,	 the	type	of	toilet	seat	you	purchase	at
the	local	hardware	store	didn’t	check	any	of	those	boxes.	Additionally,	 the	molds
for	the	seats	had	to	be	 specially	made	because	the	production	 process	for	these
particular	seats	had	been	closed	down	for	 more	than	two	decades.	So	when	you
understand	what	  was	 actually	 required	  to	 design	 and	 manufacture	 the	 six-
hundred-dollar	 toilet,	 you	begin	 to	 recognize	why	 it	 actually	 cost	 six	 hundred
dollars.
   But	 no	one	bothered	to	seek	out,	ask	questions	of,	and	listen	to	the	few	people
(such	as	Stan)	 who	could	 explain	 why	 the	 toilet	 seat	cost	so	 much.	Congress
responded	by	  passing	 legislation	   that	 minimized	   interactions	 between	  the
defense	contractors	whose	job	is	to	 discover	and	develop	 new	technologies	and
equipment,	and	the	operational	 side	of	 the	military—who	  they	 are	supposed	to
be	developing	it	for.	 Thus	the	unintended	consequence	of	the	defense	acquisition
reforms	was,	 and	still	  is,	 the	inability	  of	 the	 military	  to	rapidly	  translate	and
communicate	key	operational	 needs	and	gaps	to	the	people	who	are	in	 business
to	figure	 out	how	 to	close	those	gaps.	Although	 this	type	 of	restriction	 may	not
seem	so	detrimental	when	thinking	  in	terms	 of	developing	 toilet	 seats,	imagine
the	potentially	  life-threatening	 consequences	when	developing	 mission-critical
items	such	as	gas	masks,	weapons,	and	armor	protection	for	vehicles.

122
   Stan	 told	me	 that	I	 was	the	first	 military	  representative	they	had	talked	to	 in
the	past	 year	who	 possessed	current	real-world	  operational	 experience.	What
they	usually	 got	 were	 what	he	 described	as	“individuals	  with	  one	foot	 in	 the
retirement	grave”	 who	may	 or	may	not	 have	had	combat	experience	in	 the	past
but	whose	relevance	had	usually	vanished	with	the	crumbling	of	the	Berlin	 Wall.
   As	  our	 project	 progressed	and	I	  spent	time	 with	  each	of	 the	 three	design
teams,	I	realized	that	their	mental	models	of	what	 defined	“modern-day	 warfare”
were	vastly	different	 from	 mine.	 When	most	of	 them	described	their	 version	of
warfare	in	2001,	 they	described	scenarios	in	terms	of	 Desert	Storm	and	Kosovo
—and	solutions	 in	terms	of	 bombs	and	bombers.	They	 were	always	 asking	if	 a
faster	jet	fighter	or	a	bigger	tank	would	 help	us	fill	 current	real-world	 gaps.
   Going	 into	 the	session	I	wasn’t	sure	what	 kinds	of	 breakthrough	technologies
we	really	needed,	but	the	more	I	 talked	about	recent	real-world	 events,	the	more
I	started	to	realize	just	how	 much	warfare	had	both	changed,	and	concomitantly,
just	how	much	it	had	stayed	the	same.
   I	 realized	that	during	 my	combat	career,	from	 1989	to	the	present	day	(2001),
almost	every	major	strategic	operation	conducted	by	the	United	 States	had	either
started	out,	or	ended	up,	focusing	on	locating	and	capturing	a	specific	individual,
rather	than	defeating	a	country’s	 military	 or	seizing	 expansive	swaths	of	terrain.
Manuel	Noriega	 in	 1989,	the	 Colombian	 drug	cartel	 kingpins	 in	 1992	and	 93,
Mohamed	Farrah	Aideed	 in	 Somalia	in	 1993,	and	the	 PIFWCs	in	 Bosnia	 from
1995	to	the	present.	In	retrospect,	I	also	realized	that	it	was	Saddam	Hussein,	not
the	entire	  Iraqi	 military,	  who	  was	(or	  should	 have	 been)	the	 object	 of	  our
military	 efforts	 in	 the	1991	Gulf	 War.	 It	 hit	 me	that	the	 history	of	 modern-day
warfare	is	the	history	of	 man-hunting!
   As	 I	discussed	this	revelation	 with	Stan	and	his	design	team,	Stan	illuminated
that	this	method	of	 thinking	 and	its	resultant	operational	 focus	could	have	been,
and	perhaps	should	have	been,	the	true	military	 objective	of	 almost	every	major
U.S.	military	 action	over	the	past	sixty	years.
   “What	  might	have	 been,”	he	asked	the	group,	 “if	 we	 could	have	located	and
captured	Adolf	 Hitler	 prior	 to	’41,	 or	 Kim	 Il	 Sung	in	the	 early	’50s?	And	 think
about	the	‘nonwars’	and	the	genocide	we	might	 have	prevented.”	He	paused	and
added,	“Idi	 Amin	 in	 Uganda,	or	Pol	Pot,	 the	butcher	of	 Cambodia	who	ordered
the	murder	of	two	million	 of	 his	own	people	in	the	late	’70s.”
   The	 room	 came	alive	 with	 chatter.	 A	 handsome	woman	in	 her	 early	forties
stood	up	and	began	pacing	the	floor;	then	she	piggybacked,	“What	 we	need	is	to
develop	a	way	 to	identify,	 track,	 and	locate	specific	 people.”	 She	was	standing

123
across	the	room,	but	locked	 eyes	with	 me	as	she	asked,	“What	 if	 you	could	 do
this	from	  outer	 space?”	The	 room	 went	 quiet	 and	 everyone	looked	 at	 me.	 I
thought	about	 it	for	 a	 few	 seconds,	and	then	responded,	“That	 would	 work	 as
long	as	I	had	a	cool-looking	space	suit.”
   “Very	  funny.”	 She	smiled	as	she	walked	to	the	whiteboard	and	drew	a	satellite
hovering	over	the	earth.	“What	 if	 we	 could	figure	 out	a	way	 to	use	a	satellite	to
detect	a	person’s	genetic	code?”
   “How	  would	we	do	that?”	Sam	queried.
   “Did	  you	know	 that	humans	exfoliate	skin	 from	their	 bodies	24/7?”	she	asked
rhetorically.	 “We	  actually	 leave	 an	‘invisible	   to	 the	naked	 eye’	 trail	  of	 skin
behind	 us	 everywhere	  we	 go!”	   she	 added.	 The	 room	  erupted	 in	  sidebar
rumblings.	I	 wonder	if	the	satellite	 could	detect	someone’s	genetic	code	while	he
or	she	was	wearing	a	gorilla	 suit.
   “What’s	  so	funny?”	Stan	asked	me.
   “I	  was	just	thinking	 about	some	wild	 way	I	 might	be	able	to	disguise	my	 skin
exfoliation	 and	prevent	the	satellite	from	detecting	me.”
   Eureka!	 The	insight	that	something	 as	simple	as	a	gorilla	suit	might	 defeat	the
skin	exfoliate	detector	on	a	satellite,	brought	 me	back	down	to	earth.	We	weren’t
talking	about	an	all-purpose	technological	 panacea	for	finding	people;	the	reality
and	complexity	 of	life	 virtually	 guarantee	there	never	will	 be	one.	Instead,	these
types	of	capabilities	should	be	looked	at	as	part	of	an	overall	 system.	A	buffet	 of
capabilities	 that	 could	  be	 used	in	  combination	  with	  our	 guys	 working	  the
situation	on	 the	ground	 to	 assist	in	 the	vexing	 challenge	of	 locating	 a	 wanted
man.
   After	  three	days	 of	 anything-goes,	 free-thinking	 sessions,	we	 had	come	 up
with	 lots	  of	 out-of-the-box	   ideas,	many	  with	  significant	  potential	 to	  make
breakthrough	  contributions	   to	  current	   real-world	   operational	   challenges:
clandestine	communications	devices:	inert	human	tracking	chips;	DNA	 detection
devices	on	 satellites;	 and,	of	 course,	 all	 kinds	 of	 weird	 flying	  machines	 and
weapons	systems.
   All	  of	the	design	teams	requested	that	we	come	back	out	for	another	session	in
two	weeks.	 They	specifically	  requested	that	we	 bring	 back	a	few	 “real-world-
mission	scenarios”	 to	 help	them	 better	understand	the	 context	 of	current	 real-
world	challenges.	While	 my	 counterpart,	the	acquisitions	 officer,	 called	back	 to
our	higher	headquarters	and	passed	on	the	request,	I	thought	about	the	Lewis	and
Clark	 scenario	 that	my	  team	had	 developed	 back	 at	Fort	  Bragg	 in	 1998.	 It
represented	both	 a	current	  real-world	 scenario	 and	 our	 most	 intractable	 and

124
unsolved	operational	challenge:	how	to	infiltrate	 Afghanistan	to	 find	UBL.
   When	 I	 got	back	 to	the	Unit,	  I	opened	the	 Lewis	and	 Clark	 file	 for	 the	first
time	in	 three	years	and	reacquainted	myself	with	 the	concept.	I	 wondered	if	 we
had	made	any	progress	in	finding	UBL;	  I	hadn’t	heard	anything	 about	him	since
the	embassy	bombings.	Maybe	he	wasn’t	a	clear	and	present	danger	anymore.
   As	 soon	as	I	finished	reviewing	 the	slides,	I	sent	the	presentation	to	our	higher
headquarters	so	they	 could	decide	 whether	 to	approve	 it	 for	 sharing	 with	 the
civilian	 defense	 contractors.	Within	  a	 couple	of	  days	it	 was	 declassified	 and
approved	to	be	shown	in	its	entirety	to	all	three	companies.
   In	 late	August,	 I	flew	 back	out	to	Southern	California	 to	 conduct	the	mission-
scenario	briefings.	  I	  didn’t	  make	 any	 changes	 to	 the	 concept	 after	  it	 was
declassified;	it	still	 had	the	original	four	 phases	we	put	together	in	1998.	Phase	I:
send	in	a	couple	of	guys	(Lewis	and	Clark)	 to	link	 up	with	 some	trusted	Afghans
and	begin	developing	 the	situation	 on	the	 ground.	Phase	II:	 when	the	 situation
warranted	it,	 land	 transport	planes	 on	one	 of	 the	massive	dry	 lakebeds	in	 the
middle	of	the	night	 and	unload	additional	men	and	vehicles	to	link	 with	 our	guys
on	the	ground.	 Phase	III:	 move	 to	a	desert	hide	 site	and	 prepare	to	locate	 and
track	UBL.	 Phase	IV:	based	on	the	situation	on	the	ground,	conduct	an	operation
to	capture	him.
   After	 showing	 the	Lewis	and	Clark	concept	to	the	design	teams,	I	was	deluged
with	 questions	 and	comments	 that	 honed	 right	 in	 on	 the	 decisive	 point:	 the
ability	  to	 pinpoint	  UBL’s	  location	  and	 then	 track	 his	 movements.	 Without
knowing	 it,	 the	 defense	contractors	 had	identified	  finding	 the	 man	 (UBL)	  as
being	the	 biggest	operational	 challenge	we	 faced.	“Why	  don’t	 you	 send	some
people	to	 live	 and	 work	 in	 Afghanistan	 so	 you	 have	a	 continual	 presence	in
country?”	 “Why	  don’t	 you	 watch	the	 people	who	 live	 and	 work	 with	 UBL?”
“Why	 don’t	 you	 guys	 just	 hire	some	 Afghans	and	 ask	them	 what	you	 should
do?”	 Their	  questions	were	  perfect	 surrogates	for	  the	 three	 best	 sources	of
context:	time,	 common	sense,	and	always	listening	 to	 the	guy	 on	the	ground.	 I
was	impressed.	I	wrote	every	one	of	their	questions	down.
   On	 the	 final	 day,	we	 met	 with	 the	lead	 engineers	from	 each	company	 who
unanimously	requested	that	our	collaborative	relationship	continue.	One	of	 them,
a	regal-looking	white-haired	 man	with	 a	newscaster’s	face,	summed	it	up	for	 all
of	them:	“If	 we	could	 schedule	regular	interactions	like	this	 one,	we’re	confident
that	we	can	discover	and	develop	more	innovative	technologies	to	 help	you	guys
solve	your	 most	vexing	 operational	challenges.	And	 in	 the	process,	do	it	 much
more	efficiently	  and	effectively	  for	 the	 American	 taxpayer.”	 I	 wholeheartedly

125
agreed	and	pledged	to	go	back	and	provide	 the	same	feedback	to	key	leaders	in
the	military.
   While	 driving	  through	the	verdant	Santa	Monica	 Mountains	 on	my	way	 back
to	the	airport,	 I	reflected	 on	the	potential	of	 the	concepts	we	had	just	 discussed.
Specifically,	 how	 valuable	it	 would	 be	to	 have	a	buffet	 of	 technologies	to	find
and	capture	 dangerous	individuals	  anywhere	on	 the	 globe.	 If	 we	 could	 fully
develop	 this	 Orwellian	  capability,	  it	 could	 underpin	  our	 strategy	 for	 global
security	for	 the	 next	 fifty	 years,	 in	 much	the	 same	way	 that	nuclear	 weapons
formed	the	 foundation	 of	our	 defense	strategy	for	 the	 past	fifty.	 In	 theory,	 we
could	reverse	the	magnetic	poles	of	 warfare—to	 strike	at	the	individual	  causing
the	problem,	rather	 than	the	force	 and	the	people	under	 his	or	her	 command,	a
potentially	revolutionary	 and	evolutionary	 form	 of	warfare.	We	 spend	billions	of
dollars	on	bombs	and	bombers	to	destroy	men	and	machines,	when	the	reality	 is
that	more	often	than	not,	it	 all	comes	down	to	finding	 and	locating	 individuals—
manhunting.	We	 need	to	 combine	 our	 best	minds	 and	best	organizations	 in	 a
collaborative	fashion,	in	 much	the	same	way	we	did	to	develop	the	atomic	bomb,
except	instead	of	calling	it	the	Manhattan	Project,	we	should	 call	the	modern-day
version,	the	Manhuntin’	 Project.
   As	 I	 pondered	the	 potential	 of	 the	Manhuntin’	  Project	for	 the	 future,	 I	 was
oblivious	 to	the	 real-world	 events	snapping	together	at	that	 exact	moment,	just
two	weeks	shy	of	9/11.	It	 would	be	years	before	I	fully	 understood	the	irony	of	 it
all.
   We	  had	 scheduled	 the	 next	 collaborative	  brainstorming	  session	with	  the
defense	contractors	for	 the	last	 week	of	 September	2001.	That	 meeting	 would
never	happen.

126
                                                          9



                                                       9/11:


                               THE	 FOUR-INCH	 KNIFE	 BLADE
	
	
	
	
	
When	9/11	occurred,	I	 was	following	 a	mock	terrorist	 around	the	streets	of
Budapest,	Hungary,	as	part	of	a	training	exercise.	After	receiving	a	cell	phone
call	from	one	of	our	intelligence	analysts	telling	me	that	an	aircraft	had	crashed
into	the	World	Trade	Center,	I	pretended	to	let	the	terrorist	I	was	following	slip
away,	and	hurried	back	to	my	hotel	room	to	check	it	out.	I	arrived	just	in	time	to
turn	on	BBC	and	watch	the	second	plane	hit	the	North	Tower	and,	ultimately,
both	of	the	towers	crumbling.
   Like	 a	 lot	 of	 Americans,	I	immediately	commiserated	with	my	 comrades
about	whether	we	could	 have	or	should	 have	imagined	something	like	this
happening	and	perhaps	prevented	it.	 One	of	 my	 closest	friends	 had	 been
traveling	in	the	United	States	on	another	commercial	flight	that	day,	and	I	was
able	to	reach	him	by	phone	late	that	evening.	After	discussing	the	media	reports
that	described	the	terrorists	passing	uncontested	through	security	with	blades	and
box	cutters	in	their	carry-on	luggage,	my	friend	related	to	me	how	he	had	also
passed	through	security	earlier	that	morning	with	a	pocketknife	attached	to	his
keychain.	He	reminded	me	that	the	four-inch	knife	blade	on	his	pocketknife	was
within	the	 maximum	allowable	length	that	the	 FAA	 permitted	passengers	to
carry	on	 board	commercial	aircraft.	 “What	 a	 difference	a	 day	makes!”	 he
lamented.	It	takes	time	and	context	to	recognize	patterns.	Prior	to	9/11,	it	had
never	struck	any	of	us	as	odd	that	the	FAA	allowed	passengers	to	carry	four-inch
knife	blades	on	board	commercial	aircraft.	Today	it	is	almost	unimaginable!
   Perhaps	we	didn’t	think	it	odd	that	the	FAA	allowed	four-inch	knife	blades	on
board	aircraft	at	the	time,	because	most	of	us	thought	of	a	measly	four-inch	knife

127
blade	 as	 an	 all-purpose	  handyman’s	  tool	  or,	 in	  extremis,	  as	 a	 last-ditch
instrument	 for	 wilderness	 survival.	 Like	 the	 cardboard	 cows	and	 gorilla	 suit,
most	of	 us	had	never	 imagined	“the	 art	 of	 the	possible”	 regarding	 a	four-inch
knife	blade	on	an	aircraft.	 The	terrorists,	on	the	other	hand,	thought	 of	that	same
four-inch	 knife	  blade	 as	 a	powerful	  instrument	  for	 terror	 and	 coercion.	 By
initiating	  each	hijacking	  with	  the	 slitting	  of	  their	 first	  victims’	  throats,	 the
terrorists	were	able	to	shock	everyone	else	on	the	plane	into	a	temporary	state	of
submission,	which	bought	the	 terrorists	the	mission-critical	 minutes	they	 needed
to	organize,	gain	control	of	the	aircraft,	 and	turn	the	planes	toward	their	targets.
   This	 got	 me	to	 thinking	 that	 one	of	 the	only	 ways	 we	can	ever	 hope	to	 see
these	types	of	“unimaginable”	  events	unfolding	 before	 they	occur	 is	to	 look	 at
the	world	around	us	through	the	minds	and	eyes	of	others.
   There	were	plenty	 of	facts	and	events	(now	known	 as	dots)	that	occurred	prior
to	9/11	that,	if	connected,	might	have	allowed	us	to	understand	and	adapt	to	what
was	unfolding	 before	 it	actually	 happened.	Flight	 schools,	terrorist	 watch	 lists,
meetings,	and	cell-phone	 calls,	but	 to	collect	 dots	 you	have	 to	recognize	them
first.	Even	when	recognized,	dots	don’t	 always	add	up	the	same	way	to	different
people	with	  different	 backgrounds,	 and	different	  life	 experiences,	so	 the	 key
patterns	they	reveal	 can	be	 missed	entirely.	 In	 the	 case	of	 9/11,	for	 example,
most	of	 us	had	a	mental	 model	 of	how	 an	airplane	 hijacking	 was	 supposed	to
unfold.	We	 also	had	a	mental	model	of	what	 a	weapon	of	mass	destruction	was.
A	hijacked	 plane	entailed	an	emergency	landing	and	a	protracted	negotiation	for
the	hostages	in	exchange	for	something	of	 value	to	the	hijackers,	 which	 usually
included	 their	 safe	passage	or	 escape.	A	 weapon	 of	 mass	destruction	 was	 a
military	 weapon	that	 was	either	dropped	 from	 a	plane	or	 launched	as	a	rocket.
These	mental	models	were	 based	on	our	interpretations	 of	 numerous	incidents,
or	dots	 that	coalesced	over	 the	course	of	 our	 lifetimes.	 But	 the	 terrorists	who
masterminded	9/11	were	able	to	imagine	the	unimaginable	with	 regard	to	what	a
hijacked	airplane	could	do	when	fully	 loaded	with	 fuel	and	flown	 into	a	high-rise
building	 in	a	 large	city,	 because	they	also	were	able	 to	imagine	 and	accept	the
fact	that	they	would	be	killing	 themselves	in	the	process.
   How	 many	 of	us	had	ever	 sat	around	thinking,	 “Wouldn’t	  a	great	way	 to	get
attention	and	kill	 innocent	people	be	to	 hijack	a	bunch	 of	planes	filled	 with	 fuel
and	fly	 them	into	 buildings?”	  We	have	very	 little	 in	 common	 with	 the	kind	 of
person	who	thinks	 about	 hijacking	 airplanes	and	 flying	 them	 into	 buildings	 to
kill	 innocent	people	and	themselves	along	with	them.	That	 is	not	us.	It’s	 not	that
we	don’t	 have	the	mental	 capacity	to	 imagine	something	 like	 that;	it’s	 actually

128
pretty	simple.	 Rather,	 we	 have	boundaries	called	 values	 that	prevent	 us	from
thinking	that	way.	 Psychotic	terrorists	do	not.
   Therefore,	  to	 recognize	and	 connect	 the	 dots	 and	make	 the	 unimaginable
imaginable,	we	need	contact	with	and	input	from	 people	who	think	the	same	way
terrorists	 do.	 To	  find	  the	 kinds	 of	  people	 with	  the	 type	 of	  on-the-ground
knowledge	that	 can	enable	us	 to	understand	and	 connect	the	dots,	 we	have	 to
imagine	how	to	seek	out	and	listen	to	them.	It’s	 very	 rarely	the	self-styled	expert
or	 the	  academician,	 though	  both	 can	  make	 positive	  contributions	  to	  our
knowledge	base.	Rather,	 it’s	 the	 person	who	 has	walked	 the	 specific	 ground,
lived	the	specific	 lifestyle,	and	possesses	a	specific	psychosocial	mind-set	whom
we	need.	 Very	 rarely	 are	they	 cut	 from	 the	 same	cloth	 as	 you	and	 I,	 so	 we
usually	need	to	go	outside	our	social	networks	to	find	them.
   The	 archetypal	example	is	portrayed	in	 the	1991	movie	 Silence	of	the	Lambs,
where	Jodie	Foster,	who	plays	a	junior	 FBI	 agent,	seeks	out,	listens	to,	and	acts
on	information	 from	 a	psychotic	 murderer	named	Hannibal	 Lecter.	 Despite	the
fact	that	Hannibal	Lecter	 was	serving	a	life	sentence	in	prison	while	 the	murders
took	place,	Jodie	Foster’s	 character	understood	that	Lecter	 had	the	same	mind-
set	and	many	of	the	same	life	experiences	as	the	killer	she	was	trying	 to	capture.
Silence	of	the	Lambs	 was	just	a	 movie,	but	 if	 we	in	 the	 United	States	had	had
someone	like	Hannibal	Lecter	who	 had	the	same	mind-set	and	many	of	the	same
life	 experiences	as	the	terrorists	that	masterminded	9/11,	 we	surely	would	 have
tapped	into	his	knowledge	base,	wouldn’t	we?

129
                                                         10



IMAGINE	     EVERYONE’S	    POTENTIAL	     AS	 THE	  GUY	  ON	 THE
                                                  GROUND



                     October	  2001,	 Desert	 Island,	  Persian	 Gulf1


In	early	October,	just	a	few	weeks	after	9/11,	the	military	decided	to	set	up	a
massive	staging	base	on	a	remote	desert	island	in	the	Persian	Gulf	to	prepare	for
combat	operations	in	Afghanistan.2	Fifty	or	so	of	my	fellow	Unit	members	and	I
were	among	the	first	to	land	on	the	barren	desert	island.	As	the	tail	ramp	lowered
and	I	 stepped	off	 the	back	of	 the	 aircraft,	my	 senses	were	greeted	by	the
unmistakable	furnace	blast	of	Middle	Eastern	desert	heat.	I	slid	my	 ballistic
Oakleys	down	onto	my	face	and	stared	out	at	a	sea	of	murky	brown	sand	that
stretched	from	horizon	to	horizon.	Ah,	yes—back	in	the	middle	of	nowhere!	We
were	told	that	this	was	the	“hidden	airfield”	we	would	be	using	to	set	up	our	base
of	operations.	Rob	was	one	of	the	operations	officers	who	worked	for	me	at	the
time.	A	Special	Forces	veteran	and	also	a	borderline	savant,	he	sauntered	up	next
to	me	and	only	half-jokingly	posited	that	we	could	have	flown	circles	over	the
United	States	for	the	past	twenty-three	hours	and	just	as	easily	been	standing	in
the	middle	of	the	desert	in	Arizona	and	never	known	it.	But	this	desert	had	no
cactuses,	and	one	of	the	big	things	you	learn	about	the	U.S.	government	when
you’ve	worked	in	its	most	secretive	organizations	for	a	few	years	is	this:	The
U.S.	government	is	  incapable	of	 a	 planning	 a	 complex	conspiracy—past,
present,	or	future.	 The	reason:	when	it	 comes	to	 dealing	with	  complexity,
traditional	planning	(aka	the	kind	the	government	uses)	simply	does	not	work.
“Sorry,	 Rob,”	 I	 deadpanned,	“I	know	 Arizona,	 and	this,	 my	 friend,	 is	 no
Arizona.”
   For	some	of	the	newer	members	in	the	Unit,	it	was	the	first	time	they	had	ever
witnessed	the	awesome	capability	of	America’s	Special	Operations	logistics
forces	to	pre-position	massive	amounts	of	men,	equipment,	and	supplies	in	a
short	time.3	It	 reminded	me	of	 watching	fast-motion	photography	of	an	ant

130
colony	building	 its	nest.	As	soon	as	the	sun	went	down	 and	visibility	 dropped	to
zero,	giant	cargo	planes,	flying	 without	 lights,	 came	screeching	out	of	 the	night
sky	in	perfectly	 synched	intervals	 of	ten	 minutes.	As	the	 wheels	touched	down,
the	roaring	turbocharged	engines	changed	pitch	and	braked	the	behemoth	flying
machines	with	physics-defying	 precision.	 Each	cargo	plane	would	 then	turn	 off
the	main	runway	 without	 a	second	to	spare	before	another	plane,	waiting	empty
at	the	opposite	 end	of	 the	 runway,	 would	 release	its	brakes,	accelerate	to	 full
power,	and	go	roaring	 past	in	the	 opposite	direction	 to	take	off	 and	make	room
for	the	next	 plane	to	land	 a	few	 minutes	later.	With	 Hollywood	  special	effects-
like	orderliness,	this	 cycle	went	on	 all	night	 long.	Once	the	giant	 planes	were	in
their	parking	 spot,	they’d	drop	 their	tail	 ramps	and	regurgitate	their	 cargo	to	the
ravenous	tongues	of	tandem	two-ton	 forklifts	  driven	 by	young	 men	who	 deftly
handled	the	 machines	like	  they	were	 Porsches.	The	 entire	 choreography	was
done	impervious	to	the	naked	eye—to	be	part	of	 it,	you	 had	to	have	night-vision
goggles	strapped	to	 your	 head	and	a	real-world	  mission	to	 inspire	 your	 heart.
One	wrong	turn	or	second	of	inattentiveness	by	any	of	 the	actors	involved,	and	a
hundred	things	could	kill	 any	of	them	in	a	hundred	really	ugly	 ways.
   A	 small	city	 grew	like	 a	weed	in	front	 of	 our	mission-focused	eyes.	Hundreds
of	 brand-spanking-new	  prefabricated	 tents,	  each	 with	  its	 own	  temperature
control	ventilation	 unit,	 were	snapped	together	to	create	row	 after	row	 of	living
areas	to	sleep	in	by	 day,	and	plan	 and	prepare	for	 combat	in	 by	night.	 Shower
tents	and	Porta	Potties	were	positioned	at	distances	that	always	seemed	to	be	too
far	away	to	walk	 to	in	the	middle	 of	the	night.	The	area	in	which	 all	the	planning
would	take	place	was	called	the	Joint	Operations	Center,	or	JOC.4	The	JOC	was
a	sprawling	  tent	 compound	 made	 up	 of	 a	 byzantine	 series	 of	 more	 than	 a
hundred	specially	designed	connecting	tents	that	could	 only	have	been	designed
by	 someone	who	 had	 spent	far	  too	 many	 years	working	  at	 the	 Pentagon.	I
believe	the	configuration	 was	that	 of	a	spoked	wheel,	 but	I’m	  not	really	 sure;	I
just	followed	 signs	to	get	to	wherever	I	needed	to	go.
   Within	  twenty-four	  hours	 of	 our	 plane	 touching	 down,	 we	 were	 watching
BBC	on	seventy-two-inch	 plasma	flat-screen	TVs.	 Massive	generators	created	a
harmonic	 resonance	 of	  white	 noise	  while	  cooling	  the	 hundreds	 of	  laptop
computers	sending	 and	receiving	  data	with	  their	 counterparts	throughout	 our
own	private	 version	of	 the	World	 Wide	 Web.	 Satellite	dishes,	servers,	supplies
and	accoutrements	 were	 all	  in	 place	 to	  provide	 everything	  needed	for	  the
planning	process.	This	 was	to	 become	the	mother	 of	 all	 footprints;	 there	were
thousands	of	 men	 and	 women	 in	 place.	 It	 was	 a	 who’s	 who	 in	  the	special

131
operations	community,	with	 a	sprinkling	 of	who-the-hell-are-they?	 thrown	 in	for
good	 measure.	 There	 was	 just	  one	 thing	  missing:	  we	  had	 no	 situational
awareness	of	Afghanistan,	Al	Qaeda,	or	UBL.
   While	  the	footprint	 was	 metamorphosing,	the	 pressure	was	building	 in	 D.C.
for	 the	military	  to	 actually	 “do	  something.”	 “There	 just	 aren’t	 any	 targets	in
Afghanistan”	 became	the	standard	DOD	response	when	the	civilian	leadership	in
D.C.	asked	for	updates.5	Just	as	the	intelligence	community	 had	done	in	the	late
’90s,	 the	military	   was	committing	  the	 mental	 model	 error	 of	 thinking	  about
targets	in	Afghanistan	 as	physical	 structures—terrorist	 training	 camps,	military
barracks,	and	UBL’s	 house	(all	of	 which	were	now	 empty)—instead	of	 thinking
in	terms	 of	 the	location	 of	 individual	  leaders.	History	  was	repeating	 itself.	 In
actuality	 our	military	  mission	 wasn’t	 about	destroying	 structures,	defeating	 an
army,	or	 taking	 control	 of	 large	swaths	 of	 terrain;	it	 was	 about	hunting	 down
men.
   I	 should	 point	 out	something	 that	struck	 me	 as	odd	at	 the	time.	 At	 no	time
during	the	first	 few	 weeks	after	9/11	were	my	 comrades	and	I	in	 the	Unit	 given
the	mission	to	find,	 follow,	 and	capture	UBL	 and	his	key	associates.	Rather,	our
unofficial	 mission,	 in	 those	first	 critical	 months	after	 9/11,	was	like	 the	 rest	of
the	military,	 to	find	 targets	to	bomb	 or	attack.	Satellite	 photos	were	scrutinized;
old	intelligence	 reports	were	dusted	off;	and	in	 the	end,	two	targets	were	chosen
by	someone	or	someones	in	our	higher	headquarters.6
   When	 an	intelligence	officer	 first	 presented	“the	targets”	to	us	in	a	briefing,	he
nonchalantly	added	that	there	wasn’t	any	enemy	on	either	target.	I	looked	around
the	room	  expecting	 to	 hear	 a	 thundering	 murmur	  and	 a	 collective	  look	 of
complete	  befuddlement.	  Instead,	  there	  was	 thundering	   silence.	  As	  Bob
Woodward	 would	 later	describe	the	 two	 targets	in	 his	book	 Bush	at	 War,	one
was	an	empty	 airfield	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	desert,	and	the	 other	was	the	 long-
abandoned	home	of	Taliban	leader	Mullah	Omar.7
   Val	  leaned	over	 to	 me	 and	whispered,	 “You	  gotta	 be	shittin’me.	  If	  we’re
going	to	risk	 our	men’s	 lives	getting	 to	a	target,	it	 ought	to	 be	worth	something
when	we	get	there.”
   The	 intelligence	 officer	 then	described	the	military	  intelligence	 community’s
version	of	the	enemy	situation	in	southern	Afghanistan.
   “There	  is	a	 ring	 of	 fire	 around	 Kandahar	[see	Map	 3],”	  he	said	 with	 great
officiousness.	 “It	  consists	 of	 concentric	 circles	  of	 rockets,	 handheld	 missile
launchers,	and	antiaircraft	guns.”	 He	pointed	 to	the	satellite	 photos	that	showed

132
tanks	 and	 antiaircraft	 guns	 on	  the	 outskirts	 of	  the	 city,	  each	 with	  a	 little
PowerPoint	arrow	 describing	its	 official	 nomenclature.	“And	  the	enemy	is	 very
proficient	 at	using	them.”	He	made	some	kind	 of	comparison	between	Kandahar
and	Hanoi.	  He	 then	 described	the	 enemy	 without	  differentiating	  among	 the
Afghan	people,	 the	hard-core	Taliban,	 and	the	foreign	 Al	 Qaeda.	I	 wasn’t	 sure
what	to	 think	 about	the	 briefing,	 but	 Val	 summed	it	 up	eloquently	 in	 his	 own
special	way	when	he	posited,	“Does	this	guy	know	how	 to	do	a	handstand?”
   Although	  I	 was	puzzled	 by	 the	mission	 against	what	 appeared	to	be	 empty
targets,	my	faith	in	 the	institution	 of	 the	military	 assuaged	my	initial	 concerns.	I
genuinely	 believed	 that	 time	  and	 common	 sense	would	  reveal	 information,
insights,	and	ideas	that	would	 refocus	our	efforts	 toward	finding	 UBL	 and	other
Al	 Qaeda	and	Taliban	 leaders	who	 were	all	 still	 at	large	 inside	 Afghanistan.	 I
figured	 that	  these	targets	 were	  just	 an	 opening	  best	 guess	by	  our	 higher
headquarters,	and	that	once	they	got	more	 information	 they	would	 surely	 focus
on	the	actual	enemy.
   As	  time	 played	  out,	 we	 began	 to	 recognize	 that	 common	 sense	 was	 an
uncommon	virtue	 in	 our	higher	 headquarters	at	that	time.	As	 we	were	 about	to
discover,	our	 commanding	  general	actually	 believed	 that	 the	 most	 important
objectives	 in	 the	 early	 stages	of	 the	 operation	 were	 psychological.	  In	 other
words,	he	believed	that	if	 we	raided	empty	targets	in	Afghanistan	 and	filmed	 the
raids	for	 the	world	 to	see	(he	always	 said	CNN),	 we	would	 have	some	kind	 of
morale-breaking	effect	 on	the	enemy.	 We	were	told	 he	had	written	 a	 couple	of
papers	on	the	 uses	of	the	 media	and	 psychological	 operations	in	 wartime.	 He
believed	in	his	theories.	It	was	his	reality.	 My	 fellow	 Unit	 members	and	I,	on	the
other	hand,	believed	 that	 it	 was	futile	  to	conduct	 psychological	 operations	 on
psychos!	Think	 about	it—would	  the	type	 of	person	who	 volunteers	to	 sacrifice
his	own	life	 in	a	suicide	mission,	just	to	get	to	a	place	where	he	can	have	his	way
with	seventy-two	 virgins,	really	 back	down	due	to	“moral	 distress”	inflicted	 by	 a
CNN	video	clip	 of	bombings	on	targets	he	knows	are	empty?	I	was	thinking	no.
   Over	 the	 next	couple	 of	days,	 it	became	oppressively	 clear	that	 the	military
decision-making	 process	had	 already	 calcified	  around	 the	 two	 targets.	 With
political	 pressure	mounting,	 and	 deadlines	for	 action	 rapidly	 approaching,	 the
total	collective	 thought	power	of	the	military	  turned	to	basing	rights,	fuel	storage
capabilities,	time-distance	 limitations	  of	 aircraft,	 and	the	logistical	  conundrum
around	continuing	to	 transport	megatons	of	equipment	and	people	to	 keep	all	of
us	supplied	with	 food,	water,	 and	fuel	in	 the	middle	 of	nowhere.	It	 was	now	 all
about	obsessing	over	the	details.	There	was	no	 give-and-take,	no	“let’s	  develop

133
the	situation	and	figure	 this	thing	 out.”	 Instead	of	being	purveyors	 of	the	“art	 of
war,”	we	had	regressed	to	“painting	by	numbers.”
   Of	 course,	there	was	only	one	way	to	 get	to	the	empty	targets	and	back	to	our
island	base	on	the	same	night.	We	would	have	to	 cram	as	many	men	as	possible
into	large,	lumbering,	 heavy-lift	 CH-47	helicopters,	and	fly	 for	 eight	hours	to	the
empty	targets	outside	 of	 Kandahar.	We’d	 then	 search	for	any	 intelligence	 that
might	just	happen	to	be	lying	 around,	get	back	in	our	helicopters,	and	fly	 back	to
our	tents.	The	 entire	mission	 would	 be	filmed	 by	 military	 cameramen.	Despite
the	 fact	 that	 there	 was	 no	 enemy	 threat	 on	 either	  target,	 the	 threats	 from
accidents	and	happenstance	were	immense.	This	would	 be	the	 longest	wartime
helicopter	mission	 in	history—a	 thousand	miles	 each	way.	Getting	 to	the	target
would	put	 massive	stress	on	both	the	pilots	 and	the	 mechanical	integrity	 of	 the
helicopters.	 Landing	 on	 the	 target	 also	 would	 be	 dicey	 because	any	 enemy
within	ten	miles	 would	know	 exactly	what	was	happening	and	would	flock	 to	the
area	to	take	a	couple	of	 potshots	at	the	 slow-moving	 “flying	  mobile	 homes”	as
they	attempted	 to	land	 and	take	 off.	 We	 were	 concerned,	and	we	 had	lots	 of
questions.	But	when	 the	intelligence	 officer	 finished	 the	briefing	 and	 asked	for
questions,	all	that	was	discussed	was	the	logistics	concerning	how	to	get	the	film
downloaded,	edited,	and	back	to	the	United	States	for	use	on	the	nightly	news.
   For	 my	comrades	and	me	in	the	Unit,	we	were	beginning	 to	understand	a	stark
new	reality	 concerning	 our	role	 in	 the	global	 war	 against	terrorists.	 Instead	of
rolling	 up	our	sleeves,	immersing	ourselves	in	a	mission,	and	developing	 out-of-
the-box	concepts	and	ideas	for	 our	 country’s	 most	 sensitive	missions,	we	 now
found	ourselves	 on	the	 receiving	 end	of	 the	massive	military	  decision-making
hierarchy,	whose	hierarchical	 tendrils	 stretched	six	 thousand	miles	 back	across
the	ocean,	to	 Florida	 and	 Washington,	 D.C.	 On	 past	missions	 these	types	 of
distances	 would	  have	 prevented	  the	 constant	  real-time	  involvement	  from
faraway	leaders	 and	staff	 officers,	  but	 the	Afghanistan	 campaign	 marked	 the
beginning	of	 a	new	 command	and	control	 dynamic	 that	would	 change	the	way
the	U.S.	military	  thinks	 about,	makes	decisions	about,	and	executes	tactics	and
strategies	in	wartime.	The	technology	is	known	by	 three	letters:	VTC.
   VTC	  stands	 for	 video	 teleconference.	 The	 navy	 originally	   developed	and
refined	 VTC	  technology	 to	 allow	  officers	  to	 communicate	 more	 effectively
between	ships	 at	sea.	The	 army	 began	using	 the	 technology	 in	 the	 mid-’90s
while	in	 Bosnia.	In	those	early	days	of	planning	 on	the	desert	island,	we	spent	at
least	five	 hours	 every	 day	 sitting	 around	 darkened	conference	 tents,	huddled
together	like	 thought	 lemmings	 watching	 staff	 officers	  around	the	 globe	 read

134
from	PowerPoint	slides	and	then	pontificate	 on	anything	and	everything	they	 felt
like	talking	 about.	Thirty	 to	fifty	  leaders	at	a	time	were	forced	to	listen	 to	senior
officers	lecture	 on	what	each	thought	someone	one	step	above	them	thought	we
should	do	next.	There	was	no	real	collaborative	 give-and-take	involved—which,
if	allowed,	 might	actually	 make	the	technology	useful.	Instead	the	VTC	 protocol
was	for	 everyone	to	sit	 around	stoically,	 and	the	only	 one	who	 was	allowed	 to
talk	 was	 the	  commanding	 general	 of	  our	  higher	 headquarters.	 It	  was	 the
antithesis	of	  the	 collaborative	 free-think	  sessions	we	  conducted	in	  our	 safe
houses	in	Bosnia.
   The	 main	selling	point	 of	the	 VTC	was	and	still	 is	that	it	 increases	situational
awareness.8	But	it’s	 a	false	 sense	of	situational	 awareness.	To	 the	generals	in
Tampa,	Florida,	staring	at	a	flat-screen	television	in	 their	headquarters	buildings,
our	commanding	general	appeared	to	be	the	guy	on	the	ground.	They	 constantly
deferred	to	 him	 for	 all	 decisions	 concerning	the	 enemy,	the	 weather,	 and	the
terrain	in	 Afghanistan.	 He	 was	right	 there,	wasn’t	 he?	Although	  we	were	 five
thousand	miles	 closer	 to	 Afghanistan	 than	 the	staff	  in	 Tampa,	we	 were	 still
almost	a	thousand	miles	away	from	the	enemy-occupied	ground.	Even	worse,	we
were	cocooned	inside	 air-conditioned	  tents	in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 desert,	on	 an
island.	Distance-negating	 technologies	 such	 as	the	 VTC	 require	 a	 significant
warning	 asterisk	to	 the	guy-on-the-ground	 guiding	 principle.	  The	acid	 test	for
guy-on-the-ground	   relevance	  is	   whether	  the	   individual	    possesses	 tacit
knowledge,	which	 is	 developed	from	 direct	experience	and	action	 in	 the	actual
environment.	 When	 it	 comes	to	 tacit	 knowledge,	 it	 is	 generally	 true	 that	 the
closer	the	person	is	to	 the	environment,	 the	more	likely	  he	or	 she	is	to	possess
tacit	knowledge.	 However,	 when	 it	 comes	to	 tacit	 knowledge,	 the	word	 close
does	not	  solely	  connote	 distance.	 Close	 is	  a	 holistic	  concept	  that	 entails
interaction,	understanding,	knowledge,	and	experience.	Geographic	proximity	  to
the	target	does	not	the	guy-on-the-ground	make.	The	only	 information	 we	 could
access	on	the	 island	 came	 through	 the	 satellite-linked	  cables	hooked	 to	 our
secure	computers	 and	 telephones.	 Concerning	 the	 reality	  on	 the	 ground	  in
Afghanistan,	we	might	 as	well	have	been	on	the	moon;	we	didn’t	 have	any	more
information	 on	where	UBL	and	his	lieutenants	were	than	we	did	back	in	1998.
   Guy-on-the-ground	 impostors	aside,	I	 believe	that	the	most	detrimental	aspect
of	 VTC	 is	 the	opportunity	  cost	 it	 incurs	 to	individuals	  and	 the	overall	 team.
Every	minute	we	 sat	in	a	VTC	 was	a	minute	we	could	 have	been	using	to	better
understand	the	 environment	 by	 reading	 everything	 available	 on	 Afghanistan,
studying	maps,	 identifying	  and	making	 contact	 with	 guy(s)	 on	the	 ground,	 or

135
using	that	same	time	to	brainstorm	the	art	 of	the	possible.	Four	VTCs	 a	day	was
robbing	 the	 key	 leaders	of	  the	much-needed	 time	 to	 saturate,	 incubate,	and
illuminate.
   Within	  a	few	days	my	 fellow	 Unit	 members	and	I	began	breaking	away	from
the	nonstop	didactic	planning	sessions	and	VTCs,	and	started	convening	our	own
brainstorming	 sessions	in	the	 Delta	 tent.	We	 weren’t	  the	only	 ones	frustrated
with	our	higher	 headquarters’	lockstep	approach	and	the	all-or-nothing	obsession
with	the	two	empty	 targets.
   Men	 from	every	 unit	and	every	service	(army,	navy,	 and	air	force)	joined	 us.	I
knew	 most	 of	 these	 guys	 from	  other	 real-world	  missions,	 or	 joint	  training
exercises;	none	of	them	surprised	me	with	their	attendance.	Why	did	 they	come?
These	guys	came	because	they	cared.	None	of	us	joined	the	military	  to	conduct
empty-target	raids;	we	joined	 to	make	a	contribution.	 These	were	the	mavericks,
banding	together	to	find	a	way;	there	is	always	a	way.
   Our	 goal	 was	straightforward:	 if	 we	 were	to	 have	any	hope	of	 finding	 these
guys,	we	 first	 had	 to	figure	  out	what	 was	 really	 happening	on	 the	 ground	in
Afghanistan.	 Using	 all	of	 our	 finely	  tuned	lessons	from	 the	 recent	past,	these
sessions	were	 marked	  by	 a	 raucous	 anything-goes	  mentality.	  Anyone	  and
everyone	who	had	an	idea	was	welcome	 to	throw	 it	on	the	 table.	Much	 like	our
gorilla	  warfare	 sessions	 in	 Bosnia,	  humor	 was	  never	 in	 short	  supply.	 As
frustrating	as	it	was	for	 all	of	us,	the	command’s	obsession	and	obstinacy	around
the	empty	targets	provided	ample	ammunition	for	 sarcastic	witticisms.
   Before	  we	 did	 anything	 operational,	 we	 had	 to	 wrap	 our	 collective	 heads
around	how	to	 define	the	 enemy.	According	 to	the	 conventional	wisdom	 at	the
time,	Afghanistan	was	a	hostile	environment,	and	almost	everyone	on	the	ground
was	in	 cahoots	with	 UBL	 and	 Al	 Qaeda.	This	 didn’t	 seem	right,	 especially	 to
those	of	us	who	 had	read	about	 and	researched	the	history	 of	Afghanistan	 and
the	Afghan	 people.	Not	 a	single	hijacker	 or	9/11	 planner	was	an	 Afghan.	UBL
himself,	 for	  that	 matter,	 is	 not	 an	 Afghan.	 But	  we	 knew	 the	 Taliban	 were
Afghans.	So	should	we	consider	 the	Taliban	and	UBL’s	  Al	 Qaeda	terrorists	one
homogeneous	enemy	force?
   In	 the	 first	 few	 days	following	  9/11,	 I	 spent	two	 nights	from	 dusk	 to	 dawn
searching,	reading,	and	downloading	papers	and	articles	by	authors	from	all	over
the	 globe	 concerning	  UBL,	  Afghanistan,	  Afghans,	  and	 Al	  Qaeda.	 I	  used
LexisNexis,	  a	  popular	  searchable	 online	  subscription	  database	 containing
content	from	  newspapers,	magazines,	legal	 documents,	 and	 all	 other	 printed
sources.	Its	primary	customers	are	graduate	students,	journalists,	academics,	and

136
lawyers;	 its	slogan	 is	 “It’s	  how	 you	know.”	  I	 brought	 copies	 of	 the	papers	I
downloaded	with	me.
   One	 of	 the	 papers	came	from	 a	 Pakistani	journalist	 named	 Ahmed	 Rashid,
who	wrote	 what	is	 still	 to	this	 day	one	of	 the	best	books	 for	understanding	 the
chronology	 of	events	that	 led	 up	to	 the	pre-9/11	 situation	in	 Afghanistan.	 The
book	 is	titled	  Taliban.	 The	 most	 insightful	  part	 of	 the	 work	 I	  read	was	 the
author’s	 revelation	 that	the	 Afghan	 people	 had	a	 deep	disdain	 for	 UBL’s	  Al
Qaeda	occupiers.	The	reason	was	simple:	 UBL	  and	his	 Al	 Qaeda	charges	had
committed	 the	 cardinal	 sin	  of	 Maoist	  guerrilla	 warfare	  doctrine.	 Instead	 of
making	an	effort	 to	win	 the	hearts	and	minds	of	the	people	in	Afghanistan,	 UBL
and	Al	 Qaeda	had	treated	the	Afghan	populace	 as	second-class	citizens	in	their
own	 country.	 The	result	 was	 a	growing	  disdain	 for	 the	 occupying	 Al	 Qaeda
Arabs	by	the	majority	 of	the	Afghan	 populace.	This	seemingly	mundane	tidbit	of
information	 changed	everything	 about	 the	way	 we	 thought	 about	operating	 in
Afghanistan.	  It	  was	  in	  direct	  contradiction	   to	  the	  conventional	  wisdom
promulgated	by	 most	 Western	governments	 and	by	 much	 of	 the	 international
media	at	the	 time.	 Most	 everyone	associated	Al	 Qaeda	with	 Afghanistan,	 and
then	jumped	to	the	conclusion	that	 all	Afghans	were	 the	enemy—connecting	the
dots	before	collecting	 all	 the	dots.	The	Pakistani	 author’s	on-the-ground	 insight
provided	the	first	chink	 in	the	urban	legend	of	Afghanistan	 impenetrability.	 If	we
could	win	  the	hearts	and	 minds	of	 the	 Afghan	 people,	 we	realized,	 we	 could
successfully	conduct	ongoing	operations	inside	Afghanistan.	A	 few	months	later,
this	information	 would	 turn	 out	to	 be	an	indispensable	insight	 for	 my	 men	and
me	while	interacting	 with	the	Afghan	 people	during	the	mission-critical	  first	few
weeks	after	the	Taliban	and	Al	Qaeda	fled	to	the	frontier	 areas	of	the	country.
   We	 had	lots	of	other	questions	we	needed	answered	before	we	could	come	up
with	something	of	 substance	that	might	convince	our	higher	headquarters	to	drop
the	empty-target-raid	 concept.	Where	 were	the	Al	  Qaeda	and	Taliban	 leaders?
Where	were	 the	 Al	  Qaeda	fighters	 setting	 up	 their	 defenses?	What	 was	 the
condition	 of	the	 dry	 lakebeds	we	wanted	to	 land	 on?	What	 kind	of	 trucks	 and
SUVs	were	 most	ubiquitous	 in	the	 area	around	Kandahar?	How	 navigable	was
the	desert	around	 Kandahar?	How	  extensive	was	 the	ring	 of	 fire	  (antiaircraft
weapons)	around	Kandahar?	What	would	a	goatherd	do	if	 he	ran	into	one	of	our
teams	outside	of	Kandahar?	There	was	no	doubt	in	my	 mind	that	we	needed	on-
the-ground	input	 from	 Afghans,	 and	 to	understand	the	 enemy,	we	 desperately
needed	on-the-ground	input	 from	 someone	who	understood	Al	 Qaeda.	We	 had
neither.	After	our	 meeting	adjourned,	I	realized	I	wasn’t	 going	to	find	 the	type	of

137
knowledge	 we	 needed	by	  sitting	 around	 my	  tent	 inside	 our	 lunar	 planning
compound;	I	had	to	take	action	to	make	action.
   Sequestered	 on	 a	 desert	 island	 with	  no	  way	 to	  get	 off,	  communication
technology	was	 the	only	  vehicle	available	 to	 access	sources	of	 on-the-ground
knowledge.	 An	 edict	 was	issued	 a	few	 days	 earlier	 that	restricted	 the	 use	of
phones	 and	 the	  Internet	  to	  make	  contact	 with	   anyone	 except	  our	  own
organizational	headquarters	back	in	the	States.	The	purpose	of	the	restriction	was
to	prevent	 someone	from	  contacting	 a	friend	  or	 loved	 one	and	 inadvertently
leaking	information	 about	our	location	 or	mission	to	the	public.	 In	the	context	 of
personal	phone	calls	and	e-mails,	 the	edict	 made	sense.	But	I	 believed	that	 the
mission	took	 priority	  here.	I	 needed	to	 use	the	satellite	 phone	 and	our	 secure
Internet	  connection	  to	   begin	  boundary-spanning	  with	   other	  government
agencies,	tapping	into	online	search	engines,	and	making	contact	with	whomever
I	could	find	 to	provide	us	with	 guy-on-the-ground	knowledge.
   You	 may	 have	heard	the	expression	“In	 large	 organizations	it’s	 easier	to	ask
for	forgiveness	 than	permission.”	 Years	earlier,	 while	 briefing	 Colin	 Powell	 on
the	missions	 we	 conducted	 in	 Colombia,	  I	 mentioned	 to	 him	  that	 we	 were
successful	because	we	 were	 nimble.	  We	 didn’t	  ask	 anyone	 to	 approve	 our
concepts;	we	moved	 first,	 and	figured	  things	out	 as	we	 went	along.	 Listening
intently	 to	the	story,	 he	smiled	and	reflected	to	 me	that	good	 leaders	don’t	wait
for	official	  blessings	to	 try	 things	out.	 They	 use	common	sense	to	 guide	them
because	they	understand	a	simple	fact	 of	life	  in	most	 organizations:	if	 you	 ask
enough	people	for	permission,	you’ll	  inevitably	 find	 someone	who	believes	that
they	should	tell	you	no.
   So	 while	 the	staff	obsessed	over	the	details	of	 the	weather,	and	whether	they
had	enough	fuel	to	get	the	helicopters	 to	the	empty	targets	inside	 Afghanistan,	I
started	  boundary-spanning	   with	   other	   government	   agencies	  (the	   state
department,	the	FBI,	the	CIA)	 back	in	the	States.	There	was	a	palpable	“anything
goes”	spirit	 pervasive	in	 our	government	during	 the	months	 following	 9/11.	 To
me	it	was	a	prime	example	of	how	 things	should	work	 all	the	time.	 During	those
weeks	and	months,	the	red	tape	that	usually	impeded	nimbleness	in	 government
all	but	 dissolved.	No	one	 ever	told	you	 they	couldn’t	 help	 you	unless	you	went
through	the	“proper	 channels,”	 or	until	 they	 “checked	with	 their	 boss.”	No	 one
was	thinking,	 I’m	 military,	 or	 I’m	 FBI,	 or	I’m	 Department	 of	State.	Instead,	we
were	all	part	of	 the	same	organization—the	United	 States	of	America.	Everyone
seemed	willing	 to	share	whatever	information	 and	ideas	they	had	for	the	greater
good	of	the	mission.

138
   The	 phone	I	was	using	allowed	me	to	talk	 to	anyone	anywhere	in	the	world;	 it
used	specially	developed	technology	to	bounce	the	signal	 all	over	the	world	 and
make	the	call	untraceable.	One	of	the	first	 calls	I	made	was	to	an	old	 friend	who
was	once	 a	high-ranking	  leader	in	 the	 Department	 of	 State.	He	 had	 recently
retired	and	was	now	 living	 in	 the	idyllic	  Washington,	D.C.,	 suburb	of	 McLean,
Virginia.	  I	 explained	 what	 I	 was	 looking	  for,	 and	 he	told	  me	he	 had	 some
Afghan-American	  friends	 he	 met	 with	  weekly	  at	 an	Afghan	  restaurant	 just
outside	of	D.C.	He	specifically	 mentioned	 an	ex-Afghan	general	who	had	fought
against	the	Soviets	in	the	mid-’80s.	 The	fact	that	he	met	with	 these	guys	weekly
reassured	me	that	he	knew	them	well	and	more	important,	that	he	trusted	them.
   When	 we	 talked	the	 next	 night,	my	 friend	 handed	his	 phone	to	 the	Afghan
general.	I	 wondered	what	 he	told	 the	 guy	about	 me.	My	 friend	 had	 obviously
prepped	him	 for	 the	 call,	 because	the	general	 spoke	in	 a	very	 deliberate	 and
thoughtful	whisper	 the	entire	conversation.	His	 English	was	perfect.	By	 the	tone
of	his	voice	 I	imagined	a	large	man	with	 a	thick	 salt-and-pepper	beard.	“I	am	an
Afghan	general	 who	has	fought	 in	 many	battles.	I	 left	 Afghanistan	 in	the	early
’90s	after	 the	Soviets	left.”	 Although	  we	were	six	 thousand	miles	apart	 I	could
detect	the	 emotion	 in	  his	 voice.	 “I	  love	 Afghanistan	  and	 am	willing	   to	 do
anything	 to	help	 my	 people	 return	 Afghanistan	 to	 the	Afghans.	 I	  had	family
members	killed	by	 the	Taliban	when	 they	tried	to	 join	me	 in	the	United	 States.”
He	continued,	 “I	  still	 have	relatives	 living	  in	 terror	 of	 the	Taliban,	  and	I	 am
prepared	to	offer	my	 services	to	you	 in	any	 capacity.”	He	 paused	for	a	moment
and	continued,	“I	 am	prepared	to	fight	 with	 you	on	the	front	 lines	for	 as	long	as
it	takes.	I	can	pack	and	be	prepared	to	join	 you	by	tomorrow	 morning.”	  Another
example	of	what	 makes	America	 such	a	great	 country.	 Great	 men	and	women
from	all	over	 the	world	come	to	the	United	States,	and	realize	how	lucky	they	are
to	live	in	 a	country	 that	allows	 them	to	experience	all	 the	freedoms	that	the	rest
of	us	sometimes	take	for	granted.	They	understand	that	freedom	isn’t	free.	“I	 still
have	my	uniform,”	 he	told	me.
   Now	 it	 was	my	turn,	 “Sir,	 I	want	 to	thank	you	for	 volunteering	 your	services.
We	are	going	to	need	men	like	you.	Your	knowledge	 is	very	helpful.”
   The	 main	thing	 I	focus	 on	when	assessing	someone’s	credibility	 is	his	 or	her
motivation.	   Family,	   patriotism,	    revenge,	  and	   self-preservation	  are	   the
motivations	that	are	most	often	 correlated	with	 credibility.	 If,	 on	the	other	hand,
someone	immediately	begins	 discussing	an	extrinsic	 motivator,	 such	as	money
or	 personal	  advancement,	 I	  maintain	  a	  healthy	  degree	 of	  skepticism	  of
everything	he	 or	she	tells	 me.	Based	on	what	 I’d	 heard,	I	 assessed	the	Afghan

139
general	to	be	credible.
   The	  Afghan	 general	 told	  me	that	  he	stayed	 in	 constant	 contact	 with	  his
relatives	in	Kabul	 and	Kandahar.	The	general	mentioned	that	he	had	talked	with
his	cousin	in	Kandahar	that	very	morning.
   “Can	 you	tell	 me	what	your	cousin	said?”	I	asked.
   “Of	  course,”	the	 general	replied.	He	 went	on	to	 tell	 me	a	story	 of	a	city	 that
was	just	 beginning	to	 realize	 what	the	 implications	 of	 9/11	 might	 be	to	 them.
The	land	 that	time	 forgot	 was	 once	again	 returning	 to	its	 starring	 role	 on	the
world	stage.	“The	people	are	confused;	they	fear	the	cruise	missiles,”	he	told	me.
   I	 thought	I’d	 take	a	chance	and	ask	him	if	 his	cousin	knew	anything	 about	the
enemy	situation.	“How	 hard	is	it	to	get	around	with	 all	the	military	 activity	 going
on?”
   “What	 military	 activity?”	  he	responded.
   “All	  the	tanks	and	antiaircraft	guns	that	encircle	the	city,”	 I	replied.
   The	 Afghan	general	scoffed,	 and	then	explained	to	me	that	 there	were	indeed
tanks	and	antiaircraft	guns	all	 around	the	city,	 but	that	very	 few,	if	 any,	of	 them
actually	worked.	Apparently	 when	the	Taliban	 took	over,	they	disbanded	the	last
of	 the	 Afghan	 military	   units	 that	 were	 trained	 to	 operate	 and	 maintain	 the
equipment.	Most	of	the	tanks	sat	today	where	they	broke	 down	for	the	final	 time
in	the	mid-’90s.
   He	 paused,	and	I	was	speechless.	When	you	talk	to	the	person	on	the	ground,
you	 almost	 always	 experience	 an	 onslaught	 of	  insights	 on	 the	 problem	  or
opportunity.	It’s	 like	 a	skyscraper	rising	up	 out	of	the	ground:	 suddenly	you	can
see	the	entire	girdered	structure,	 and	better	understand	how	 it	 is	constructed	to
make	optimal,	reality-based	decisions.
   The	 general	 had	just	 provided	  another	prime	 example	 of	 why	 guy-on-the-
ground	 input	 is	  so	 important	  to	 understanding	 the	 reality	  of	 the	  situation.
Technology	such	as	satellite	photos	and	communication	intercepts	give	us	a	one-
dimensional	view	  of	 the	world.	 Although	  these	can	offer	 value	 as	a	 baseline,
they	 do	 so	 without	  one	  key	 factor:	  context.	 The	  satellite	 photos	 that	  the
intelligence	community	  was	using	to	 brief	 everyone,	including	 the	president	 of
the	United	 States,	on	the	 enemy	situation	 in	 Afghanistan,	 portrayed	what	 they
referred	to	 as	 “the	 ring	  of	 fire”	  surrounding	 Kandahar.	 A	 massive	 bombing
campaign	was	 planned	to	 neutralize	 those	defenses,	and	 once	again,	 massive
amounts	of	time	 and	effort	that	 should	have	been	focused	on	finding	 the	living,
breathing	enemy	was	 dedicated	to	neutralizing	 the	 bogus	ring	 of	fire.	 But	 in	 a
single	phone	conversation	 with	 someone	who	 was	connected	to	 on-the-ground

140
knowledge,	I	had	learned	that	perhaps	all	we	thought	we	knew	 from	our	panoply
of	advanced	technologies	was	a	canard.	Regarding	the	 Al	 Qaeda	fighters	inside
Kandahar,	the	Afghan	 general	told	me	that	Al	 Qaeda	wasn’t	 preparing	defenses
around	the	city	as	our	intelligence	 officers	 had	told	 us.	Rather,	they	didn’t	 seem
to	believe	 that	the	United	 States	was	actually	 going	to	 attack	them.	 They	were
just	sitting	around	their	tents	and	houses,	with	a	business-as-usual	mentality.
   Next	 I	asked	the	Afghan	general	about	the	weather.	He	compared	it	to	Denver,
Colorado,	cold	and	snowy	 in	the	mountains	 but	very	temperate	on	the	 flatlands.
More	than	any	other	 aspect	of	the	Afghan	 urban	legend;	it	 was	the	weather	that
seemed	to	 put	 the	biggest	 zap	 on	 the	 thinking	  of	 our	 military	  and	 political
leaders.9	The	myth	of	 the	arctic	 Afghan	 winter	 was	driving	 the	thinking	 of	 our
key	military	  and	civilian	 decision-makers	in	 Washington,	 D.C.	Bob	 Woodward
describes	Vice	 President	Cheney’s	 guidance	to	 the	presidential	 advisers:	 “I’m
worried	  that	  we	  won’t	  have	  anything	  concrete	  to	 point	   to	  by	  way	  of
accomplishment.	When	the	 snow	and	bitter	 cold	come	 next	month	.	 .	.	What	 is
our	objective	for	accomplishment	 before	the	snow?”
   The	 reality,	also	available	 with	 the	double	click	 of	a	mouse	button,	 is	that	the
mean	monthly	 temperature	in	the	 capital	city	 of	 Kabul	 between	December	and
February	is	 in	 the	 mid-thirties,	  borderline	 balmy.	 Our	  lack	 of	 on-the-ground
knowledge	concerning	 the	weather	 was	forcing	  our	leaders	to	 believe	 that	we
were	running	out	of	time	 and	that	we	had	to	do	something,	and	do	it	quickly.
   Slowly	  but	surely,	 a	different	 picture	 was	beginning	 to	form	 for	 me	 and	my
comrades	as	we	accrued	more	and	more	on-the-ground	information.	We	began	to
challenge	everything	 we	thought	 we	knew	 about	the	 reality	 of	the	 situation	on
the	ground	 in	 Afghanistan.	 There	was	no	 “ring	  of	fire”	  around	 Kandahar;	the
Afghan	people	were	 not	the	enemy,	the	weather	was	temperate	not	terrible,	 and
the	enemy	was	far	from	being	a	formidable	foe—they	 were	actually	low-hanging
fruit	ripe	 for	the	picking.
   Back	 in	D.C.	 both	the	secretary	of	 defense	and	the	president	were	expressing
well-earned	frustration	 with	 the	dearth	of	 intelligence	 being	fed	to	 them	from	 a
trillion	 dollars	 worth	 of	space-age	intelligence	technology.	 Ironically	  just	a	few
miles	away	from	 the	White	 House,	across	the	Potomac	River	 in	 Virginia,	 there
were	men	 sitting	 around	a	 table	in	 an	 Afghan	 restaurant	who	 had	better,	 and
more	accurate,	intelligence.	The	cost	 for	anyone	in	 D.C.	to	 access	and	consume
that	intelligence—a	 hearty	handshake,	a	few	 minutes	of	 time,	 and	maybe	three
bucks	for	a	kabob	and	a	Coke.
   I	 passed	the	 information	 on	 the	Kandahar	 defenses	(“the	 ring	 of	 fire”),	  the

141
weather	in	Afghanistan,	 and	the	Afghan	 disdain	 toward	Al	 Qaeda	to	one	of	 the
staff	officers	 in	 our	 higher	 headquarters.	I	was	only	 mildly	  surprised	 when	he
dismissed	it	outright.	 He	was	incredulous	that	I	 would	even	consider	prioritizing
what	an	ex-Afghan	 general	 who	lived	 in	 the	 United	 States,	told	me	 over	what
hundreds	of	intelligence	analysts	were	telling	 us	about	the	reality	 on	the	ground.
I	didn’t	 really	 expect	that	 our	higher	 headquarters	would	go	 all	in	 and	stop	the
presses	on	the	current	plan.	After	all,	 the	Afghan	 general	was	a	single	source	of
information,	 and	I	had	never	even	met	him	 in	 person.	But	I	did	 expect	others	to
respect	the	primacy	 of	 the	 information	 he	 gave	us	 as	being	equal	 to	 or	more
relevant	than	any	other	knowledge	source	we	were	currently	using.	In	 fairness	to
the	staff	officer,	 his	job	 was	to	do	what	the	commanding	 general	told	him	 to	do,
and	he	didn’t	have	much	leeway	to	do	anything	else.
   Despite	 the	frustrations	with	 our	higher	 headquarters,	we	realized	we	still	had
plenty	of	time.	 Although	 I	felt	 good	about	the	Afghan	 on-the-ground	knowledge
we	were	accumulating,	 the	Afghans	weren’t	 the	main	 enemy—UBL	 and	the	Al
Qaeda	foreigners	were.	We	needed	to	get	inside	the	heads	of	UBL	and	Al	Qaeda.
There’s	always	a	way!

142
                                                         11



IMAGINE	    HOW	   TO	 SEEK	  OUT	 THE	  GUY	  ON	 THE	  GROUND


The	next	night	I	went	back	to	work	on	the	phones.	One	of	my	first	calls	was	to
an	old	 military	 intelligence	operative	who	worked	out	 of	 Washington,	D.C.
Frosty	was	a	fiftysomething	spook	who	was	one	of	those	guys	who	never	told
anyone	anything	about	who	he	actually	worked	for	or	what	his	actual	job	was.
To	this	day,	I	still	don’t	know.	He	was	an	enigma,	operating	on	the	fringes	of	all
of	the	three-letter	spook	clubs,	but	not	part	of	the	social	fabric	of	any	of	them.	I
figured	that	he	 and	his	vastly	 networked	web	of	 contacts	might	be	 able	to
connect	me	or	at	least	point	me	in	the	right	direction	in	my	search.	I	told	him	I
was	trying	to	better	understand	the	on-the-ground	perspective	of	the	Al	Qaeda
fighters	inside	Afghanistan.	He	warned	me	that	none	of	the	three-letter	clubs
knew	much	about	Al	Qaeda.	Then	anecdotally	he	added	that	he	had	bumped	into
a	friend	of	his	from	one	of	those	clubs	at	breakfast	that	morning,	and	the	friend
mentioned	an	imprisoned	Al	Qaeda	operative	who	had	offered	to	cooperate	in
whatever	way	needed.1
   “What’s	he	in	prison	for?”	I	asked.
   “For	 the	Kenyan	and	Tanzanian	embassy	bombings.	UBL	sent	him	there	to
oversee	the	planning.	Supposedly	he	also	trained	UBL’s	security	detail,”	 he
added	dismissively.2
   “Has	anyone	taken	him	up	on	his	offer?”	I	asked	incredulously.
   “No,”	  he	 answered.	“He’s	 been	 in	 prison	 since	1998	 so	 you	 have	 to
understand	that	he	has	only	limited	value	as	a	real-time	intelligence	source.”
   “You	 gotta	be	shittin’	 me,”	I	 replied.	“If	 he	trained	UBL’s	 bodyguards,	he
might	be	able	to	tell	us	how	they	operate.	This	guy	could	know	things	like	how
often	they	 move	 UBL,	 or	 where	 they	 prefer	to	  hide	UBL,	  or	 how	 they
communicate	with	other	members	of	the	terror	network.	If	we	understand	how
UBL’s	 bodyguards	think	 and	make	 decisions,	we	can	 adapt	to	 them,	and
anticipate	what	they’ll	do	next.”
   “Okay,	 okay,”	he	responded,	“I	get	it.”	Frosty	agreed	to	follow	up	with	 his
friend	and	get	back	to	me	as	soon	as	he	had	something.

143
   Two	 days	later	Frosty	called	me	and	told	me	he	had	a	document	written	by	the
“Al	 Qaeda	guy”	  with	 some	of	 what	 he	termed	“his	  ramblings”	 on	 the	current
situation	in	Afghanistan.
   “Great”	 I	 said.	“What	kind	 of	file	 is	it?”
   “It’s	  a	handwritten	document	on	eleven-by-fourteen	legal	paper,”	he	replied.
   I	 asked	him	 to	 scan	it	 as	a	PDF	file	  and	send	it	 to	me	 ASAP.	 A	 few	 hours
later,	I	had	the	 document	in	my	 hands.	After	 stapling	it	 together,	I	settled	down
on	my	cot	 to	check	 it	out.	 Two	 paragraphs	in,	I	 jumped	back	up	 to	get	my	 Hi-
Liter	 and	 colored	  stick-on	 tabs.	 Within	  minutes,	  I	 wasn’t	  just	 highlighting
anymore,	I	was	coloring	 it	 in.	These	weren’t	 just	idle	 musings	of	an	imprisoned
madman,	this	was	a	dissertation	on	 how	to	 find,	 infiltrate,	 and	defeat	Al	 Qaeda
in	Afghanistan.	 The	 more	 I	 read,	the	more	 it	 became	apparent	to	 me	that	 the
author	had	his	Ph.D.	in	understanding	the	enemy.	It	was	around	thirty	pages	long
and	formatted	by	questions	that	would	 have	made	anyone’s	top	ten	list	 for	 most
in	need	of	answers	at	that	time.	 His	eloquently	 simple	 answers	to	each	question
were	all	profoundly	 insightful.
   Q:	 “How	  do	you	infiltrate	   Afghanistan?”
   A:	 “You	 walk	 in.	You	 can	cross	the	border	almost	anywhere,	and	you	can	hire
Afghan	guides	for	 almost	nothing.	Once	through	 the	mountains,	walk	to	 a	house
that	has	been	prepared.	You	stay	there	until	the	 intelligence	is	 ready,	you	set	up
your	 radios	and	 equipment,	you	 can	 even	test	your	 weapons.	 [This	 guy	 must
have	some	kind	of	military	 background;	 these	are	exactly	 the	types	of	questions
my	guys	would	want	to	know.]	 The	homes	are	really	mud	forts	with	 walls	twenty
to	thirty	feet	high.	 No	one	will	 bother	you	in	there,	and	they	will	 never	know	 you
are	in	there.	You	 can	move	out	at	 night	in	 vehicles	and	conduct	 reconnaissance
of	the	local	areas	or	launch	assault	force	if	the	situation	warrants	it!”
   Eureka!—this	 was	perhaps	the	 most	intractable	 barrier	 to	imagining	  how	we
could	sustain	ourselves	on	the	barren	Afghan	frontier.	 In	 much	the	same	way	we
used	cell	phones	to	provide	our	 cover	and	hide	 in	the	open	in	 front	of	 buildings
in	 urban	 areas,	in	  Afghanistan	 we	could	 be	 right	  next	door,	  but	behind	 the
towering	mud	 walls	 and	closed	doors	 of	the	Afghan	 house/fort.	 The	Lewis	and
Clark	concept	will	 work!
	
   Q:	 “How	  do	you	infiltrate	   cities	such	as	Kandahar	  and	Kabul?”
   A:	  “You	 dress	like	 women	and	wear	 burkhas.p	In	teams	of	 two,	 no	one	will
bother	you	 because	the	Taliban	forbids	 men	 from	 talking	 to	women	 in	 public.
Just	walk	away	 if	 someone	tries	to	talk	 to	you.	 You	 can	conceal	your	weapons

144
under	your	 burkha	very	 easily,	and	 when	you	 get	to	 your	target	 you	will	  have
achieved	complete	surprise.	You	 only	 need	to	 do	this	 once,	and	you	 will	  have
terrorized	the	enemy.	They	 will	 envision	 commandos	under	every	burkha.	They
will	 be	forced	 to	take	drastic	measures	to	check	every	 woman	in	 the	city.	 They
will	  never	 allow	 women	  to	 go	 without	 burkhas,	 so	 you	 will	   paralyze	 their
security	infrastructure.”
   This	 guy	had	obviously	 spent	some	time	incubating	on	 this	one.	From	 gorilla
costumes	to	burkhas—this	is	right	up	our	alley.	 I’ll	 have	our	logistics	 guy	find	us
some	extra-large	burkhas	so	we	can	begin	tailoring	 them	and	getting	used	to	the
fit.	 We	(the	United	  States)	need	to	conduct	 a	 few	“burkha	  raids”	  just	 for	 the
psychological	effects	it	 will	 have	on	the	enemy.	Once	word	gets	around	 that	the
Americans	are	dressing	up	 in	burkhas,	half	 the	population	 will	 make	the	enemy
jittery.	 The	 Taliban	 and	 Al	 Qaeda	fighters	 will	  be	 forced	 to	wonder	 if	 every
woman	walking	 toward	 them	is	 about	to	 pull	 a	 gun,	which	 will	 cause	them	 to
devote	precious	amounts	of	manpower	 and	time	to	 set	up	and	man	 checkpoints
all	 across	the	 city.	 Imagine	 a	 Taliban	 version	 of	 the	Transportation	  Security
Administration!
	
   Q:	 “How	  can	we	find	 UBL?”
   A:	 “Look	  for	his	security	 detail.	He	trusts	only	 a	handful	of	men,	and	they	are
the	only	ones	who	know	 where	he	is	or	where	he	will	 be.	Don’t	 waste	your	time
trying	to	 find	 him;	 he	is	too	careful.	 You	will	  increase	your	odds	tenfold	 if	 you
focus	on	his	 ten	closest	security	guards.	You	 must	do	 ‘police	 work’	 here,	learn
where	the	guards’	families	 are	and	then	focus	 your	communication	 devices	and
surveillance	on	key	 members	of	those	families.	 Then	 just	wait	 for	 them	to	lead
you	back	to	bin	Laden.”
   Common	sense	is	knowledge	of	patterns!
	
   Q:	 “Where	  will	 UBL	 hide?”
   A:	 “Look	  for	UBL	 where	he	has	trusted	friends.	Always	 look	 in	places	he	has
been	before.	Like	many	 who	are	on	the	run,	he	is	 a	creature	of	habit	because	he
can	only	 go	where	 he	trusts	the	 people	around	him.	 Look	 in	 Gardez,	Khowst,
Shahi	Koht,	Ghazni,	Jalalabad,	and	Tora	Bora.”
   We	aren’t	 looking	 at	any	of	these	places.	This	is	the	first	I’ve	 heard	of	some	of
these	cities.	 Shouldn’t	 we	 drop	 the	 empty	targets	 and	 start	 looking	  at	 these
locations?
	

145
   He	 ended	the	document	with	a	message	to	the	reader:
   “I	  am	willing	  to	assist	the	effort	 in	any	way	 required.	I	 don’t	 believe	in	 what
Al	 Qaeda	is	doing,	they	 are	ruining	 the	image	of	 all	 Arabs	and	are	doing	 great
damage	to	the	Arab	cause	throughout	the	world.	 I	 can	find	 bin	Laden	for	 you.	I
am	only	asking	for	a	chance.”
   Always	 listen	to	 the	guy	on	the	ground!	 What	a	treasure	trove	of	 information.
After	tabbing	 every	one	of	 the	thirtysomething	 pages,	I	read	it	again.	As	I	 did,	I
realized	that	 there	was	more	 to	 this	document	 than	just	 sound	tactical	 advice.
Woven	within	 every	 answer,	every	idea,	and	 every	explanation,	the	 author	was
telling	 the	reader	all	about	 himself.	Indirectly,	  and	at	times	 directly	 pleading	to
help	the	cause	in	any	way	possible.	In	 the	opening	paragraphs	he	fully	 admitted
his	complicity	 in	the	African	 embassy	bombings,	but	he	wanted	to	make	amends
for	it.	 He	 made	numerous	references	to	how	 deeply	he	cared	about	 his	wife	 in
California	 and	how	much	he	wanted	to	get	back	to	her.	The	entire	document	was
written	 with	 intense	passion.	To	me,	the	validity	  of	 his	writings	 was	confirmed
by	the	operational	 relevance	of	 everything	 he	wrote.	 And	for	 this	 reason,	even
though	I	had	never	met	him,	 I	 believed	him.	These	weren’t	 the	idle	 musing	of	a
deranged	prisoner,	or	an	attempt	to	 deceive	or	distract;	there	 was	just	too	much
context	and	connective	logic.	 This	 was	someone	who	knew	a	lot	 and	wanted	to
use	what	he	knew.	But	I	wondered	what	his	motivation	 was.
   I	 was	 pumped;	my	 mind	 was	racing	 a	million	  miles	an	 hour.	We	 needed	to
stop	the	planning	for	the	empty	targets	and	jump	all	 over	this	information.	 When
aggregated	with	 what	 the	 Afghan	  general	told	  us,	and	 the	 Lewis	 and	 Clark
concept,	we	definitely	had	some	options.	I	couldn’t	 wait	 to	share	it.
   I	  hurried	  over	 to	 the	 JOC.	 Although	  there	 was	 no	  classification	 on	  the
document,	I	 handwrote	“need	 to	 share”	on	 the	top	 so	that	 every	leader	would
understand	how	important	 it	 was	for	 them	 to	read,	 understand,	and	share	with
everyone	else	in	their	organization.	 I	told	 the	lieutenant	colonel	 in	charge	of	 the
JOC	that	I	had	something	that	every	 leader	needed	to	read	right	away.	He	asked
me	what	 it	 was,	so	I	 explained	 how	 I	 got	 the	document,	 who	wrote	 it,	 and	 a
summary	of	what	the	document	said.
   “How	  long’s	this	guy	been	in	prison?”	 he	asked.
   “Since	  1998,”	 I	 explained,	 but	 the	 nanosecond	the	 eight	 came	 out	 of	 my
mouth	his	eyes	rolled	 topside	with	 a	dismissive	 smirk	 close	behind.	I	 hurriedly
attempted	to	explain	how	 the	date	really	didn’t	  matter,	but	the	more	I	 explained
about	the	timelessness	of	key	nuggets	such	as	UBL	being	a	creature	of	habit,	the
more	I	 could	 see	that	I	 had	 lost	him	  as	soon	as	he	heard	 1998.	His	 response

146
would	be	 the	first	 in	 a	long	 line	 of	offhand	 dismissals	of	 the	credibility	  of	 Ali
Mohamed’s	 advice	based	on	 the	 1998	 date	of	 incarceration.	 It	 was	 like	 they
believed	there	was	a	shelf	life	on	knowledge.	Although	 it’s	 true	that	it	 takes	time
to	build	 context,	it’s	 also	true	that	some	context	is	 timeless.	Maybe	the	inability
to	understand	this	fact	is	 why	so	many	 fail	 to	heed	the	lessons	of	history.	 “That
was	then,	 this	is	 now”;	  “things	 have	 changed”;	and	 “that’s	 old	 news”	 are	 all
common	reactions	of	those	who	dismiss	the	value	of	historical	context.
   “Pete,	 how	 can	 a	 guy	 who	 has	been	in	 prison	 for	  three	years	 have	better
information	 than	the	satellite	photos	and	signal	intercepts	we	have	from	 the	here
and	now?”	 he	 asked	as	he	held	 up	 a	couple	 of	 pieces	of	 paper	that	 probably
showed	the	latest	satellite	images	of	the	“ring	 of	 fire,”	 but	I	 didn’t	 look	 at	them.
“Would	 you	dismiss	a	stock	tip	from	 Warren	Buffet	 three	years	after	he	retired?”
I	asked	 him,	 but	I	 could	 see	in	 his	 eyes	that	 it	 was	already	 too	 late.	He	 had
already	made	up	his	 mind;	 I	was	 spitting	 in	the	 wind.	 I’d	 have	to	find	 another
way.
   In	  October	  2001,	 the	  military’s	   institutional	  faith	  in	  the	  supremacy	 of
technology	 was	 unimpeachable.	 We	 still	  hadn’t	  conducted	a	 single	  combat
mission	as	part	of	the	war	against	terrorists,	so	there	were	no	empirical	examples
of	guy-on-the-ground	 knowledge	 trumping	the	 accuracy	and	collective	 value	of
satellites,	listening	devices,	and	 database	searches.	We	would	have	to	learn	that
lesson	the	hard	way—over	and	over	and	over.
   I	 recommended	that	 the	commanding	general	 read	a	copy,	but	 I	 was	told	 he
was	in	the	middle	of	 a	VTC,	 and	was	booked	solid	with	 VTCs	for	 the	rest	of	the
night.	So	I	dropped	a	copy	 off	for	 him	 with	a	note	that	explained	 how	important
I	 believed	 the	 information	  to	 be.	 The	 lieutenant	 colonel	  told	 me	 he	 would
personally	try	to	read	the	document	when	he	got	a	chance,	but	he	had	a	planning
meeting	he	was	busy	preparing	for.	My	 suggestion	to	make	it	mandatory	reading
for	all	leaders	went	over	like	 a	lead	balloon.
   “No	  one	has	time	to	 read	a	thirty-page	 document.	We’re	 about	to	launch	 the
longest	helicopter	  raid	 in	 the	 history	  of	 warfare	 and	 we	 still	  have	 a	lot	  of
planning	left	to	do,”	 he	lectured.
   As	  frustrated	  as	 I	  was	 about	 not	  being	 able	  to	 share	 Ali	   Mohamed’s
operational	insights	 with	 my	 own	 headquarters,	there	were	other	 pieces	of	 his
document	that	 I	 believed	 were	equally	 important	 to	 share	with	  the	high-level
decision-makers	in	Washington,	 D.C.,	as	quickly	 as	possible.	Specifically,	 what
Ali	 Mohamed	said	about	sleeper	cells:
   “There	 are	no	sleeper	cells	left	in	 the	United	States.	Think	like	 you	are	part	of

147
Al	 Qaeda.	Would	 you	 want	 to	try	 to	 hide	 in	 the	United	 States	right	 now?	 Al
Qaeda	leaders	do	not	want	 anyone	left	 who	could	 be	interrogated	 and	lead	the
United	 States	to	 find	 them.	 There	 is	 no	threat	 from	  sleeper	cells.	 You	 must
understand	that	this	operation	was	a	huge	undertaking	for	 Al	 Qaeda.	They	don’t
have	a	 lot	 of	  money	 and	 it	 took	 everything	  they	 could	 muster	 to	 pull	  this
operation	off.	 There	 is	 no	threat	 from	 sleeper	cells.	 It	 cost	Al	  Qaeda	a	lot	 of
money,	 and	despite	 what	 some	 think,	 UBL	  and	 Al	  Qaeda	don’t	  have	 deep
pockets,	they	 watch	 their	 money	 very	 carefully.	  The	 way	 they	 operate	is	 to
always	clean	the	table	after	an	operation.	There	is	absolutely	no	 way	they	would
leave	anyone	 in	 the	 United	  States	who	 could	 be	 captured	 and	 expose	their
leaders.”
   Even	 though	we	now	 had	firsthand	information	 from	 an	individual	 who	 knew
more	about	Al	 Qaeda	than	anyone	in	 our	government,	 there	was	no	way	 to	get
this	foundational	 information	  back	to	 the	 key	decision-makers	 in	 Washington,
D.C.	If	 I	had	the	president’s	cell	 phone	number	I	would	 have	called	him	 myself.
But	  the	  mechanistic	  and	  hierarchical	   organizational	   structures	  of	  large
organizations	such	as	the	 military	 create	layers	 upon	layers	of	 human	barriers,
each	providing	   incremental	 friction	   to	 the	 flow	  of	  the	 information,	   which
invariably	 ends	 up	 diluting	  or	 contaminating	 it	  so	it	  never	makes	 it	 to	 key
decision-makers	in	a	timely	and	accurate	fashion.
   If	 President	Bush	and	Congress	had	been	able	to	read	what	Ali	Mohamed	was
saying,	I	 have	no	 doubt	that	 they	 would	 have	been	able	to	 make	better,	 more
well-informed	 decisions	about	 homeland	security	 and	the	establishment	of	 new
agencies	such	as	the	Transportation	Security	Administration	 (TSA)	 during	those
first	few	critical	 months.
   As	  I	 walked	 out	 of	  the	 JOC	into	  the	 dusty	 desert	darkness	with	  the	 Ali
Mohamed	document	in	 my	 hand,	I	 realized	that	 once	again,	the	tyranny	 of	 the
plan	was	trumping	updated	situational	 awareness	and	common	sense.	There	was
no	way	 to	 turn	 the	 planning	 machine	 off,	 and	 there	was	 no	 way	 to	 alter	its
course.	Even	 though	we	 had	 updated	information,	  the	staff	 had	 put	 so	much
work	into	 putting	the	plan	together	that	the	mission	itself	 no	longer	had	anything
to	do	with	the	reality	 on	the	ground.	The	mission	was	to	execute	the	plan.
   Just	 a	 few	  days	 later,	 we	  conducted	 the	 opening	 raids	  of	 the	 war	  and
confirmed	 that,	 indeed,	both	 targets	 were	 empty.	 Both	 raids	 were	 filmed	 by
military	 cameramen,	distributed	to	 all	the	major	 news	organizations,	and	shown
to	the	world	the	next	day.
   New	 Yorker	 writer	 Seymour	M.	 Hersh	 published	an	 article	 on	November	 5,

148
2001,	 which	  described	 the	 empty	  target	 raids.	 In	  the	 critical	   passage,	he
described	the	raids	in	 detail—who,	 what,	 where,	and	 when—and	ended	with	 a
devastating	quote	attributed	to	an	anonymous	senior	military	official:

           U.S.	  Special	 Forces	 conduct	 their	  first	  two	  significant	  raids	 in	  the
           Afghanistan	  war	 on	this	 day.	 In	 the	 first,	 more	 than	a	 hundred	Army
           Rangers	 parachute	 into	 a	 supposedly	 Taliban-controlled	  airbase	 near
           Kandahar.	 But	 in	  fact,	 the	airbase	 had	already	 been	cleared	 by	 other
           forces,	  and	 the	 raid	  apparently	 is	  staged	 for	  propaganda	purposes.
           Footage	of	 the	raid	is	shown	that	evening	 on	U.S.	television.	 In	the	other
           raid,	 a	combination	  of	Rangers	and	 Delta	Force	 attack	a	 house	outside
           Kandahar	occasionally	 used	by	Taliban	leader	Mullah	 Omar.	 This	raid	is
           publicly	  pronounced	a	success,	but	privately	the	military	 deems	it	a	near-
           disaster.	Twelve	 U.S.	 soldiers	are	wounded	 in	 an	ambush	as	they	leave
           the	 compound,	and	neither	Mullah	 Omar	nor	 any	significant	 intelligence
           is	 found	at	the	house.
               One	senior	U.S.	 military	 officer	 criticized	 the	planning	for	 the	October
           20	  attacks	 as	 “Special	  Ops	  101.”	  “I	  don’t	  know	  where	  the	 adult
           supervision	 for	these	operations	is,”	the	officer	 added.

   The	 article	 from	 the	 New	 Yorker	 was	widely	  distributed	 and	read	 by	most
everyone	 in	 our	 desert	 compound,	 as	 well	  as	 by	 the	 military	   and	civilian
leadership	back	 in	  D.C.	 and	 Tampa.	 Our	 highest-level	 civilian	  and	 military
leaders	in	D.C.	 reacted	by	 questioning	our	 commanding	 general	as	to	what	 he
was	actually	 thinking	 by	attacking	 the	empty	 targets.3	I	 have	no	idea	 what	his
response	was,	but	 that	series	 of	 events	taught	 me	firsthand	 how	 valuable	 the
press	can	be	in	wartime.	The	New	Yorker	article	 may	not	have	been	100	percent
accurate	(none	 of	  our	 men	 were	 wounded	 in	  the	 raid)	  but	 it	  exposed	the
operational	 futility	   of	 the	 empty	 target	 raids,	  as	well	  as	 the	 senseless	risk
incurred	by	 sending	all	 those	 men	and	machines	 on	such	a	 perilous	 operation
with	no	potential	upside	to	the	overall	 mission.
   Make	  no	mistake	 about	 the	heroic	 role	 of	 the	 commandos	and	 pilots	 who
participated	in	 these	raids.	They	risked	their	 lives	and	showed	uncommon	 valor
in	 the	execution	 of	 an	incredibly	  complex	 and	 high-risk	 mission.	 Those	 men
were	doing	what	 they	were	told	 to	do,	 based	in	large	part	on	 their	faith	 in	 their
chain	 of	 command	 to	 always	 make	 the	type	  of	 decisions	 that	 prioritize	  the
mission	and	the	men.	As	we	would	 learn	in	 the	coming	months,	the	real	tragedy
of	the	empty	target	raids	was	the	opportunity	cost.

149
   Enemy	 accounts	 of	 life	  inside	 Kandahar	revealed	 that	 the	Taliban	  and	Al
Qaeda	fighters	made	no	discernible	 effort	 to	prepare	defenses	or	to	vacate	their
camps	in	the	weeks	between	9/11	and	the	 early	November	 raids.	The	Al	 Qaeda
leadership	clearly	  believed	 they	 were	 invincible	  in	  Kandahar,	often	  directly
quoting	media	comments	about	their	 impregnable	geographic	defenses	and	their
undefeatable	tactical	acumen,	as	exemplified	by	their	victory	 against	the	Soviets.
They	had	a	“come	and	get	me,	I	dare	you”	 mentality	 that	made	them	ripe	for	the
picking	 during	  those	 early	 weeks	 and	 months.	 So	 the	 reality	  was	 that	 the
majority	of	 Al	 Qaeda	and	Taliban	leaders	were	sitting	in	their	 tents	in	Kandahar,
while	 we	were	 sitting	 in	our	 tents	a	 thousand	miles	away	 planning	 to	attack	 a
couple	of	empty	targets.	Instead	of	focusing	our	efforts	on	finding	 the	enemy	and
attacking	 them	before	 they	 fled	 to	 Pakistan,	 we	focused	 all	 of	 our	 time	 and
resources	trying	to	psych	them	out.
   In	 the	 days	following	  the	empty	 target	raids,	 the	sitting-duck	  Al	 Qaeda	and
Taliban	leaders	fled	from	 Kandahar	for	 the	border	region	near	Pakistan.	The	list
of	terrorist	 leaders	sitting	 around	Kandahar	 at	the	time	 included	 Mullah	 Omar,
Abu	Zubeida,	and	Abu	 Zarqawi,	two	 of	whom	would	 form	 the	foundation	of	 our
Worldwide	 Most	Wanted	List	 for	many	years	to	come.4	Zarqawi	went	 on	to	lead
the	Al	Qaeda	resistance	movement	in	Iraq,	 which	was	responsible	for	 thousands
of	American	and	Iraqi	 deaths	during	the	six	years	that	followed.
   With	  the	 5th	 Special	Forces	 Group	 and	CIA	  making	 quantum	 progress	in
northern	Afghanistan,	the	pressure	was	now	on	our	commanding	general	and	our
higher	headquarters	to	actually	 provide	 some	sort	of	 contributory	 return	 on	the
hope	 and	 expectation	 our	  country	 had	 invested	  in	 us	 to	  make	 a	 positive
difference	in	Afghanistan.
   The	 day	 after	the	 Seymour	Hersh	 article	 came	out,	our	 higher	 headquarters
called	a	meeting	 with	 leaders	of	the	 subordinate	special	operations	units.	 Once
everyone	was	 seated,	a	high-ranking	 officer	  stood	 up,	cleared	 his	throat,	 and
announced	unabashedly,	“Our	 work	 here	 is	 done;	we’ll	  start	planning	 for	  the
redeployment	immediately.”
   We’re	 throwing	 in	the	towel?	I	couldn’t	 contain	my	 shock.
   “Sir,	 why	 would	we	go	home	now?	We	have—”
   He	 interrupted	  me	before	 I	 could	  continue.	 “Because	we	 need	 to	 be	in	 a
position	 to	  react	 to	 other	  contingencies	 around	 the	 world,”	   he	 responded.
Sometimes	 when	 someone	says	 something	  that	 is	 so	 bizarrely	  illogical,	   it
momentarily	 stuns	 the	listener	 into	 a	 state	of	  incoherent	speechlessness.	The
mission	was	to	destroy	 UBL	 and	Al	 Qaeda.	They	were	here	and	 we	were	here.

150
What	in	  the	 world	 could	 possibly	 be	 more	 important	  than	 hunting	 this	 guy
down?
   “But,	 sir—”
   That	 was	all	 I	was	 able	to	get	out	 of	my	 mouth	 before	he	turned	around	and
rushed	out	of	the	tent,	slamming	 the	tentflap	behind	him.	 I	had	just	spoken	what
history	confirms	 are	the	 two	 most	notorious	 last	words	by	 a	subordinate	to	 his
commander.
   Then	  a	 funny	 thing	  happened	 in	 that	 tent.	  What	 everyone	 was	 actually
thinking	I’ll	  never	know.	But	 it	appeared	to	me	that	all	eyes	in	that	tent	zeroed	in
on	me	with	 that	 familiar	 eyebrow-raised,	pursed-lips	 look	 that	asks,	“What	 the
hell	should	 we	do	 now?”	 No	 one	uttered	 a	word	 when	I	 got	 up	from	 my	 ass-
aching	metal	folding	  chair,	walked	 up	to	 the	front	 of	 the	tent,	and	plugged	 my
thumb	drive	into	 the	USB	port	 of	the	laptop	computer	that	was	projecting	 on	the
screen.	Here	goes:
   “Gentlemen,	 I	think	 going	home	would	 be	a	huge	mistake.	We	need	to	present
the	commanding	general	with	 some	options.	As	 most	of	 you	know,	 we’ve	 been
conducting	brainstorming	 sessions	over	the	past	couple	of	weeks,	and	I’ve	 got	a
few	 options	  that	  I’d	  like	  to	  share	 with	  all	  of	  you	  for	  your	  intellectual
refreshment.”
   I	 opened	the	file	up	and	the	first	 slide	on	the	screen	was	a	quote	from	Thomas
Friedman	 that	 I	  downloaded	 from	  LexisNexis	  on	 September	 14.	 Much	  as
Thomas	Paine’s	treatise	Common	Sense	captured	the	essence	of	the	argument	for
America’s	rights	 to	independence	and	freedom	of	choice	in	1776,	I	 believed	that
more	 than	 any	 other	  written	  word	 after	  9/11,	 Thomas	 Friedman’s	  treatise
captured	the	common	sense	essence	of	what	the	global	war	against	terrorism	was
all	about.

           The	people	who	 planned	the	9/11	attacks	combined	world-class	 evil	with
           world-class	  genius	 to	 devastating	 effect.	And	 unless	 we	 are	 ready	 to
           combine	 our	 best	minds	and	our	 best	organizations	to	 combat	them	(the
           World	 War	III	  Manhattan	Project)	 in	an	equally	 daring,	 unconventional
           and	 unremitting	  fashion,	we’re	in	 trouble.	 Because	while	9/11	may	have
           been	the	first	 major	 battle	 of	World	 War	 III,	 it	 may	also	be	the	last	 one
           that	   involves	  only	  conventional,	   non-nuclear	  weapons.	  (Emphasis
           added.)

   By	  stripping	 away	 the	emotion	 and	 bombast	of	 the	 event,	he	 put	 both	 the
enemy	and	 the	 complexity	 of	  the	challenge	 in	 bare-bones	 context	 for	 all	 to

151
understand.	He	also	illuminated	the	key	ingredients	 for	future	 mission	success—
combining	our	 best	minds,	daring,	 unconventional,	and	unremitting—into	  sharp
focus	for	all	to	recognize.
   “Consider	 this	 as	our	 foundational	 logic	 for	everything	 we	 do	from	 this	 day
forward,”	  I	 commented.	 I	 could	 tell	  Friedman’s	 common	 sense	inspired	 the
group.	I	could	see	it	in	their	eyes.
   Next,	 I	toggled	through	the	Lewis	 and	Clark	slide	deck.
   “But	  what’s	 the	 mission?”	 someone	asked.	“Yeah,	  and	what’s	 the	 target?”
said	someone	else	with	a	slight	hint	of	skepticism.
   “The	 mission	 is	 to	develop	 the	situation—we’re	 going	 to	 get	on	the	 ground,
build	our	 situational	awareness,	and	then	let	the	teams	develop	options	based	on
what	is	 actually	 happening	around	them.	 Think	 of	 it	 as	taking	 action	 to	make
action.”
   The	response	was	a	collective	“hmmmmm.”
   I	 finished	with	 a	couple	of	slides	that	summarized	Ali	 Mohamed’s	 advice.	The
title	 of	  the	 slides	was	 “The	  Art	  of	 the	 Possible.”	  I	 used	 bullet	 points	 and
amplified	 each	with	an	 explanation	of	 his	key	insights:	 wearing	 burkhas,	hiring
Afghans,	the	 people	are	on	 our	 side.	When	 the	men	and	 woman	in	 that	 room
heard	his	advice	and	insights,	I	detected	a	collective	 hint	of	reflective	 frustration
regarding	how	cautious	and	constrained	we	had	been	up	to	that	point.	I	closed	by
advising	everyone	to	read	the	entire	Ali	Mohamed	 document.
   Whether	  it	  was	 Thomas	 Friedman’s	 quote	 or	  Ali	  Mohamed’s	  audacious
insights	into	 the	art	of	the	possible,	 or	the	seed	planting	that	our	 entrepreneurial
comrades	had	done	leading	up	to	the	meeting,	it	was	blatantly	obvious	 that	there
was	no	need	for	any	more	 convincing.	 It	was	as	if	 someone	slapped	all	of	 us	in
the	face	and	shouted	“Snap	 out	 of	it!	  Where	are	the	gorilla	  costumes?”	It	 was
time	to	get	innovative;	it	 was	time	to	adapt;	it	was	time	to	get	audacious!
   The	 colonel	 in	 charge	of	 our	 higher	 headquarters	staff	jumped	 up	 from	 his
chair	and	began	 barking	out	 new	 guidance	and	timelines.	 Within	  five	 minutes
everyone	in	the	tent	was	up	and	heading	out	the	flap	to	start	working	 on	the	new
concept.	The	staff	went	back	to	work,	 this	time	 directing	their	 energy	toward	the
coordination	and	execution	of	 the	Lewis	and	Clark	 concept.	We’re	in	 business,	I
thought.
   Our	 higher	 headquarters	still	had	to	 go	through	 the	military	 decision-making
process	to	plan	the	Lewis	and	Clark	concept,	so	it	would	 be	ninety-six	hours—or
four	days—until	 the	 first	 teams	would	 get	on	the	ground.	 Although	 the	empty-
target	raids	hadn’t	 accomplished	anything	 of	 operational	significance,	 they	had

152
definitely	 alerted	the	enemy	that	the	United	States	had	the	capability	and	resolve
to	put	forces	on	the	ground	in	 Afghanistan.	The	 enemy	would	be	waiting	 for	 the
next	 attack.	 So	 we	 wanted	 to	 ensure	 that	 we	 maintained	 the	 advantage	 of
surprise,	but	to	do	this	 we	needed	to	minimize	 the	enemy’s	 ability	 to	detect	our
landings.	How	can	we	reduce	the	enemy’s	situational	awareness?
   That	 night	 we	 got	 back	 together	in	 the	 Unit	  tent	and	 began	brainstorming
ideas.	If	situational	 awareness	is	knowing	what’s	 going	on	around	you,	 then	our
objective	was	to	confuse	and	confound	 the	enemy	so	they	had	no	idea	what	was
going	 on	 around	 them.	 This	 is	 the	 essence	of	 effects-based	warfare:	  taking
actions	to	influence	the	way	the	enemy	thinks	and	makes	decisions.
   When	 you	unleash	the	creative	floodgates	 of	a	bunch	of	 special	ops	warriors,
you	better	 be	ready	for	 some	of	 the	wildest,	 most	 diabolical	 ideas	imaginable.
The	wake-up	  call	 from	 Ali	  Mohamed	  for	 thinking	  creatively	 and	 using	 our
imaginations	was	heeded;	the	operational	handcuffs	were	now	off.	 I	 think	it	 was
Rob	who	 came	up	 with	 an	official	  name	for	 our	 group:	 the	Ministry	  of	 Dirty
Tricks,	a	 name	supposedly	used	by	an	obscure	British	  team	that	developed	the
deception	activities	to	fake	out	the	Germans	before	the	D-Day	invasion.
   The	 first	 concept	we	 came	up	with	 was	to	 fly	 over	 Kandahar	in	 C-130s	and
drop	parachutes	attached	to	 giant	ice	 blocks	 in	the	 hills	 around	the	 town.	 The
goal	of	 the	 phantom	parachute	 drops	was	 to	strike	 terror	 in	 the	 hearts	of	 the
enemy	by	making	 them	believe	that	the	hills	 were	alive	 with	 commandos.	Once
the	ice	 blocks	hit	 the	 ground	 they	would	 melt	 away	 into	 the	desert,	and	 each
parachute	would	blow	 free	across	the	hills	until	 it	 was	captured	and	reported	by
whoever	came	across	it.	Where	are	the	commandos?	they	would	wonder.
   We	 would	  follow	  the	 phantom	parachute	 operations	by	 dropping	  resupply
bundles	around	 the	same	locations	 a	 few	 days	later.	 Boxes	 stuffed	 with	 fake
letters	from	home,	along	 with	appropriate	 amounts	of	food,	batteries,	and	water,
were	all	part	 of	the	 phantom	resupply.	We	 also	would	 send	false	radio	and	cell
phone	signals	that	simulated	 the	chatter	between	 nonexistent	teams	in	 the	hills
around	the	city.	 At	 this	point,	 the	staff	 of	our	 higher	headquarters	was	ready	to
approve	just	about	anything	we	brought	to	them—and	they	did.
   Twenty-four	  hours	 later,	 phantom	parachutes	dropped	 from	 the	 sky	around
Kandahar.	We	were	getting	nimble!
   As	 the	Ministry	  of	Dirty	  Tricks	 continued	to	 piggyback	ideas	and	stretch	the
limits	  of	 outrageousness,	the	  ideas	grew	  bigger	 and	 bolder.	  The	 pièce	 de
résistance,	in	my	opinion,	was	the	concept	of	 creating	a	false	helicopter	crash	on
the	outskirts	of	 the	city.	 We’d	 first	 drop	an	unflyable	 helicopter	full	  of	fuel	 and

153
explosives	on	the	edge	of	town.	 As	enemy	soldiers	rushed	to	the	fiery	 crash	site
like	 bugs	to	a	 light,	 in	 hopes	of	 capturing	or	 killing	  the	defenseless	American
pilots,	we	would	 identify	 and	engage	them	using	an	aerial	gunship	circling	out	of
sight	and	sound	high	overhead.
   That	 concept	was	overtaken	by	events,	but	it	 definitely	 would	 have	made	any
enemy	throughout	 the	world	  think	 twice	 before	 approaching	the	 next	downed
U.S.	helicopter.	  We	later	 learned	 that	 the	phantom	 parachute	drops	 not	 only
confused	the	enemy,	they	 also	terrorized	 the	enemy.	Once	 they	discovered	 the
infiltration	  evidence,	every	bump	 in	the	 night,	and	 every	seemingly	 out-of-the-
ordinary	occurrence	around	the	town	of	 Kandahar	was	attributed	to	the	phantom
“American	 Commandos.”	As	 their	diaries	would	 later	expose,	the	enemy	wasn’t
sleeping	very	well	 during	that	period.	 In	paranoid	 times,	people	see	connections
where	there	aren’t	any.
   Four	 days	later,	phase	one	of	the	 Lewis	and	Clark	 concept	was	launched	and
we	were	landing	on	the	same	dry	lakebeds	we	pinpointed	 in	1998	(and	the	same
dry	lakebeds	we	 briefed	 the	defense	contractors	on	 in	 August).	 We	had	 teams
and	vehicles	all	 over	the	southern	deserts	of	 Afghanistan.	 For	the	enemy,	there
was	one	unsettling	difference;	 these	teams	were	firing	projectiles	 at	them	before
melting	away	into	the	surrounding	 desert.
   The	 remaining	 enemy	 reacted	as	most	 fighting	  forces	do	 when	 completely
confounded	by	 the	chaos	of	 unconventional	tactics:	 they	panicked	 and	fled	 for
the	mountains.	The	 Taliban	 government	of	 Afghanistan	 collapsed	within	  days,
while	 the	Northern	 Alliance,	 accompanied	by	 the	heroic	men	 and	teams	of	 the
5th	Special	Forces	Group	and	the	CIA,	rushed	in	from	 the	north	to	fill	  the	power
vacuum	and	occupy	the	capital	city	of	Kabul.5
   But	 the	fall	 of	 the	Taliban	 regime	only	 marked	the	 end	of	the	 beginning;	we
now	 had	to	 get	 on	 the	 ground	 and	find	  UBL	  and	 his	 Al	 Qaeda	 army.	 The
footprint	  moved	 forward	  onto	 Afghan	 soil	  to	 occupy	  an	abandoned	 Soviet
airbase	called	Bagram.6
   The	   men	 who	   had	  conducted	 the	  empty-target	   raids	  and	 the	  initial
reconnaissance	missions	into	Afghanistan	were	all	sent	back	to	the	States	as	part
of	an	 administratively	 driven	 rotation	 plan.	 I	also	 returned	to	 the	States,	and	I
knew	exactly	what	I	needed	to	do	when	I	got	there.

154
                                                         12



                                           IMAGINE	     HOW:


                          THE	 COUNTERFEIT	 DOUBLE	 AGENT


                                              December	  2001


Reading	the	Ali	 Mohamed	document	was	illuminating,	but	I	wanted	more;	I
wanted	to	look	him	in	the	eye,	listen	to	his	words,	and	understand	what	made
him	tick.1	There	was	no	doubt	in	my	mind	that	if	we	as	a	nation	were	going	to
take	full	advantage	of	his	unique	insights	and	perspectives,	someone	needed	to
talk	to	him	face-to-face.	The	reality	on	the	ground	in	Afghanistan	had	changed
significantly	since	he	wrote	the	original	document,	so	I	figured	he’d	have	lots	of
new	insights	and	ideas,	given	the	amazing	turn	of	events.
   I	had	only	limited	time	at	home	before	I’d	be	heading	back	to	Afghanistan,	so
as	soon	as	I	got	there	I	began	coordinating	to	visit	Ali	Mohamed	in	prison.	It
wasn’t	difficult,	because	no	one	considered	him	to	be	any	kind	of	big	deal—after
all,	he	had	been	in	prison	since	1998.	Additionally,	the	anything-goes	spirit	was
still	alive	and	well	throughout	the	government,	so	coordinating	with	the	various
government	agencies	that	were	involved	in	his	case	was	a	simple	matter	of	a	few
phone	calls	and	a	few	lunches.
   While	I	 waited	for	confirmation	of	my	request,	I	prepared	myself	by	learning
as	much	as	possible	about	Ali	Mohamed	the	person:	What	was	his	background?
What	shaped	his	values	and	beliefs?	What	motivated	him	to	do	what	he	had
done?	There	wasn’t	anything	 available	on	 him	 in	 the	 military	 intelligence
database,	so	I	figured	I’d	do	what	everyone	does	when	they	need	background
information	on	someone;	I	sat	down	at	my	computer	at	home	and	Googled	the
name	Ali	Mohamed.	2
   Although	I	 felt	 like	we	 missed	some	opportunities	to	take	advantage	of	his
insights	during	the	initial	invasion,	once	I	started	researching	his	past,	I	learned

155
that	 those	 missed	 opportunities	  in	  October	 and	  November	 2001	  paled	 in
comparison	to	the	missed	opportunities	 in	the	 prior	ten	years.	There	was	 lots	of
information	 about	him	 online.	 The	most	difficult	  part	 of	culling	  through	it	 was
separating	the	 facts	 from	  the	 fiction	  around	 the	 man	 and	 his	 complex	  life
journey.	I	would	 soon	discover	that	much	of	what	 the	media	and	the	government
thought	they	 knew	about	 Ali	 Mohamed	 was	based	on	misinformation,	  and	dot
connecting	without	adequate	dot	collecting.
   Today	 there	are	TV	 documentaries,	books,	and	numerous	official	 reports	that
promulgate	what	 has	become	the	accepted	version	 of	 the	Ali	  Mohamed	 story:
that	of	  a	terrorist	  double	 agent,	most	 commonly	  referred	 to	 as	 bin	 Laden’s
military	 mole,	 who	infiltrated	  and	duped	multiple	 U.S.	 government	agencies	to
pilfer	 their	most	 sensitive	secrets.	3	But	 as	I	 was	about	to	 discover,	the	 reality
behind	the	story	of	Ali	 Mohamed	was	quite	different.
   Ali	  Mohamed	was	incarcerated	in	a	federal	penitentiary	for	masterminding	 the
surveillance	 and	 planning	  of	  the	 U.S.	  embassy	 bombings	 in	  Nairobi	  and
Tanzania.	In	late	1993,	Al	 Qaeda	leadership	ordered	Mohamed	to	scour	Nairobi
for	targets	that	would	avenge	the	U.S.	involvement	in	 Somalia.	While	in	 Nairobi,
Ali	 Mohamed	 was	responsible	for	 training	 at	 least	two	 of	 the	members	of	 the
East	Africa	 cells	directly	 involved	 in	the	attacks,	Abu	 Jihad	and	Fazul	Abdullah
Mohammed.4	He	taught	them	 how	to	 conduct	surveillance	and	how	 to	preserve
operational	secrecy	by	moving	 around	Nairobi	undercover.	 His	favorite	 disguise
tip	to	 his	trainees	was	 always	to	 wear	a	pair	 of	 sunglasses	and	a	baseball	cap.
During	his	guilty	 plea	Mohamed	 told	prosecutors,	“We	used	various	code	names
to	conceal	our	identities;	I	used	the	name	Jeff.”5
   Mohamed	 drew	maps	and	diagrams	of	the	U.S.	embassy	in	Nairobi	and	rigged
a	darkroom	 in	 a	colleague’s	 apartment.	When	 Mohamed	showed	 the	embassy
surveillance	 drawings	 and	photos	 to	 UBL,	  UBL	  pointed	 to	 the	 rear	parking
garage	as	the	 optimal	 place	 for	 detonation	 of	 the	truck	 bomb	 by	 the	 suicide
bombers.
   The	 tactics,	techniques,	and	procedures	Mohamed	taught	the	suicide	bombers,
such	as	how	to	case	targets,	how	to	photograph	them,	and	how	 to	write	 detailed
attack	plans,	came	 right	 out	 of	 U.S.	military	  manuals.	But	 he	 didn’t	 steal	 the
manuals,	nor	did	 he	 have	to	 purchase	them	on	 the	black	 market;	 the	manuals
were	issued	to	him	while	 he	was	serving	as	a	member	of	the	U.S.	 Army	 Special
Forces.
   Born	 in	1952	in	 Egypt,	he	joined	 the	Egyptian	army	where	he	rose	to	the	rank

156
of	major.	 In	 1980	 he	was	 chosen	by	the	 Egyptian	 military	  to	take	 part	in	 the
highly	 coveted	 U.S.	 military	  exchange	program.	 He	 was	sent	 to	 Fort	 Bragg,
North	 Carolina,	 to	  spend	four	  months	 learning	 about	 the	 U.S.	 military.	  He
trained	alongside	U.S.	Special	 Forces	(Green	Berets),	learning	 firsthand	how	 to
plan	 and	 coordinate	 Special	 Forces	 missions	  such	 as	deep	 reconnaissance,
unconventional	warfare,	 and	 counterinsurgency	operations.	 After	 four	 months,
he	received	 a	diploma	 with	  a	Green	 Beret	 on	it,	  and	then	 returned	to	 Egypt
where	he	spent	three	more	years	in	the	Egyptian	military	 before	 leaving	to	work
as	a	security	 adviser	for	 Egypt	 Air.6	 But	 Ali	  Mohamed	 wasn’t	 satisfied.	Like
many	foreign	  exchange	officers	  before	 him,	 he	had	 acquired	 a	 taste	for	 the
freedoms	and	liberties	 he	experienced	while	 living	 in	 America,	 and	now	 found
himself	hungering	for	 more.
   At	 this	 point,	what	we	 know	about	Ali	 Mohamed’s	 journey	 gets	a	bit	tangled.
We	know	 that	 he	 approached	the	U.S.	 embassy	in	 Cairo	 and	volunteered	 for
service	with	  the	 FBI	 and	 the	CIA.7	  We	 also	 know	 that	 the	 CIA	 sent	 out	 a
worldwide	  cable	 to	 all	  its	 stations	 asking	 if	  anyone	 needed	someone	 with
Mohamed’s	 skills.	  The	 CIA	   station	 in	 West	  Germany	 was	 interested,	 and
subsequently	hired	him	 to	infiltrate	  a	mosque	in	 West	Germany.	He	 didn’t	 last
long.	According	 to	 the	unclassified	reports	available	 at	the	time,	 Mohamed	was
terminated	 for	  “talking	   to	  known	  terrorists,”	   which	  resulted	 in	  the	  CIA
determining	him	to	be	untrustworthy.8	 Isn’t	 that	what	we	hired	him	for?
   In	 1985	Ali	 Mohamed	returned	to	the	United	States.	On	the	plane	ride	over,	he
met	and	fell	in	love	 with	 an	American	woman	who	would	 eventually	 become	his
wife.	They	 moved	into	a	tidy	 two-bedroom	duplex	 in	the	central	California	 town
of	Santa	Clara.	Santa	Clara	residents	who	met	him	described	him	as	cordial,	well
spoken,	and	 physically	  fit.	  Mohamed	 often	  introduced	 himself	  as	a	 former
Egyptian	 army	 officer	  who	 hoped	 to	 someday	 do	 intelligence	 work	  for	 the
United	 States.9	 Is	 that	  how	 an	  undercover	 terrorist	   introduces	 himself	  to
strangers,	or	does	that	sound	like	someone	who	is	trying	to	network	for	a	job?
   In	  1986	Ali	  Mohamed	 approached	 a	U.S.	 army	 recruiter	 in	  Oak-land	 and
volunteered	his	services.	The	army	liked	 what	they	saw	and	signed	him	up	as	an
enlisted	soldier.	He	was	thirty-four.	  Although	 unusually	 old	for	 a	new	recruit	 in
the	mid-’80s,	 he	was	in	excellent	physical	 condition	 and	possessed	a	trait	found
in	 all	 prized	 recruits:	 he	was	 highly	  motivated.	 He	 told	 his	 recruiter	 he	was
joining	 because	he	wanted	to	“serve	 the	United	 States.”	 After	 graduating	from
basic	training,	he	was	assigned	to	the	army	Special	Forces	at	Fort	Bragg.

157
   Every	 article	and	interview	 written	 about	Ali	 Mohamed	 in	the	hyper-paranoid
fall	 of	 2001	concluded	 that	he	 was	a	double	 agent	who	 specifically	 chose	the
Special	Forces	so	he	could	siphon	and	export	the	skills	 he	learned	to	train	future
terrorists.	But	the	more	 I	read	and	learned	about	his	life,	 and	the	more	I	 thought
about	his	actions	 in	the	 context	of	 my	 own	(I	 joined	 the	military	  in	 1985),	the
less	the	 double-agent	theory	 began	to	 make	 sense	to	 me.	The	 dots	 were	not
snapping	together.
   As	 the	name	implies,	 the	Special	Forces	is	a	refuge	for	 those	who	are	special
—as	in	a	bit	different	 from	 everyone	else.	The	Special	Forces	soldier	is	a	unique
breed	of	cat,	a	breed	that	doesn’t	lend	itself	to	any	specific	psychological	 profile.
But	  there	 is	  a	  pattern	 of	   common	 individual	   traits	  such	  as	 mavericks,
adventurers,	and	patriots;	one	or	more	of	which	 are	almost	always	present	in	the
pedigree.
   Like	 a	lot	 of	men	who	 joined	the	Special	Forces	during	 the	peace	years	of	the
1980s,	Ali	 Mohamed	 seems	to	have	possessed	varying	levels	 of	 all	 three.	The
dictionary	 definition	 of	 maverick	 is	an	unbranded	range	animal	 that	belongs	 to
the	 first	 person	 who	  puts	 a	 brand	 on	 it.	  Remember	 that	 definition.	  When
Mohamed	left	 Egypt;	 he	packed	his	worldly	  possessions	in	a	suitcase	and	used
every	dollar	he	had	to	buy	a	ticket	 to	the	United	 States.	At	the	age	of	thirty-four,
his	search	 for	 adventure	still	  not	 satiated,	the	 former	 Egyptian	 Army	  officer
decided	to	enlist	 in	 the	U.S.	 army	as	a	 private.	Like	 many	 fellow	 adventurers,
both	inside	 the	military	 and	 out,	he	dreamed	of	 someday	upping	 his	game	and
joining	 the	CIA	 or	FBI	 to	become	a	covert	operative	similar	 to	the	James	Bond-
like	image	 propagated	in	books	and	movies	all	 around	the	globe.	 Ali	 Mohamed
also	was	keenly	aware	that	honorable	 service	in	the	U.S.	 military	 portends	fast-
track	 status	to	 U.S.	 citizenship.	  10	 Thus,	it	  was	 with	 high	  hopes	and	 great
expectations	that	he	reported	for	duty	on	his	first	day	with	 the	U.S.	Army	 Special
Forces	at	Fort	Bragg,	North	Carolina.
   Although	  Mohamed	 was	 administratively	  slotted	 as	a	 supply	 sergeant,	the
Special	Forces	have	always	put	a	 premium	on	difficult-to-learn	   language	skills,
and	word	spread	quickly	 of	Ali	  Mohamed’s	fluency	 in	 Arabic,	Hebrew,	 French,
and	English.	 He	was	soon	 spending	most	of	 his	 time	as	a	 language	instructor,
and	also	 teaching	 classes	to	  soldiers	 about	 the	culture	  of	 the	 Middle	  East.
Although	his	 contributions	were	appreciated,	he	didn’t	 join	the	Special	Forces	to
be	a	language	instructor;	he	was,	at	his	core,	 a	warrior,	 and	he	yearned	to	be	an
elite	combat	 soldier	like	 those	he	was	 teaching.	Within	  a	few	 months,	he	filed
the	paperwork	to	 go	through	 Special	Forces	qualification	 training,	 which	 was	a

158
prerequisite	for	 anyone	who	 wanted	to	 become	a	member	of	 one	of	 the	small,
closely	knit	 Special	 Forces	teams	that	had	the	 mission	of	 going	 behind	enemy
lines	and	conducting	unconventional	warfare.	His	 request	went	nowhere.
   In	 1988,	Mohamed	approached	his	commander	(a	lieutenant	colonel)	 and	told
him	he	wanted	to	 use	his	upcoming	 thirty	 days’	leave	to	 go	to	Afghanistan	 and
fight	 alongside	the	Afghanistan	 resistance	fighters	(the	 mujahideen)	against	the
Soviets.	At	 the	time,	 the	United	 States	was	secretly	supporting	 the	mujahideen
by	supplying	 them	with	 hundreds	of	 millions	 of	 dollars’	 worth	 of	weapons	and
equipment.11	Much	 like	 today,	the	 agents	working	 the	situation	 in	 Pakistan	in
the	’80s	were	in	dire	need	of	Arab	 Americans	who	could	 speak	the	language	and
move	into	 and	 out	of	 the	 border	area	between	 Afghanistan	 and	Pakistan	with
impunity.	  Instead	 of	  seeing	 Mohamed	  for	 the	  unbounded	 potential	  he	 so
blatantly	 represented	for	 both	 current	 and	 future	 Middle	 East	 operations,	 his
commanding	officer	 saw	him	as	a	problem,	and	openly	 labeled	him	as	a	fanatic.
12
   In	 post-9/11	newspaper	and	television	interviews,	Ali	  Mohamed’s	commander
described	his	 rationale:	 “Ali	   Mohamed	 was	 hellbent	 on	 fighting	  against	 the
Soviets,”	 which	 he	described	as	being	 “contrary	 to	 all	 army	 regulations.”	 The
commander	 added	 that	 when	  he	 asked	 Mohamed	 about	 the	  Anwar	  Sadat
assassination,	Mohamed	told	him	 that	“Sadat	 was	a	traitor,”	  and	then	“showed
no	remorse	for	Sadat’s	death.”13	His	commander	also	claimed	he	“wrote	 reports
to	get	Mohamed	investigated,	 court-martialed,	and	deported.”	 This	struck	 me	as
odd.
   I	 was	a	Ranger	lieutenant	 in	 1988,	and	what	Mohamed	 was	proposing	 to	his
commander	was	very	similar	 to	what	most	if	 not	all	 special	operations	soldiers	I
hung	around	 with	 were	 thinking	  and	hypothesizing	 about	 during	 that	 period.
Like	  most	 Americans,	  we	 fervently	   believed	 in	  the	 mujahideen	  cause	 of
liberating	 their	country	 from	 an	 invading	 army	and	 freeing	 the	Afghan	 people
from	 the	oppressive	 shackles	of	 a	Communist	 political	  system.	There	 was	an
additional	and	 more	palpable	motivator	 for	 those	of	 us	in	 the	military.	  Many	a
young	 American	 soldier	  was	killed	  or	  wounded	 in	 Vietnam	  due	to	  Soviet-
supplied	advice	 and	ammunition;	 helping	 the	mujahideen	 seemed	like	 a	prime
opportunity	 to	 conduct	some	payback.	 If	 the	 option	 to	go	 to	 Afghanistan	 and
help	out	the	mujahideen	during	leave	had	availed	itself	 to	me	or	any	of	 the	cats	I
hung	with	from	 the	Ranger	pedigree,	I’m	certain	every	last	one	of	 us	would	have
pounced	on	it.

159
   As	 far	 as	Ali	  Mohamed’s	 supposedly	fanatical	 opinions	 on	 Anwar	 Sadat,	I
thought	about	the	U.S.	presidential	election	in	2000.	If	 a	person	is	to	be	labeled	a
fanatic	for	 stating	 his	dislike	  for	the	 president	of	 his	 country,	 then	judging	 by
some	of	 the	hate-filled	  bumper	stickers,	 radio	 talk-shows,	 and	demonstrations
seen	and	heard	around	the	 United	 States	at	the	 time,	 this	country	 had	 a	large
fanatic	problem.
   Despite	 his	 commander’s	 retrospective	 reaction,	 there	is	 no	 record	 of	 him
ordering	Mohamed	not	to	 go	to	Afghanistan.	 Therefore,	and	perhaps	because	of,
Mohamed	 followed	   his	  heart	 and	  headed	 off	  in	  search	 of	  adventure	 in
Afghanistan.	We	only	 have	Mohamed’s	version	 of	what	transpired	while	 he	was
gone,	but	thirty	  days	after	 he	departed,	he	returned	to	 Fort	 Bragg.	Bedraggled
and	twenty	pounds	lighter,	he	walked	 into	his	commander’s	office	 and	presented
him	with	 a	souvenir	from	 his	trip,	 a	Russian	belt	buckle	 that	he	claimed	to	have
taken	off	a	dead	Russian	officer.
   What	 was	he	 trying	 to	do?	 If	 he	was	a	 double	agent,	 why	would	 he	tell	 his
Special	Forces	 commander	what	 he	 had	 just	done	 instead	of	 laying	  low	 and
keeping	his	Afghanistan	 war	 stories	 to	himself?	 It	 didn’t	 make	sense.	Was	the
belt	buckle	a	token	of	his	fanaticism,	 as	his	commander	described	it,	 or	was	this
an	act	of	 desperation	to	 prove	his	 worth	 as	a	warrior	  in	 hopes	it	might	 finally
earn	him	 the	 rite	 of	passage	into	 the	 elite	 brotherhood	 of	 the	Special	 Forces
operational	 teams?	The	 image	of	 a	 cat	or	 dog	 trying	 to	 please	its	 master	 by
dropping	a	mangled	bird	 carcass	at	their	feet	came	to	mind.
   Whatever	  his	 intent,	  it	 didn’t	  fly;	   there	 was	 no	 rite	 of	  passage	for	  Ali
Mohamed.	His	commander	was	incensed,	and	once	again	Mohamed	was	harshly
rebuked	for	his	 actions.	As	a	U.S	 Army	 soldier,	he	technically	 was	not	 allowed
to	fight	 in	 an	armed	conflict	 unless	it	was	 with	 his	army	unit.	 But	 ignoring	 and
admonishing	him	after	 he	returned	didn’t	 seem	to	make	much	sense.	As	hard	as
it	 may	be	 to	remember	 now,	in	 1988,	 U.S.	 military	 doctrine	 was	 100	percent
focused	on	defeating	 the	Soviet	Union	 in	 an	armed	conflict.	  All	 of	 our	 tactics,
techniques,	and	procedures	were	based	on	 this	doctrine.	 It	 seems	like	 it	 might
have	been	 a	good	 idea	 to	 at	 least	listen	  to	 the	insights	  and	perspectives	 of
someone	 who	 was	  resourceful	  enough	 to	  travel	  from	  North	  Carolina	  to
Afghanistan	and	engage	in	real	combat	on	the	ground	against	real	Soviet	forces.
   Ali	 Mohamed’s	 commander,	like	 the	FBI	 and	CIA	 before	 him,	just	 could	not
see	it.	Perhaps	it	 was	because	Ali	Mohamed	was	Egyptian,	 or	 perhaps	because
he	was	older	(then	thirty-six	 years	old),	or	 perhaps	it	was	the	combination	of	 the
two	that	made	Ali	Mohamed	the	human	equivalent	of	the	four-inch	 knife	blade.

160
   With	  the	harsh	 rebuke	and	cold	 shoulder	 he	received	from	  his	commander,
along	with	the	lack	 of	progress	concerning	his	repeated	requests	to	transfer	to	an
operational	team,	 Ali	 Mohamed	 began	to	 grow	 frustrated.	Like	  water	flowing
through	rocks,	 Ali	 Mohamed’s	 thirst	 for	action	 and	adventure—preferably	 as	a
U.S.	operative—was	going	 to	be	quenched.	It	 was	only	 a	matter	of	 time	before
he	found	the	path	of	least	resistance	to	get	there.
   In	 the	 fall	 of	 1989	Ali	  Mohamed	 received	an	honorable	 discharge	from	 the
U.S.	military	 and	was	subsequently	granted	his	 U.S.	citizenship.	 He	returned	to
Santa	Clara,	California,	 where	he	continued	 to	serve	in	 the	U.S.	Army	  Reserve
while	trying,	 and	ultimately	 failing,	 to	get	a	job	as	an	FBI	interpreter.
   At	  this	point	 in	 his	 life,	 Ali	 Mohamed	 had	a	 résumé	of	one-of-a-kind	  skills
and	knowledge:	 fluent	 in	 four	 languages,	Special	Forces	training,	 Afghanistan
combat	 experience,	  U.S.	  citizen,	  Arab,	  physically	   fit,	  good-looking,	   and
intelligent.	 When	viewed	in	aggregate,	his	curriculum	 vitae	would	 put	him	in	 the
“highly	 coveted	employee”	 category	with	 almost	 any	organization	operating	 on
the	world	stage	at	the	time,	whether	for	business,	diplomacy,	espionage,	military,
or	terror.	It	 didn’t	 take	long	 for	 one	of	those	potential	 employers	to	take	notice.
The	group	 that	 recognized	his	 unique	buffet	  of	 skills	 found	 him	 in	 much	 the
same	way	they	found	John	Walker	 Lindh	 and	all	the	other	American	 jihadists—
through	 the	 mosque	 network	  in	 the	 United	  States.	 In	 1989	  Ali	  Mohamed
wandered	into,	and	was	welcomed	with	 open	arms	by,	the	Al	 Farooq	mosque	in
New	Jersey.	Al	Farooq	was	home	to	some	of	the	charter	members	of	what	would
eventually	 become	Al	 Qaeda,	and	 they	 were	looking	  for	 someone	to	 provide
weapons	and	tactics	training	to	their	members.	Ali	 Mohamed	 was	just	what	they
were	looking	 for,	 and	in	short	 order,	he	would	 exceed	all	 of	their	 expectations.
The	terrorists,	on	the	other	hand,	 thought	of	that	same	four-inch	 knife	blade	as	a
powerful	instrument	for	 terror	 and	coercion.
   Ali	  Mohamed	 had	found	 his	 path	of	 least	resistance.	Here’s	 what	 I	 learned
about	his	journey	from	that	day	forward:	 14

	
   •	 1990:	Ali	 Mohamed	makes	another	attempt	to	join	 the	FBI	in	San	Francisco,
but	is	only	put	on	retainer	as	a	translator.
   •	 November	  5,	1990:	One	 of	the	 men	Ali	 Mohamed	 trained	 to	shoot	on	 the
firing	 ranges	of	 New	 Jersey,	Al	 Said	 Nosair,	is	 arrested	after	 the	murder	 of	a
radical	 Jewish	 rabbi	 Meier	 Kahane.	 When	 authorities	 searched	the	 home	 of
Nosair,	  they	 found	   U.S.	 Army	   training	   manuals,	 secret	 documents,	  and
videotaped	talks	that	Mohamed	delivered	at	the	Kennedy	Special	Warfare	Center

161
at	Fort	Bragg.
   •	  1992:	  Ali	  Mohamed	 travels	  to	 Khowst,	  Afghanistan,	  trains	 Al	  Qaeda
soldiers	in	 basic	 military	  training,	 and	establishes	a	 reputation	 as	a	hard-core
trainer	who	is	very	strict	 but	also	very	proficient.
   •	 1993:	At	 the	request	of	Al	 Qaeda	leaders,	Ali	Mohamed	conducts	visual	and
photographic	surveillance	on	the	U.S.	embassy	in	Nairobi,	Kenya.
   •	 1994-1996:	 UBL’s	  second-in-command,	Mohamed	 Atef,	 refuses	to	 let	Ali
Mohamed	know	 what	 name	and	passport	he	 is	traveling	 under.	 Captured	U.S.
embassy	bomber	 L’Houssaine	  Kherchtou	  would	 testify	  in	  his	 U.S.	 trial	  in
February	2001	that	Atef	 “doesn’t	 want	Abu	 Mohamed	al	Amriki	  [Ali	 Mohamed
the	American]	 to	see	his	name,	because	he	[is]	afraid	 that	maybe	he	is	 working
with	United	 States	or	other	 governments.”15	Other	 captured	terrorists	will	  later
report	that	Ali	 Mohamed	 had	numerous	falling-outs	 with	 Al	Qaeda	leaders	after
1994,	over	a	wide	 range	of	issues,	from	 his	handling	of	 money	to	 his	suspected
relationships	with	 the	FBI.16	 He	also	is	labeled	by	 many	of	his	 fellow	 terrorists
as	a	bad	Muslim	who	isn’t	fanatical	 enough.
   •	 1996:	He	 helps	supervise	the	security	for	 UBL	 and	his	 family’s	 move	from
Sudan	to	Afghanistan.
   •	 1998:	 The	U.S.	embassies	in	Kenya	 and	Tanzania	are	bombed.	Within	 two
weeks,	FBI	  agents	use	a	 key	 supplied	 by	 Mohamed’s	 apartment	manager	 to
search	his	apartment	in	 Sacramento,	California.	  According	 to	 testimony	 at	his
trial,	 his	computer	 hard	drive	 contained	files	 and	photographs	from	 the	cell	 he
set	up	in	Nairobi	 and	numerous	how-to	 documents	for	terrorist	 training.	He	 was
arrested	on	September	10,	1998.17
	
   The	  FBI	  has	 acknowledged	 in	  court	  filings	  that	  its	 agents	 interviewed
Mohamed	at	least	three	times	between	1990	and	1998.	So	how	could	a	man	be	a
key	participant	 in	 Al	  Qaeda’s	most	diabolical	  terrorist	 activities	 in	 the	1990s,
while	simultaneously	 volunteering	 to	work	 with	 and	for	 the	FBI,	 without	 being
killed	  or	  imprisoned	  by	 either	  side?	 Was	  this	 the	  behavior	  of	  a	 highly
accomplished	and	fanatical	double	 agent,	as	is	the	conventional	 wisdom	today?
Or	was	there	some	other	explanation?
   There	 was	only	 one	way	 to	find	 out:	 a	face-to-face	meeting	 with	 the	guy	on
the	ground.
   To	 help	me	separate	the	facts	from	the	fiction,	 before	I	 talked	to	him,	 I	boned
up	on	 my	counter-elicitation	  skills.	 I	 had	gone	through	 a	commercial	 counter-

162
elicitation	 course	a	few	 years	earlier.	 Taught	 by	 retired	CIA	  case	officers,	 the
course	has	since	become	popular	 with	  police	departments	 all	 over	the	 U.S.18
Counter-elicitation	 uses	neuro-linguistic	 techniques	 to	build	 rapport	 and	detect
deception.	The	main	premise	of	 counter-elicitation	 is	 that	the	best	way	to	 tell	 if
someone	is	lying	 or	being	deceptive	is	 by	recognizing	 the	patterns	of	his	 or	her
body	movements.	Forget	about	eye	movements:	some	people	habitually	roll	their
eyes,	and	some	people	 just	like	  to	check	 out	 your	shoes;	neither	 are	accurate
indicators	 of	 truth	  or	 deception.	 But	 body	  movements,	 in	 conjunction	  with
responses	and	reactions	are.	When	people	tell	the	truth	they	are	smooth,	natural,
and	still.	But	 when	they	engage	in	deception	or	lack	confidence	 in	what	they	 are
telling	  you,	 their	  bodies	 betray	  them	 and	 they	  make	 subtle,	 abrupt	  body
movements—the	instructors	call	 it	 “coming	 off	 one’s	 base.”	All	 the	 techniques
apply	cross-culturally	 and	cross-gender,	and	therefore	are	effective	in	all	parts	of
the	world.	The	training	 video	used	in	the	course	I	attended	showed	a	clip	of	O.	J.
Simpson	 answering	 questions	from	  a	 couple	 of	 Chicago	 Police	  Department
detectives	the	day	after	the	murder	 of	his	 ex-wife	 and	her	friend.	 It	was	 routine
questioning.	 O.J.	 wasn’t	 a	 real	 suspect	 yet—after	  all,	 why	  would	  O.J.	 kill
someone?—he	was	rich,	  famous,	and	 had	 it	 all.	 During	  the	 initial	 stages	 of
questioning	O.J.	was	very	 still,	 he	was	on	his	 base.	But	when	questioned	about
his	whereabouts	 during	 the	killing,	   and	how	 he	 cut	 his	hand,	 he	rocked	 and
rolled	 off	 his	base	as	he	explained	 that	 he	was	nowhere	 near	the	scene	of	 the
murder,	and	that	he	had	cut	his	hand	when	he	broke	a	glass	in	his	hotel	sink.	O.J.
was	lying.
   But	 that	 was	the	classroom;	I	 had	to	test	 it	out	 in	the	 real	world.	 So	I	 added
counter-elicitation	  techniques	 to	 my	 repertoire	  for	 dealing	  with	 intelligence
sources	and	paid	 informants	  while	 operating	 around	 the	world.	  It	 proved	 its
worth	many	times	over.
   Armed	 with	  a	witches’	 brew	 of	facts,	 fiction,	 assumptions,	and	suppositions
about	Ali	 Mohamed	and	his	complex	 life	 journey,	I	 was	ready	to	meet	with	 him
at	the	maximum-security	 prison	where	he	had	taken	up	residence.	There	was	no
fanfare,	nor	any	bureaucratic	red	tape	to	pass	through;	in	retrospect,	I	don’t	think
anyone	really	 gave	a	hoot	 about	the	guy,	 or,	 for	 that	matter,	who	 was	visiting
him.	 The	  prison	 was	  located	 smack	 in	  the	 middle	  of	  a	 sprawling	  urban
metropolis.	 Ten	feet	 from	 a	newspaper	 stand	bustling	 with	 businesspersons,	I
walked	 through	a	 thick	 tinted-glass	 entrance	door	 and	 found	 myself	 standing
directly	in	 front	 of	a	bulletproof	 glass-cocooned	guard	booth.	Dressed	in	a	sport
coat	and	tie,	with	 long	hair	 and	a	goatee,	I	slid	 my	military	  ID	card	 through	the

163
slot.	The	guards	seemed	a	bit	incredulous	 at	first,	 then	pushed	a	clipboard	 back
to	me	and	 told	 me	I	 had	to	 sign	a	safety	 waiver	 acknowledging	 that	if	 I	 were
taken	captive	during	 a	 prison	uprising,	 the	prison	 would	 not	 be	held	liable	 for
whatever	happened	to	me.	It	was	a	bizarre	way	of	 reinforcing	 that	it	was	time	 to
switch	out	 of	 my	“I’m	  walking	  through	a	 safe	U.S.	city”	  mind-set	into	 a	 “I’m
about	to	walk	 through	a	 building	 full	 of	 desperate	criminals”	 mode.	Situational
awareness	is	knowing	what’s	going	on	around	you.
   I	 had	never	been	inside	 a	maximum-security	 prison	 before,	so	I	 didn’t	 know
what	to	 expect.	 What	 I	 remember	most	 about	the	 place	was	 how	 completely
antiseptic	it	was.	Everything	 was	either	made	of	 stainless	steel	or	painted	white,
and	everything	was	either	rounded	or	completely	flat.	 No	doorknobs,	no	handles,
no	chair	legs—there	were	no	protuberances	of	any	type	that	 could	potentially	 be
broken	off	or	re-formed	 for	use	as	a	weapon.
   The	 guard	escorted	me	 into	 the	visiting	 room	 where	 I	sat	 in	a	 white	 plastic
chair,	its	 legs	molded	 into	the	 floor.	 The	room	 was	bathed	in	 sunlight,	 but	 the
thick	 walls	 and	 shatter-resistant	windows	  completely	 soundproofed	 the	room
from	the	bustling	 city	just	a	few	 feet	away.	After	 a	couple	of	minutes	of	 waiting,
a	large	steel	door	off	to	 my	left	 slid	open	and	in	 walked	Ali	 Mohamed.	 Wearing
an	orange	jumpsuit	 and	leg	chains,	he	 shuffled	purposefully	  to	his	seat	and	sat
across	the	table	from	me.	He	 didn’t	 look	anything	 like	 his	picture,	 but	I	 learned
long	ago	that	not	many	people	do.	His	 hands	were	unencumbered.	Do	you	shake
a	terrorist’s	  hand	when	 you	first	 meet	him?	 I	 was	told	 ahead	of	 time	 that	Ali
Mohamed	wouldn’t	  be	told	 anything	about	 my	background	 or	my	 purpose.	He
would	 only	 know	 that	I	 was	 a	government	 employee	who	 wanted	 to	ask	 him
some	questions.
   He	 extended	his	hand	across	the	table.	“Hello.	What	do	you	 do	to	stay	in	such
great	shape?”	he	asked	in	perfect,	unaccented	English.
   “Nothing,”	   I	replied	 as	I	 clasped	my	hands	together	on	 the	table	then	 pulled
them	 back	 and	 rested	them	  on	 my	 thighs.	  He’s	 trying	  to	 figure	  out	 what
government	agency	I’m	 from,	 I	 thought.	 If	 I	 had	truthfully	  told	 him	 about	my
intensive	workout	 routine,	 he	would	have	pegged	me	as	a	special	ops	guy	 right
off	the	bat.	Next	time,	stay	on	your	base,	I	scolded	myself.
   I	 explained	to	him	 that	I	had	read	his	paper,	which	 seemed	to	put	him	at	ease;
authors	like	  to	 know	  that	 someone	has	 actually	 read	 their	 work.	  From	 my
briefcase,	I	 pulled	 a	 manila	folder	  that	contained	 some	maps	 and	photos	and
placed	it	on	the	table.	He	had	an	eight-by-fourteen	 legal	pad	in	front	 of	him	 with
what	looked	 like	 a	hundred	 dog-eared	pages	of	handwritten	 notes	 that	he	was

164
adding	to	as	we	talked.	Maybe	he’s	writing	a	book,	I	 thought.
   Without	  prompting,	he	jumped	 right	into	 his	thoughts	on	 the	current	situation
in	Afghanistan.	 The	prison	must	have	allowed	 the	prisoners	unlimited	 television
access,	because	he	had	up-to-the-hour	information	on	what	was	going	 on	on	the
ground.	I	 pulled	out	 my	 map	of	Afghanistan	 and	Pakistan,	and	 he	immediately
put	his	hands	on	a	section	of	the	map	around	 the	border	region	between	the	two
countries.
   “How	  can	we	find	Al	 Qaeda	in	Afghanistan?”	I	 asked.
   He	 looked	 at	 me	 and	smiled,	 as	 if	 to	 say,	 I	 thought	 you’d	 never	 ask.	He
oriented	the	map	and	ran	his	finger	 along	a	five-hundred-mile	  contiguous	series
of	mountains	above	and	below	the	cities	of	Gardez	and	Khowst	(see	Map	3).
   “This	  is	where	you	 must	go,”	 he	said.	“You	 want	to	 find	 Al	 Qaeda	and	UBL
—yes?”	I	 nodded	my	head	nonchalantly.	 “Okay,	 then	this	is	 where	you	need	to
go.”
   He	 paused	for	a	minute	 then	continued,	“Go	 out	into	 the	Afghan	 frontier	 and
ask	the	shepherds,	because	the	Arabs	must	have	lamb	meat	to	 survive.	Ask	 the
shopkeepers,	because	Arabs	consume	special	spices	that	Afghans	rarely	use.	Ask
the	money	 exchangers,	because	the	Arabs	 get	money	 delivered	 to	 them	from
home	by	 couriers	and	must	 always	convert	 the	money	 to	dollars.	 Ask	 the	taxi
drivers,	because	very	few	Arabs	drive	and	none	bring	cars	into	Afghanistan!”19
   I	 was	writing	  as	fast	as	I	could.	Having	 been	through	a	couple	 hundred	man-
hunting	missions,	 I	recognized	 his	counsel	for	 what	 it	 was:	simple	genius.	 The
wisest	guy	on	the	ground	will	always	defer	to	other	 guys	on	the	ground.
   As	 he	elaborated,	 I	wished	 I	 could	 have	put	him	 on	 a	speakerphone	so	that
every	soldier,	  every	 agent,	and	 every	 leader	in	  Washington,	 D.C.,	 who	 was
involved	 in	 the	Afghanistan	  mission	 could	 have	heard	firsthand	 the	 pearls	of
tacit	knowledge	 that	were	 coming	 out	of	 this	guy’s	 mouth.	 Tacit	 knowledge	is
contextualized	knowledge	 of	people,	 places,	ideas,	 and	 experiences.	This	 was
tacit	knowledge	 on	steroids.	He	was	telling	 me	 where	to	go,	what	 to	do	 when	I
got	there,	and	how	to	accomplish	my	mission.	This	 was	why	I	came	here—to	get
to	the	real	nuggets	that	are	available	only	through	face-to-face	conversation.	You
have	to	let	the	person	tell	his	story.
   For	 the	next	 three	hours	I	 asked	him	 questions,	challenged	his	 answers,	and
listened	to	 Ali	 Mohamed	 while	 he	told	 me	about	 UBL,	 Al	 Qaeda,	his	 life,	 his
motivations,	 and	 his	dreams.	 He	 never	rocked	 off	  his	 base.	He	 watched	my
responses	with	great	introspection.	Whenever	I	 appeared	to	ponder	or	doubt	one
of	his	 responses,	he	would	quickly	 challenge,	 “If	 you	 don’t	 believe	me,	 let	me

165
take	you	 there	myself.”	  He’d	 then	add,	 “You	 can	kill	  me	 if	 you	 find	 out	I’m
lying.
   “Take	 me	with	 you	to	the	Northwest	Frontier	 Province,	I	can	find	him.”
   “How?”	  I	asked.
   “You	  have	to	 ask	the	right	 questions	and	follow	  leads,”	he	told	 me.	 He	was
rock	solid—no	movement.
   U.S	 government	psychologists	 developed	a	simple	mnemonic	 to	describe	the
primary	 motivators	 of	 individuals	  who	 are	 willing	  to	 betray	 their	 country	 or
parent	organization.	The	concept	 of	“MICE”	   is	based	on	historical	 examples	of
hundreds	of	cases	(including	 Aldrich	  Ames,	the	most	 notorious	“mole”	  ever	to
penetrate	the	CIA)	 over	the	past	fifty	  years.	MICE	 stands	for	 money,	ideology,
coercion,	and	 excitement.	 Intrigue	 is	 sometimes	substituted	 for	 ideology.	  We
know	from	 the	testimony	of	Ali	 Mohamed’s	 captured	Al	Qaeda	comrades	that	he
wasn’t	motivated	 by	 religion	 or	 by	 money.	We	 also	learned	that	 there	was	no
coercive	pressure	on	him	 from	  either	the	 United	 States	or	Al	 Qaeda.	So	 what
motivated	him	to	work	 both	sides	of	such	a	combustible	counterfeit	coin?
   As	  I	 sat	across	 from	 him	  and	listened,	 I	 began	 to	 recognize	 that	 his	 life
experiences	had	instilled	in	 him	 a	completely	different	 set	of	 values	and	beliefs
than	I	 had.	 He	 spoke	nonchalantly	 about	 teaching	 Al	 Qaeda	fighters	 how	  to
commit	acts	of	terror,	while	 seamlessly	transitioning	to	explain	 his	willingness	to
work	undercover	to	infiltrate	 and	capture	those	same	terrorists.	I	began	to	realize
that	he	 had	what	 is	 sometimes	 referred	 to	 as	“moral	  flexibility.”	   Commonly
found	in	master	criminals,	 hitmen,	and	white-collar	 criminals,	 Mohamed	was	the
type	of	 guy	 who	 could	 rationalize	 just	 about	 any	behavior	 based	on	 his	own
belief	 that	it	 was	the	 circumstance	of	 the	 moment	that	 mattered	most,	 not	the
conventional	distinctions	 between	good	and	evil	or	 truth	and	lies.	In	 other	ways,
though,	he	wasn’t	 so	different	 from	me	 or	many	of	 the	guys	I	 worked	 with.	 He
was	an	adventurer,	genetically	addicted	to	both	the	thrill	 of	the	hunt	and	the	thrill
of	 the	 chase,	and	 a	maverick,	  someone	who	 exhibits	  great	independence	 in
thought	and	action.
   Patterns	were	 beginning	 to	coalesce.	He	 spoke	with	 devout	 reverence	as	he
continually	referenced	secret	organizations	and	secret	missions.	He	rarely	missed
an	opportunity	  to	pay	 homage	to,	 and	 convey	 his	admiration	 and	 respect	for
secret	operatives,	especially	those	in	 what	 he	described	as	“the	 almighty”	  CIA
and	FBI.	That’s	 when	it	 hit	me:	 this	was	the	missing	 piece	of	the	Ali	 Mohamed
puzzle.
   The	 more	I	listened	to	 what	he	told	me,	and	the	more	I	 thought	about	it	 in	the

166
context	 of	 his	 life	 journey,	  the	more	 I	  began	to	 understand	that	 the	 real	 or
perceived	intrigue,	 excitement,	 and	adventure	of	 becoming	a	 U.S.	secret	agent
was	the	common	thread	that	wove	through	 his	pattern	of	seemingly	 inexplicable
life	behaviors.	His	moral	 flexibility	  was	what	allowed	him	 to	do	it	so	effectively.
   He	 was	not	a	fanatic,	as	his	Al	Qaeda	brethren	correctly	surmised.	Nor	 was	he
a	 double	 or	 triple	  agent,	 as	 most	  books,	 documentaries,	 and	 conventional
wisdom	still	  promote.	Instead,	Ali	  Mohamed	was	 an	adventurer	and	maverick,
with	a	certain	moral	 flexibility	  who	believed	 that	by	keeping	his	options	open	as
a	terrorist,	he	 would	increase	his	 value	as,	and	correspondingly	 his	potential	 to
become,	a	U.S.	secret	agent.	Interviewed	by	 the	FBI	 one	day,	ignored	 the	next.
Entrusted	to	 conduct	surveillance	 on	 the	 Nairobi	 embassy	one	day,	 distrusted
with	key	 information	 concerning	Al	 Qaeda	leaders	the	next.	He	was	hedging	his
bets	and	developing	the	situation	 on	both	fronts,	 hoping	 to	discover	the	options
that	would	 allow	  him	 to	find	 his	 path.	 An	 advanced	version	of	 the	 same	belt
buckle	behavior	he	exhibited	 at	Fort	 Bragg,	hoping	 that	maybe,	just	 maybe,	his
credentials	as	a	terrorist	insider	 would	 earn	him	 affirmation	 from	 his	American
handlers	and	the	rite	of	passage	to	become	a	U.S.	secret	agent.
   In	 the	end,	the	option	to	become	a	U.S.	secret	agent	never	availed	itself	 to	Ali
Mohamed,	and	without	the	option	 to	become	a	U.S.	secret	agent,	he	had	no	other
choice—he	went	with	 the	only	option	 available	to	him,	the	option	 to	work	 for	Al
Qaeda.	The	unbranded	 range	 animal	 belongs	 to	 the	 first	 person	 who	 puts	a
brand	on	it.
   I	 left	 my	 first	  face-to-face	meeting	 with	 Ali	  Mohamed	with	  confidence.	As
events	continued	to	 unfold	 on	the	ground	 in	 Afghanistan,	 I	became	even	more
confident	 that	 the	knowledge	 he	 had	shared	 was	credible.	 On	 December	 12,
2001,	an	intercepted	radio	 transmission	by	 UBL	  confirmed	 that	he	was	indeed
hiding	in	 Tora	 Bora.20	Ali	  Mohamed’s	seminal	 document	had	advised	looking
for	UBL	  in	 Tora	 Bora	in	 early	 October,	and	 two	 months	before	 the	first	 U.S.
forces	arrived	 there.	He	 was	right	 about	how	 to	 infiltrate	 Afghanistan,	 he	 was
right	 about	 sleeper	 cells,	 and	 he	 was	 right	  about	 Tora	 Bora—a	 pattern	  of
accurate	advice	and	prognostications.	Deductive	 reasoning	told	 me	that	the	rest
of	the	information	 he	provided	was	likely	 accurate	too.
   I	  felt	  that	 I	  was	 uniquely	  qualified	  for	 the	 toughest	 and	 most	  complex
challenges	our	country	was	facing	 at	that	time.	All	 I	 needed	was	a	mission.	And
for	all	my	 efforts,	I	was	about	to	get	one.

167
                                   GUIDING-PRINCIPLE	     LESSON:


	
                     Imagine	 the	 Possibilities	 of	the	Guy	 on	the	 Ground
	
The	stories	of	the	defense	contractors,	the	Afghan	general,	and	Ali	Mohamed	are
all	stories	 of	the	 amazing	synergy	between	imagination	 and	 guy-on-the-ground
knowledge.	Imagine	everyone’s	potential	 as	the	guy	on	the	ground.	Imagine	how
to	seek	out	the	guy	on	the	ground.	Imagine	how.
   An	  object	 lesson	for	 the	 utility	  of	 this	 guiding	 principle	 was	 an	intangible
tipping	 point	in	 the	 mid-’90s.	 At	 that	time	 Al	 Qaeda	and	the	U.S.	 government
were	 conjoined	  by	  their	  common	  interest	  in	  Ali	   Mohamed.	  Both	  sides
recognized	 that	 Ali	  Mohamed	  had	 one-of-a-kind	  skills	  and	 experiences	 to
support	each	side’s	uniquely	self-serving	 interests.	Both	sides	had	independently
come	to	the	same	conclusion:	Ali	 Mohamed	 was	not	the	type	of	 individual	 they
could	trust	to	 become	a	card-carrying	member	of	 their	 respective	organizations.
The	tipping	 point	was	how	 the	two	sides	reacted.	Al	 Qaeda	leaders	were	able	to
overlook	Ali	  Mohamed’s	lack	 of	Muslim	  fanaticism	and	his	 erratic	connections
to	the	U.S.	 government	because	they	couldn’t	 imagine	 how	they	 could	achieve
their	 ultimate	 terror	  objectives	 without	  the	 mission-essential	 knowledge	 and
skills	that	 only	he	possessed.	Ali	 Mohamed’s	U.S.	 government	handlers,	on	the
other	hand,	just	plain	could	not	imagine.	The	result	of	 the	tipping	point	 was	9/11.
Ali	 Mohamed	wasn’t	 directly	 responsible	for	the	execution	of	 9/11,	but	it’s	 easy
to	imagine	how	he	could	have	been	directly	responsible	for	preventing	it.
   The	only	 ways	we	can	ever	hope	to	see	these	types	of	events	unfolding	before
they	occur,	 is	 to	look	 at	 the	 world	 around	 us	through	 the	 minds	 and	eyes	of
others.	It’s	 the	 person	who	 has	 walked	the	 specific	 ground,	 lived	 the	specific
lifestyle,	and	 possesses	a	specific	psychosocial	mind-set	 whom	you	need.	They
are	very	rarely	cut	from	 the	same	cloth	as	you	and	I.
	
                                                        Postscript
	
   The	 Ministry	  of	 Dirty	  Tricks	 also	 brainstormed	ideas	 for	 how	 to	 best	take
advantage	 of	   Ali	    Mohamed’s	   guy-on-the-ground	  knowledge	   for	   future
operations	in	the	Global	 War	 Against	Terrorists.	 Here	are	the	three	options	that
the	Ministry	 came	up	with:

168
   Option	 1:	 The	Snake	Plissken	Option,	 based	on	the	movie	 Escape	from	New
York.q	After	 telling	 Ali	 Mohamed	 that	we’d	 take	him	 up	on	his	 offer	to	 release
him	from	 prison	in	order	to	 allow	him	 to	infiltrate	 certain	countries	to	 find	UBL,
we	would	 take	him	 into	a	 medical	examination	 room	and	pretend	 to	inject	 him
with	a	cosmic-looking	 infusion	 needle.	When	he	asks	what	it	was,	we	would	 tell
him	we	just	injected	him	 with	 a	time-delayed	poison	capsule	that	will	 dissolve	in
four	to	 six	 weeks	and	kill	  him	 unless	he	comes	back	 to	his	 handler	to	 get	the
lifesaving	 serum.	If	  he	succeeds	and	provides	 the	 information	 or	 evidence	 of
UBL’s	 whereabouts,	we	will	 negotiate	his	sentence.	Either	way,	he	would	be	led
to	believe	that	he	must	return	to	get	the	antidote.
   Option	 2:	Portable	 Ali	 Mohamed	Option.	 Transport	him	 in	a	portable	jail	 cell
to	 the	detention	 center	 on	 the	 ground	 in	 Afghanistan.	 Let	  him	 view	 certain
interrogations	(e.g.,	 through	two-way	 glass)	 and	provide	 contextual	knowledge
to	counter	answers	and	assist	in	the	questioning.	Have	him	 advise	on	credibility
of	 information,	  and	 provide	  context-specific	  knowledge	 that	 will	   make	 the
prisoners	think	 their	 questioners	 know	 much	more	 than	 they	really	  do.	If	  his
advice	is	good,	he	may	get	his	sentence	reprieved.
   Option	 3:	The	Ali	  Mohamed	Blog	 Option.	Give	 him	a	computer	that	can	only
access	a	special	blog	site	that	anyone	and	everyone	involved	with	the	mission	 in
Afghanistan	and	Iraq	has	access	to	and	can	use	to	ask	him	questions	and	bounce
ideas	off	him.	 His	 seminal	document	 is	still	 the	most	 informative	 piece	on	 AQ
that	we	have.	The	Ali	 Mohamed	 Blog	will	  optimize	the	 potential	of	 the	wisdom
of	 the	crowd.	 Perhaps	we	 could	 set	up	 some	sort	 of	 long-term	 incentive	 that
provides	potential	 to	 shorten	his	 sentence	based	on	feedback	 ratings	from	 the
bloggers	on	the	ground!

169
PART	4

170
                                                         13



                      ON	 THE	  GROUND	   IN	 AFGHANISTAN


                                 RIDING	 THE	EDGE	OF	 CHAOS


                                             November	   2001


Perhaps	one	of	the	least	recognized	and	most	misunderstood	aspects	of	combat	is
that	the	true	moments	of	battlefield	genius	almost	always	occur	during	periods	of
complete	chaos.	In	the	Unit,	we	had	a	name	for	these	moments:	we	called	them
operational	sweet	spots.	They	usually	occur	during	the	early	phases	of	a	battle	or
mission,	or	 during	 unanticipated	contingencies	such	as	surprise	attacks,	or
accidents.	It’s	during	these	operational	sweet	spots	that	entrepreneurial	warriors
recognize	the	chaos	of	the	moment	as	opportunity,	and	break	free	from	 the
prison	of	the	plan	and	the	shackles	of	the	hierarchy,	to	achieve	effects	way	out	of
proportion	to	the	effort	expended.
   American	 military	 history	 is	 replete	with	 such	examples.	The	 men	who
parachuted	into	Normandy	prior	to	D-Day	weren’t	successful	because	someone
was	directing	their	every	move,	or	because	they	were	following	a	highly	scripted
plan.	Instead,	they	were	successful	because	they	were	dropped	in	the	wrong
locations,	were	separated	from	 their	 chains	of	  command,	and	collectively
decided	to	throw	away	the	plan.	In	the	chaos	of	the	moment,	they	innovated,
they	adapted,	and	they	were	 audacious.	As	a	result,	 the	Nazi	 enemy	were
completely	confused,	confounded,	and	quickly	collapsed.
   In	the	final	months	of	2001,	this	same	pattern	of	battlefield	chaos	and	genius
was	repeating	itself	in	Afghanistan.	In	late	November,	one	of	the	most	potent
entrepreneurial	combinations	ever	to	 self-organize	on	 any	 battlefield	 took
advantage	of	the	chaos	of	the	moment	to	achieve	one	of	the	most	astonishing
battlefield	successes	in	the	history	of	warfare.
   As	phantom	parachutists	dropped	from	the	sky	and	melted	into	the	desert	in
the	south,	derring-do	CIA	officers	made	something	out	of	nothing	by	organizing

171
and	supplying	 superempowered	Northern	Alliance	  militias,	 while	 small,	 highly
adaptive	Special	 Forces	 teams,	sometimes	 riding	  into	 combat	 on	 horseback,
guided	both	the	 militias	 and	their	 laser-guided	arsenal	from	 the	sky	 against	the
enemy.1	Confused	and	confounded,	the	hapless	enemy	quickly	collapsed.
   These	astonishing	 battlefield	 successes	weren’t	the	offspring	 of	 some	master
strategist	standing	on	a	 hilltop	 and	spouting	 orders.	Nor	 did	 they	come	from	 a
master	plan;	 none	 existed.	Instead	 they	 were	 spawned	during	 an	 operational
sweet	spot,	when	fewer	than	five	 hundred	American	 special	operations	and	CIA
warriors	were	unleashed	to	do	 what	American	 warriors	 throughout	history	 have
always	done	best:	they	developed	the	situation.2

172
                                                         14



                 IT’S	  NOT	  REALITY	    UNLESS	   IT’S	  SHARED


                                              December	  2001


By	late	December,	the	situation	in	the	main	Afghan	cities	of	Kandahar,	Kabul,
and	Mazer-e-Sharif	was	settling	into	normalcy,	if	normalcy	were	possible	where
none	had	existed	for	over	twenty	years.	As	for	the	rest	of	the	country,	no	one	had
a	clue.	No	Westerner	had	been	out	in	the	frontier	areas	of	Afghanistan	where	the
enemy	was	now	hiding	since	the	late	’70s.	To	find	the	enemy	and	figure	things
out,	the	United	States	needed	to	get	people	on	the	ground	in	the	unexplored
frontier	areas;	that’s	where	the	concept	of	AFO	entered	the	picture.1
   AFO	stood	for	advanced	force	operations.	More	a	verb	than	a	noun,	prior	to
Afghanistan,	advanced	force	operations	described	what	small	special	operations
teams	were	supposed	to	do	in	a	hostile	country	in	preparation	for	potential	future
missions.2	If	necessity	is	the	mother	of	invention,	then	in	the	case	of	AFO	in
Afghanistan,	serendipity	was	the	father,	because	AFO,	the	organization	that	was
about	to	make	the	biggest	impact	on	the	Afghan	battlefield,	wasn’t	planned;	it
just	happened.3	There	was	no	charter;	no	organizational	structure;	no	budget;
and	best	of	all	for	me,	no	real	constraints	or	limitations	on	creating	any	of	the
above.	The	operational	sweetspot	was	still	open.
   “Get	some	men	out	into	the	frontier	to	figure	out	what’s	going	on,”	General
Tommy	Franks	told	us.4	As	 commander	in	chief	of	 U.S.	Central	Command,
General	Franks	commanded	all	American	military	forces	in	Afghanistan.	“Find
the	enemy,	then	kill	or	capture	’em,”	he	added.	That	was	more	than	sufficient
guidance	for	me;	it	was	a	blank	canvas	on	which	I	could	paint	whatever	was
required	to	accomplish	the	mission.	Whether	I	created	a	masterpiece	or	piece	of
crap	would	depend	on	my	ability	to	apply	all	the	guiding	principle	lessons	I	had
learned	over	the	years	as	an	artisan	of	the	art	of	war.
   My	 plane	landed	at	Bagram	Air	Base	(see	Map	3),	thirty	miles	north	of	Kabul,
and	taxied	to	a	parking	spot	between	two	rusting	Soviet	MIGs	that	 had	long

173
since	seen	better	days.	With	 the	engines	still	  screaming	at	ear-splitting	 decibel
levels,	the	hydraulic	 ramp	on	 the	back	of	 the	aircraft	 lowered	slowly,	 revealing
the	bone-chilling	 blackness	of	 the	Afghan	 winter	 night.	 The	only	 thing	 I	 could
see	was	a	blinking	red	light	 twirling	  in	circles	from	 a	few	hundred	meters	away.
That	would	be	Jimmy.
   Jimmy	 didn’t	 have	a	formal	title;	 no	one	in	AFO	 did.	I	 guess	you	could	say	he
was	my	 deputy.	 Jimmy	 was	 one	of	 those	 guys	everyone	 remembers.	With	  a
billboard-handsome	face,	 now	 carpeted	with	  a	thick	  black	beard,	 Jimmy	 was
well	liked	 by	 just	about	everyone	who	 met	him.	 “Salaam	alaikum,	 Panther!”	he
bellowed,	“Salaam	 alaikum,	Jimmy.	 You	 look	like	 a	real	mountain	 man,”	I	 told
him	 as	 we	 shook	 each	other’s	  hand	while	  executing	 the	 patented	 no-touch
warrior	 hug.	 His	 eyes	 lit	 up	 and	 he	 pointed	 at	 me	while	  saying,	 “Blend	  in
anywhere.”
   I	 was	genuinely	ecstatic	that	Jimmy	 was	going	to	be	working	 with	 me;	he	was
a	rare	breed	of	 warrior:	 superfit,	 commonsense	smart,	and	 a	superb	organizer.
Unlike	a	lot	 of	us,	Jimmy	was	as	lethal	with	a	keyboard	and	pen	as	he	was	with	a
knife	 and	 a	 gun.	 Best	 of	  all,	  Jimmy	 was	 what	  Malcolm	  Gladwell	  calls	 a
“connector,”	  someone	 who	 is	  extraordinarily	  gifted	  at	 making	  friends	 and
acquaintances	and	  then	 linking	   them	  all	  together	 to	  create	 a	  productive
network.5	 With	 the	ever-increasing	 cornucopia	of	 organizations	 and	units	 that
AFO	would	 be	interacting	with,	 Jimmy’s	 skills	as	a	connector	would	prove	 to	be
as	important	 to	 our	success	as	any	 weapon,	radio,	 or	 tactic.	 After	  forty-eight
hours	of	mostly	 sitting	 on	my	 ass	on	planes,	I	badly	 needed	to	stretch	my	 legs,
but	I	also	 needed	to	get	an	update	from	Jimmy,	 so	he	and	I	 did	what	 we	would
do	all	across	Afghanistan	 over	the	next	hundred	days;	we	 went	for	 a	long	walk,
and	we	talked.
   So	it	 was	when	I	 returned	to	Afghanistan	 in	early	December	2001.	 There	was
a	lot	 of	uncertainty	 on	 the	ground,	 with	 a	country	 in	 need	of	 rebuilding	 and	a
terror	network	 in	need	of	 being	found	 and	destroyed.	I	realized	 I	had	to	 do	two
things:	I	had	to	develop	 the	situation	to	find	 and	destroy	the	enemy,	and	I	had	to
create	and	lead	an	organization	to	do	it.	This	was	my	mission!
   The	 next	day	 we	headed	out	to	 the	frontier	 to	 get	the	 lay	of	 the	land	 and	to
meet	with	and	listen	to	 our	men	on	the	ground.	At	 this	stage	in	the	war	the	other
key	players	 on	the	 ground	in	 Afghanistan	 were	 the	army’s	 5th	 Special	Forces
Group	and	 the	CIA.	 Both	 had	 already	begun	 following	  the	enemy’s	 trail,	 and
both	were	pushing	out	into	 the	frontier	 to	recruit	and	train	 Afghan	militias	 while

174
trolling	 the	waters	for	any	and	all	useful	information	 about	the	enemy.6
   AFO	 had	about	 forty-five	 men	 in	country,	 spread	out	in	 six	teams	across	the
647,000	square	kilometers	of	 Afghanistan.	 Most	 of	AFO	 came	from	 Delta,	 but
because	AFO	was	a	top	priority	 of	 General	Franks,	we	were	able	to	tap	 into	the
best	of	the	 best	from	 the	navy	 and	air	 force	 special	operations	forces.7	 All	  of
these	men	were	seasoned	veterans	of	numerous	other	battlefields,	and	only	a	few
were	below	age	thirty.	 This	was	no	insignificant	 factoid.	 As	warriors	 throughout
history	 can	 attest,	 there	 are	 few	 shortcuts	  to	 combat	 wisdom;	  acquiring	 it
requires	 travel	 on	  the	 long,	 winding,	   and	 hazard-laden	 road	 of	 real-world
experience.	Combat	experience	provides	context,	and	context	 provides	common
sense.	There	were	two	 other	 virtues	that	 all	 of	 these	men	had:	the	 first	 was	a
skill:	 they	all	 possessed	highly	advanced	strategic	reconnaissance	skills;	and	the
second	was	a	mind-set:	they	were	all	highly	adaptable.
   At	 that	 time,	most	AFO	 teams	were	either	 operating	by	themselves	or	 within
close	proximity	  to	 the	 Special	 Forces	and	 the	CIA,	  who	 were	 now	 working
together	in	what	was	referred	to	as	“pilot	 teams.”8	 The	AFO	team	in	 Orgun	(see
Map	3)	 was	different.	 They	had	 already	integrated	with	 the	Special	 Forces	and
the	CIA	 as	part	of	the	pilot	 team	working	 the	area.	No	one	told	 them	to	do	 this;
they	did	it	because	it	made	sense.
   Living	   together	in	  a	sprawling,	  mud-walled	  safe	house,	 the	pilot	  team	 in
Orgun	was	busy	 developing	the	 situation	when	 I	arrived.	 Tall,	 thickly	  muscled
men	with	long	 hair,	spontaneously	barbaric	beards,	and	dark	sunglasses	scurried
around	the	compound	like	 ants.	No	one	appeared	wanting	 of	a	task.	These	men
formed	 the	initial	  impression	 by	 which	 most	 Afghan	 frontiersmen	 thought	 of
Americans.
   Orgun	 was	one	of	the	closest	outposts	we	had	to	the	Pakistan	border.	Perhaps
because	of	its	proximity	  to	the	border,	enemy	 activity	 in	 the	area	was	constant,
which	 made	the	 Orgun	 safe	 house	not	 so	safe.	 The	 area	around	 Orgun	 was
distinctive	  because	 it	  had	  something	  you	  rarely	  saw	  in	  other	  areas	 of
Afghanistan:	 trees.	There	were	 no	 forests,	but	 thousands	of	 copses	dotted	the
green,	rolling	 hills	 that	defined	 the	area.	Somehow	this	area	of	 the	country	 had
escaped	the	insatiable	 axes	of	 the	 starving	 and	 freezing	 populace	 during	 the
Soviet	War.
   On	 the	 third	 day	 of	 my	 stay	at	 the	Orgun	 safe	house,	Rex,	 the	 AFO	 team
leader,	woke	me	at	 sunrise	and	told	me	 that	the	Afghan	 warlord	 I	 had	met	two
days	earlier	  was	at	 the	 front	  gate	 asking	 for	 a	 personal	 meeting	 with	  “the

175
American	commander.”9	 Establishing	 relationships	 and	building	 alliances	 with
the	local	 warlords	was	a	 top	priority	  at	that	time,	 and	the	team	 was	anxious	to
bring	this	particular	 warlord	 into	the	fold.	 Two	decades	of	nonstop	civil	 war	had
disintegrated	 all	 established	 central	  government	 institutions	  in	  Afghanistan.
Filling	 the	power	 vacuum	 were	ethnically	 aligned	 leaders	of	war	 bands,	called
warlords,	 who	  ruled	 the	 frontier	  areas.	They	  built	  their	 power	 bases	 on	 a
combination	  of	   benevolence,	  bravery,	  brutality,	    and	  a	  heavy	  dose	  of
swashbuckling	theatrical	 flair	  thrown	 in	 for	 good	measure.	They	 provided	 the
only	line	 of	defense	and	security	for	 the	people	of	 their	specific	 tribal	 ethnicity,
which	earned	most	 of	 them	the	genuine	 loyalty	 and	support	of	 the	 majority	 of
their	constituents.	With	 names	such	as	Dostom,	Kahn,	 Najibullah,	 and	Noorzai,
these	guys	were	essentially	land	pirates.
   I	 threw	 on	my	 shirt,	tucked	my	 pistol	 inside	my	 belt	holster,	 and	told	Rex	 to
bring	the	warlord	into	 the	courtyard	where	I’d	 be	waiting	to	meet	with	 him.
   The	 warlord	 strode	through	the	center	opening	 gates	into	the	dusty	 courtyard
flanked	by	 two	 heavily	 armed	bodyguards,	who	 shadowed	him	 cockily	 from	 a
pace	or	two	behind.	The	guard	on	the	right	 immediately	 gave	me	pause.	A	black
charcoal	substance	 coated	his	 eyelids,	 and	 his	 unnaturally	  pursed	 lips	 were
coated	with	some	kind	of	 pink,	gooey	substance.	An	Afghan	drag	queen;	I	 never
thought	I’d	 see	that.	 But	 it	 was	his	finger,	 planted	 firmly	  on	the	trigger	 of	 his
AK-47	 that	 really	  concerned	me.	 Psychological	 instability	  and	 finger	 on	 the
trigger	do	not	 a	healthy	combination	 make	in	a	combat	zone.	Rex	had	zeroed	in
on	 the	  same	 thing.	  In	 a	  polite	  yet	  stern	 tone,	 Rex	  used	 pantomime	  to
communicate	 with	  the	 bodyguard.	 “Take	  your	 finger	  off	  your	  trigger,”	  he
commanded	 while	   wagging	  his	  bent	  index	  finger.	  Unbeknownst	   to	  the
bodyguard,	he	was	about	a	pound	of	trigger	pressure	away	from	 having	his	head
explode	like	 a	 watermelon.	Danno,	 one	of	 the	 other	AFO	 members	in	 Orgun,
was,	 at	 that	  moment,	 on	  sight	 security	  detail	  in	  one	 of	  the	 four	  corner
watchtowers	that	surrounded	the	safe	house.	The	protocol	 we	used	for	meetings
such	as	this	was	situationally	driven.	If	 the	U.S.	participant	ever	put	his	 hands	up
or	scratched	the	top	of	his	 head,	the	sniper	was	cleared	to	use	his	best	judgment
and	mitigate	the	situation.
   Likely	  believing	 his	 original	 purpose	for	 meeting	 with	 me	now	 in	 jeopardy,
the	warlord	harshly	 rebuked	the	bodyguard,	who	turned	 around	and	stormed	out
of	the	courtyard,	stomping	his	 feet	in	what	could	only	 be	described	as	an	Afghan
version	of	an	effeminate	tantrum.
   Wrapped	  in	 a	  claret	 robe,	 with	  a	 jet-black	  beard	 that	 flowed	   from	 his

176
cheekbones	to	his	chest,	and	well	over	six	 feet	tall	(without	  turban),	the	warlord
presented	an	imposing	figure.	 Judging	by	 the	depth	of	 the	wrinkles	 etched	into
the	few	visible	 inches	of	his	fully	  bearded	face,	he	was	likely	fifty	  to	sixty	years
old.	His	 furled	  brow	 and	frenetic	 eyes	gave	 him	 the	look	 of	 a	 man	who	 had
fought	his	way	 to	the	top	of	 the	heap	and	now	spent	all	his	 time	worrying	 about
defending	his	roost.
   After	  greeting	him	 in	 Pashto	and	shaking	his	 hand,	I	allowed	 him	 to	 initiate
the	conversation.	He	began	in	a	slow	baritone	rustle,	but	within	 a	few	seconds	he
worked	 himself	 into	 a	 saliva-spitting	  frenzy.	 He	 explained	 to	 me	(through	 a
translator)	 that	  the	 evening	  before,	 his	  cousin—a	 truck	  driver—had	   been
murdered,	his	gut-shot	body	 left	 in	a	bloody	 heap	on	the	side	of	 the	road	just	 a
few	miles	 from	 our	 safe	house.	“Please	accept	the	 condolences	of	me	 and	my
men,”	I	replied.	 “What	 can	we	do	to	help?”	With	 the	look	 of	a	man	who	is	about
to	ask	a	 really	 big	 favor,	 he	replied,	 “I	 was	 wondering	 if	 you	 could	 use	your
computer	to	find	out	who	 killed	my	 cousin.”
   I	 was	 puzzled,	so	 I	 paused	and	feigned	 indecision	 to	 buy	time.	 As	 I	 did,	 I
happened	to	glance	over	the	 warlord’s	 left	 shoulder	toward	 the	entrance	to	our
living	 area.	Set	up	 close	to	 the	 door	for	 fresh	 air	 and	generator	power	 access
were	our	laptop	computers,	clearly	 visible	from	 where	he	and	I	were	 standing	in
the	courtyard.	During	his	prior	 visits	to	 our	safe	house,	the	warlord	likely	noticed
the	computers’	mystical	 glow	 radiating	from	 the	darkened	interior;	 it	 must	have
seemed	like	space-age	magic	to	this	Afghan	frontiersman,	 who	almost	assuredly
had	had	no	prior	contact	with	 the	technocentric	outside	world.	 I	 put	my	 hand	on
his	shoulder	 and	replied	 with	 open-minded	sincerity,	 “I’ll	   take	a	 look,	 but	I’ll
need	a	few	hours.”	 His	eyes	widened	 as	he	shook	my	hand	with	 grateful	 vigor,
bowed	slightly,	 then	 yelled	something	 unintelligible	  to	his	 drag	queen	security
guard	and	headed	for	the	gate.
   I	 walked	back	 into	the	communication	 room	where	Rex	and	five	 to	ten	of	 our
Special	Forces	and	CIA	 comrades	were	anxiously	 awaiting	 my	return.	 “What’d
he	want,	boss?”	 Rex	asked	while	 everyone	else	stopped	what	 they	 were	doing
and	listened.	I	 explained	 what	he	told	 me	 and	then	asked	the	group	 what	 they
thought.	The	senior	Special	Forces	sergeant	was	the	first	to	respond.	“Well,	if	we
can	do	something	for	the	guy	that	motivates	him	 to	cooperate	with	us,	I’m	 up	for
just	about	anything.	Without	 the	support	 and	cooperation	of	his	tribe	 against	the
enemy	in	this	area,	we’re	 just	spitting	 in	the	wind.”	  He	paused	for	a	second	and
then	continued,	“Why	 don’t	I	 go	and	check	out	the	spot	where	he	said	his	cousin
was	killed.”	  “I’ll	  go	with	  him,”	 Rex	added.	As	 both	men	 walked	out	 the	door,

177
they	 simultaneously	 checked	 the	 chambers	 of	 their	  M-4	 rifles.	  This	  was	a
reflexive	 habit	that	served	the	dual	 purpose	of	confirming	 a	round	 was	ready	to
fire	 if	 needed,	and	to	 cue	each	man’s	 psychological	 transition	 from	 the	 semi-
relaxed,	inside	 the	 compound	 mind-set,	 to	the	 fully	  alert,	 all-senses-scanning
mind-set	required	any	time	any	of	us	headed	out	into	the	frontier.
   Without	   looking	  up	 from	  his	 computer,	  a	 guy	  who	 I	  assumed	was	 an
intelligence	analyst	chimed	in	 next:	“I’ll	  send	a	request	back	to	my	headquarters
to	probe	last	 night’s	 satellite	imagery	 and	see	if	 we	 had	coverage	of	 that	area;
maybe	it	 will	 reveal	something.	 I	 can	also	run	the	 warlord’s	 name	through	 our
relationship	database	and	see	who	his	cousin	 actually	was.”	 He	didn’t	  need	me
or	anyone	else	to	give	him	permission,	 or	to	tell	 him	it	 was	good	idea.	Of	all	 the
organizations	on	 the	 battlefield	 in	 Afghanistan,	 the	 CIA	 was	 by	 far	 the	most
nimble.	They	 allowed	their	 people	to	make	decisions	as	far	forward	 as	possible,
and	seemed	to	live	by	the	philosophy	“When	it’s	 the	right	thing	 to	do,	just	do	it.”
   A	 few	 hours	later,	 the	analyst	called	 me	over.	 “Bingo!”	  he	announced	while
an	“I-told-you-so”	  smile	crept	onto	his	face.	I	walked	 over	to	see	what	he	had	on
his	computer,	 which	 was	 surrounded	 by	 a	thick	 nest	 of	 candy	 bar	wrappers,
cracker	crumbs,	 Kleenex,	 and	 half-eaten	 MRE	 cookies.	 A	  grainy	 black-and-
white	 aerial	 picture	 of	  the	truck	  appeared	on	 his	 laptop’s	  dusty	 screen.	He
zoomed	in	and	then	hit	 the	return	button	 a	couple	of	 times	to	get	the	 next	time-
phased	pictures	to	 sequence	in.	 “There	 it	 is.”	 The	 picture	 showed	two	 trucks
parked	back	 end	to	 back	end.	 The	image	 was	 clear,	but	 too	 grainy	 to	 read	a
license	plate—not	that	they	 had	any	in	that	 part	of	the	 world	anyway.	 “Find	 the
driver	of	 the	other	truck	and	you’ll	  find	the	murderer,”	 the	analyst	declared	with
great	conviction.	 Just	then,	Rex	walked	 in.	“How’d	  it	 go?”	 I	asked.	“We	 found
the	truck,”	 he	reported	while	 looking	 over	my	 shoulder	at	the	satellite	 photo	on
the	computer.	“We	found	wood	 chips	all	over	the	bed	of	his	truck,	 and	all	around
on	the	ground.	At	 first	 we	 figured	the	 warlord’s	 cousin	was	carrying	 wood	 and
was	killed	when	someone	else	tried	to	steal	it—”
   The	 intelligence	 analyst	interrupted.	“Hey,	 man,	I	 could	have	saved	you	guys
the	time	and	the	risk	you	took	by	 driving	 all	the	way	out	to	a	murder	scene	in	the
middle	 of	 bad-guy	 country—the	 satellite	 photos	 prove	that	 whoever	 took	 his
load	of	wood	is	the	killer.”
   Rex	 didn’t	  respond;	he	 just	smiled	 and	 continued	talking.	  “While	  we	were
snooping	around	we	noticed	 a	couple	of	 kids	playing	 in	the	 rocks	nearby.	They
looked	hungry,	so	we	gave	’em	some	MRE	 crackers.	While	they	were	 munching
away	we	asked	’em	if	 they	knew	 what	happened	to	the	guy	who	got	 killed.	 One

178
of	the	kids	told	 us	he	saw	the	whole	thing	 while	 he	was	drawing	water	 from	the
well	 behind	his	 home	just	 before	 sunrise.	He	told	 us	 that	he	saw	 the	cousin’s
truck	driving	  slowly	 down	the	 road	with	 its	lights	 off.	 The	 kid	 showed	us	how
the	cousin	 backed	his	truck	 up	 to	 the	other	 guy’s	 truck,	 then	jumped	 out	 and
started	transloading	the	wood	as	fast	as	he	could.	He	was	halfway	done	when	the
other	 guy	 came	 walking	  out	 of	 his	 house	 and	 caught	 him	 in	  the	act.	 The
warlord’s	cousin	 pulled	his	pistol	 first	and	started	blasting	away,	but	the	kid	 said
the	other	guy	was	a	better	aim,	and	shot	him	dead	with	one	shot.”
   The	 warlord	 returned	that	 evening.	This	 time	 he	didn’t	 have	his	 bodyguards
with	him.	 Instead	he	brought	his	 daughter.	Perhaps	five	or	six	years	old	 and	too
young	to	wear	a	burkha,	 she	had	dark	brown	 hair	and	strikingly	  catlike	eyes,	in
stark	contrast	to	the	 jet-black	 hair	and	dark	 eyes	that	most	of	 us	think	 of	 when
we	think	  about	 Afghans.	 Whether	 for	 trade	 or	 to	 conquer,	 people	had	 been
passing	through	Afghanistan	for	 thousands	of	years,	creating	one	of	 the	world’s
most	diverse	 melting	  pots.	While	  the	 majority	 of	 Afghans	  are	of	 Persian	 or
Turkish	 descent,	there	are	also	 many	other	 ethnic	roots	 still	 visible	 across	the
frontier.	 The	  girl’s	  dark	 brown	  hair	 and	 greenish	 eyes	were	 likely	   genetic
markers	of	 those	 thought	 to	 be	 descendants	of	 Alexander	 the	 Great	and	 his
invading	army	in	 330	B.C.
   I	 didn’t	 attribute	 the	little	 girl’s	  presence	to	happenstance—he	had	a	specific
reason	 for	  bringing	  her.	  But	  what	  was	 it?	   While	  the	  little	  girl	   waited
submissively	near	the	gate,	her	father	and	I	walked	 circles	around	the	courtyard.
Through	  my	  Afghan-American	  interpreter,	  I	  shared	  what	 we	  discovered,
specifically,	 that	it	looked	 like	his	cousin	 was	shot	because	he	was	attempting	to
steal	wood	from	another	man.	For	obvious	reasons	I	didn’t	mention	 the	kids.
   I	  could	  see	 something	 connect	 behind	  the	 warlord’s	  eyes	 as	 his	 facial
expression	cycled	from	 receptiveness,	to	enlightenment,	to	anger,	and	finally	  to
resignation.	I	got	 the	feeling	that	his	 cousin	was	a	known	troublemaker,	 and	our
explanation	confirmed	what	 the	warlord	already	suspected.	He	sighed,	shook	his
head,	then	looked	me	in	 the	eye	and	 whispered,	“You	 must	 find	 Al	 Qaeda	and
kill	  them	 all.”	  I	 wasn’t	 sure	 what	 to	 say	 back;	 it	  seemed	kind	 of	  random,
considering	 what	  we	 had	 just	  discussed,	but	  I	  was	 more	 than	 willing	   to
hyperlink.	 I	figured	 he	knew	 a	heck	of	 a	lot	 more	about	 how	to	 find	 Al	 Qaeda
than	I	did—this	  was	his	backyard.	 “How	 do	you	 recommend	we	 find	 them?”	I
asked	through	 my	 interpreter.	  He	 seemed	bewildered	 for	  a	moment,	 maybe
because	I	was	deferring	 to	 him	instead	 of	going	 into	 the	house	and	typing	  the
question	into	 my	 all-knowing	  computer.	Then	 he	smiled	 and	whispered,	 “The

179
mountains	around	Gardez,	you	must	look	 for	them	in	 the	mountains.”	 Interested
in	his	motivation	 for	 helping	us	and	not	the	enemy,	I	 asked	him	why	 he	disliked
Al	 Qaeda	so	much.	He	looked	back	at	 his	daughter	for	 a	few	seconds,	and	then
whispered	just	loud	 enough	for	me	 and	my	interpreter	 to	hear,	“Because	I	 want
my	daughter	to	go	to	school,	I	want	her	to	be	a	person.”
   As	 he	walked	 away	with	 his	 daughter	in	tow,	 I	 suddenly	understood	why	 he
brought	her	with	him	 that	day.	It	was	so	we	could	 see	her	with	our	own	eyes	and
put	a	 face	on	 the	future	 of	 Afghanistan.	 It	 worked.	 From	 that	 day	 forward,	 I
never	needed	anyone	 to	tell	  me	why	 we	 were	 in	 Afghanistan,	 and	 I’ll	  never
forget	that	little	 girl.
   The	 experience	with	 the	warlord	was	an	example	 of	the	kind	 of	 situation	that
our	 guys	 on	 the	ground	  in	 Afghanistan	 dealt	 with	  almost	 every	 day.	 Since
nothing	dramatic	 occurred,	such	as	a	 firefight	 or	 a	captured	enemy	 combatant,
episodes	such	as	the	warlord	encounter	rarely	 got	passed	on,	or	for	 that	matter,
remembered	by	most	of	the	participants.
   As	 we	 drove	away	from	 the	 Orgun	safe	house,	staring	at	 the	copses	of	trees
dotting	the	hills,	 I	 was	reminded	of	 how	important	 it	 is	to	 see	the	world	around
us	through	the	minds	and	eyes	of	others.	To	 understand	the	way	others	interpret
reality,	we	have	to	interact	with	 them,	and	we	have	to	share	information.	Sharing
information	 creates	a	shared	reality.	Not	only	does	it	 make	the	whole	wiser	 than
the	individual	 parts;	it	 also	serves	as	an	effective	system	of	checks	and	balances
to	correct	misinterpretations	 by	individuals	 who	 don’t	 have	all	the	 pieces	of	the
puzzle.
   The	 satellite	photo	portrayed	 two	trucks	 parked	together	at	a	specific	 point	in
time;	 this	information	  was	 useful,	but	 only	 as	a	 one-dimensional	 portrayal	 of
reality.	 As	our	 intelligence	 analyst	 exemplified,	 the	 reality	 the	satellite	 photos
portrayed	  were	  highly	  susceptible	  to	  the	  perspective	  and	 corresponding
misinterpretation	 of	 whoever	 was	 looking	  at	 them.	 Only	 when	 Rex	 and	 the
Special	Forces	sergeant	drove	 out	 to	 the	scene	of	 the	 crime	 were	we	 able	 to
understand	the	reality	of	what	 had	actually	occurred.	As	 is	so	often	the	case,	the
key	piece	of	the	 puzzle	came	from	the	 guys	on	the	ground,	and	in	 this	case,	the
kids	 on	 the	 ground.	  Technology	 was	 still	  valuable;	  it	 both	  confirmed	 and
corroborated	the	 kids’	  account	of	 what	 happened.	 Each	piece	 was	 important
alone—the	wood	chips,	 the	kids	on	 the	ground,	and	the	satellite	 imagery	 of	the
two	trucks—but	  only	 when	shared	did	 they	 portray	 the	context-rich	  reality	 of
what	actually	occurred.
   As	 we	passed	the	last	of	the	Orgun	 tree	copses	and	entered	the	barren,	brown

180
beauty	of	the	“other”	  Afghanistan,	I	 recognized	that	to	 successfully	develop	the
situation	and	 accomplish	our	 mission	 on	the	complex	 and	 unforgiving	 Afghan
frontier,	AFO	 would	 need	to	create	and	maintain	a	shared	reality.	As	I	was	about
to	learn,	 it	 would	  be	more	 than	 just	 mission-essential.	The	 lives	 of	 my	 men
would	depend	on	it.

181
                                                         15



                              ORGANIZING	     FOR	  COMBAT:


                        DEALING	  WITH	 A	NATURAL	 DISASTER


                                            January	   16,	2002


The	final	stop	on	my	journey	across	the	frontier	was	the	capital	city	of	Kabul,
where	I	was	scheduled	to	meet	with	my	counterparts	from	the	Special	Forces
and	the	CIA.1	One	of	the	common	denominators	of	every	successful	mission	I
had	taken	part	in	 over	the	years	was	unity	 of	 effort	among	the	government
agencies	involved,	 such	as	 the	 CIA,	  the	 Defense	Department,	the	 State
Department,	and	the	FBI.	Whenever	we	achieved	interagency	unity	of	effort,	we
were	successful.	When	we	didn’t,	we	weren’t.	The	CIA	was	the	key	government
agency	on	the	ground	at	that	time.	Not	only	did	they	have	the	best	understanding
of	Afghanistan	and	the	enemy,	they	also	were	best	equipped	to	translate	that
knowledge	into	action.	For	AFO	to	succeed,	I	had	to	ensure	we	had	a	shared
reality	with	the	CIA.
   Once	the	premier	luxury	hotel	of	Kabul,	the	war-scarred	building	we	would	be
meeting	at	was	in	the	center	of	the	city,	just	a	stone’s	throw	from	the	presidential
palace.2	Surrounded	by	twelve-foot-high	walls	topped	with	concertina	wire,	the
building	was	guarded	by	hardscrabble	Northern	Alliance	soldiers	who	had	to
earn	the	“right”	  to	 perform	this	 lucrative	duty	 with	 battlefield	 bravery	and
conquests.3
   After	 giving	my	name	and	a	password	to	the	guard	at	the	gate,	Jimmy	and	I
drove	into	the	compound	and	headed	up	the	once-grand,	cracked	and	crumbled
curving	marble	stairs	to	our	meeting	room	on	the	second	floor.	The	stench	of
piss	and	Pine-Sol	hung	thick	in	the	air.	Waiting	for	me	inside	the	room	were	my
Special	Forces	and	CIA	counterparts.	John	was	a	thin,	scholarly	looking	fellow,
who	sported	the	Jesus	hairdo	and	beard.4	Chris	H.	was	the	battalion	commander

182
of	all	 the	Special	 Forces	teams	arrayed	around	the	eastern	part	of	 Afghanistan.
His	men	 were	some	of	 the	first	 in,	 and	the	first	 to	 ride	horses	in	 combat	since
who	knows	when.	Built	 like	 an	offensive	 lineman,	he	had	an	unexpectedly	high-
pitched	voice	and	an	always	jovial	 disposition.	For	the	first	 hour	or	so	we	sipped
green	tea	and	engaged	in	a	free-flowing	conversation	that	spanned	a	wide	variety
of	topics,	all	centered	on	the	topic	du	jour:	how	 to	find	the	enemy!5
   There	 was	 still	  plenty	 left	 to	 do.	 The	 Taliban	 were	 gone	and	 Al	  Qaeda’s
foreign	 fighters	were	 on	the	 run.	 It	 was	up	to	 our	 three	organizations	 to	band
together	and	hunt	them	down.	Within	 a	few	minutes	we	all	 agreed	on	one	central
organizing	 principle:	  the	 power	 of	  combinations.	 Both	  Chris	 and	 John	 had
already	heard	from	their	people	about	the	incident	with	 the	warlord	in	Orgun.
   “If	  we	 can	 create	that	 kind	 of	 synergy	 everywhere	in	 country,	  we’ll	 be	 in
really	good	shape,”	Chris	reflected	out	loud.
   “We	 can,	but	we	all	 need	to	agree	to	work	together,	we	gotta	be	boundaryless,
and	we	gotta	share	everything,”	I	emphasized.
   “I’m	  all	for	 it,”	 John	chimed	in
   “Me,	 too,”	 Chris	added.
   With	 our	unofficial	  union,	we	had	mixed	together	the	key	ingredients	for	 man-
hunting	 success.	The	CIA	  would	  provide	 the	 ability	 to	 produce	 and	 process
intelligence,	 the	Special	Forces	teams	would	  train	and	 equip	the	Afghans,	 and
we—the	 AFO—would	  operationalize	 the	 entire	 effort	  by	 conducting	 on-the-
ground	reconnaissance	to	find	and	destroy	the	enemy.
   “Building	   out	the	AFO	 concept	 across	the	country	 is	the	right	 first	 step,	but
we	need	to	focus	 our	efforts	 where	the	enemy	is,”	 I	 commented.	“So	 where	do
you	guys	want	 to	focus	 next?”	 Chris	asked.	John	was	 pensive.	Chris	looked	 at
his	watch	and	announced	that	he	had	to	get	back	to	his	compound,	just	down	the
street.	“Let’s	  meet	again	 tomorrow	 at	 Bagram,”	  he	said,	 hurrying	 out	 of	 the
room.
   John	  stood	 up	  and	  stared	 out	  the	 window.	   The	 currency	  of	  spies	 is
information,	  and	the	 highest-value	 currency	 is	  information	  that	 no	 one	else
knows	about.	Once	a	spy	acquires	it,	he’s	trained	to	lock	 it	up,	guard	it,	 and	only
give	  it	  to	  others	  for	  something	  in	   return.	  As	  a	  result,	  spies	 tend	  to
overcompartmentalize	their	most	credible	 information,	 even	in	an	atmosphere	of
complete	cooperation,	 such	as	existed	 in	 Afghanistan	 at	the	 time.	 I	 could	 tell
John	had	something	on	his	mind,	some	juicy	 morsel	of	 context	locked	inside	his
head,	available	 for	 release	only	 if	  I	 could	 come	up	 with	  the	right	  password.
“John,	we	 have	to	 keep	the	 pressure	on	these	guys—the	 enemy’s	 on	 the	run,

183
they’re	desperate,	and	desperate	men	make	desperate	moves.	They’re	vulnerable
right	 now,	 but	the	 longer	 we	 allow	 them	to	 re-arm,	 refit,	 and	 reorganize,	the
harder	it	will	 be	for	us	to	find	 ’em	and	accomplish	our	 mission.”	He	walked	 over
to	the	window,	  and	closed	the	thick	 curtains.	 Darkness	now	cloaked	 the	room.
Bingo.
   “We’re	  getting	a	lot	 of	reports	that	 Al	 Qaeda	forces	are	regrouping	in	an	area
in	 the	 mountains	 between	 Gardez	 and	 Khowst,”	   he	 whispered.	 “What’s	  it
called?”	I	 whispered	back	 as	I	yanked	 my	 Day-Timer	 out	of	 my	 cargo	pocket.
“Shahi	Khot,”	  he	whispered.	I	 thought	 I’d	 heard	the	name	before,	 but	it	 didn’t
immediately	 register.	Probably	 a	 phonetic	thing,	 so	I	 asked	him	 to	 spell	it	 for
me.	“S-H-A-H-I-K-H-O-T.”6	    He	 spoke	each	letter	with	 the	slow	 deliberateness
of	a	man	who	is	going	to	say	something	only	once.
   As	 Jimmy	 and	I	drove	 the	thirty	 miles	from	 Kabul	 back	to	 Bagram,	my	head
was	awash	with	dots.	After	  three	weeks	of	living	  with	 and	listening	to	 Afghans
and	Americans	all	 around	the	country,	I	 felt	 confident	that	we	 now	knew	 where
to	focus	our	search	(in	the	mountains	around	Gardez,	near	this	place	called	Shahi
Khot).	Thanks	to	the	team	in	Orgun,	I	 had	a	living,	breathing	 example	to	use	as	a
model	for	organizing	 AFO.	It	 was	time	to	reorganize.
   One	 thing	  that	 always	 frustrated	 me	 about	 the	 military	  was	 the	 way	 we
organized	for	combat	 missions.	No	matter	 what	the	mission,	 no	matter	who	 the
enemy	was	or	what	country	we	were	operating	in,	we	always	 organized	the	same
way.	 Platoons,	battalions,	 army,	 navy,	 air	 force;	 no	 matter	how	 complex	  the
mission,	 we	 used	 the	 same	 administratively	  driven	 organizational	  approach
every	time.	Over	 the	past	two	 hundred	years,	U.S.	history	 has	taught	us	that	no
two	wars,	engagements,	or	enemies	are	ever	alike.	Yet	 to	 this	day,	we	 continue
shoving	organizational	marshmallows	 into	operational	 piggybanks.	In	combat	as
in	nature,	if	  you	don’t	 adapt,	you	 die.	How	 would	 large	 organizations	 such	as
the	 military	  organize	  if	  they	 didn’t	  know	  how	 they	 were	  supposed	to	  be
organized?	I	wondered.
   Outside,	 a	fierce	 blizzard	 was	 howling.	 Visibility	   dropped	to	 front	 bumper.
Jimmy	violently	  jerked	the	wheel	 to	the	left	 in	an	attempt	 to	avoid	an	elephant-
sized	pothole.	Too	late,	and	too	big:	the	pothole	 swallowed	the	right	 front	corner
of	the	vehicle.	The	 tire	was	flat	 and	the	rim	destroyed.	Jimmy	 pulled	over	 to	the
side	of	 the	 road.	 Without	 saying	 a	 word,	 each	 of	 us	buttoned	 up	 our	 coats,
slipped	on	our	gloves,	 and	jumped	out	into	 the	blizzard.	 I	grabbed	the	jack,	 and
Jimmy	 grabbed	the	spare.	 While	 I	 pumped,	Jimmy	  grabbed	the	nuts,	 and	we
started	talking	about	what	would	 happen	if	a	natural	or	man-made	disaster	struck

184
Afghanistan	and	isolated	all	 the	Americans	currently	 inside	the	country,	from	 all
connectivity	 to	 the	outside	 world.	 After	  a	few	 days	of	 no	 communications	 or
guidance	from	their	parent	organizations,	everyone	would	 likely	 do	exactly	what
Jimmy	and	I	 just	did:	they	 would	come	to	 the	realization	that	 they	had	to	get	on
with	 the	 mission.	 AFO,	 Special	 Forces,	CIA,	  10th	 Mountain,	 Department	 of
State,	anyone	and	everyone	on	the	ground	would	 size	up	the	situation,	 and	self-
organize	in	 a	 way	 that	 was	optimized	  for	 only	 one	 thing:	 to	 accomplish	 the
mission—just	like	 the	teams	and	the	teamwork	we	saw	in	Orgun.
   With	 AFO,	 we	had	the	opportunity	 to	break	out	of	the	business-as-usual	mode
and	organize	according	 to	the	current	 mission	 and	the	environment.	 We	 didn’t
need	a	natural	disaster;	we	knew	what	the	right	 thing	 was	to	do	right	 then.	With
the	wheel	repaired,	Jimmy	 and	I	 jumped	back	in	 our	vehicle	 and	continued	 our
journey	back	to	Bagram.	Along	 the	way	we	started	the	reorganization.
   The	  first	  step	 was	  to	 flatten	  AFO	   headquarters	by	  pulling	  all	  of	  our
intelligence	analysts	and	communications	specialists	out	 of	Bagram	and	pushing
them	out	to	the	pilot	 teams	in	 the	safe	houses.7	The	communications	specialists
brought	with	  them	a	 suite	of	 communications	 technologies	 that	 would	 enable
each	team	to	talk	 to	anyone	anywhere	on	 the	globe.	They	 could	 also	upload	or
download	 data	(photos,	 articles,	and	 maps)	whenever	 they	 needed	them.	 The
intelligence	 analysts	provided	 the	team’s	 face-to-face	interaction	 with	  a	single
point	 of	  contact,	 who	 was	 completely	  dedicated	 to	 aggregating	 the	 teams’
requests	and	feedback,	and	diving	 into	 research	whenever	required.	 There	was
no	protocol	 for	 communications	among	teams.	“Boundaryless”	  meant	just	that:
if	 the	teams	 needed	to	coordinate,	 they	 were	encouraged	to	 work	 freely	  with
each	other	at	any	time.	With	 the	intelligence	 analyst	and	communications	pipes,
the	teams	would	  have	the	 key	 enabling	 tools	 to	 collect,	 analyze,	 and	act	 on
intelligence	in	real	 time,	without	 depending	on	a	staff	a	hundred	miles	away.	We
were	getting	nimble.
   Next	 we	integrated	all	 AFO	teams	with	 their	CIA	 and	Special	Forces	brethren
as	pilot	 teams.	 No	 two	 pilot	 teams	would	  be	organized	 the	 same	way.	 Each
mission-tailored	 team	would	 operate	in	 a	 decentralized	fashion	 to	develop	 the
situation	 in	 a	specific	  enemy-focused	region	 of	 the	 country.	 The	 people,	 the
geography,	and	the	enemy	required	different	 approaches	in	each	area.	We	were
going	for	multiple	 actions	at	the	fringes,	 with	each	team	developing	the	situation
in	their	 own	 area,	then	sharing	 that	information	  in	 all	 directions	 to	ensure	we
created	and	maintained	a	shared	reality.	 It	 was	my	 responsibility	  to	make	sure
we	were	 boundaryless.	No	 boundaries	between	teams,	no	 boundaries	between

185
AFO	and	any	other	organization	operating	in	 Afghanistan,	and	no	boundaries	for
what	we	could	imagine	and	accomplish.
   As	 for	 me,	 if	 I	 was	going	 to	effectively	  lead	AFO,	  I	needed	to	 be	up	 front
where	I	could	look	 a	warlord	in	the	eye,	and	where	I	could	experience	the	effects
of	the	cold,	 the	altitude,	the	lack	 of	supplies,	and	the	 same	resulting	frustrations
that	my	 men	were	experiencing.	 To	understand	the	guy	 on	the	ground,	 there	is
no	substitute	for	face-to-face	interactions.	 There	was	another	reason	why	I	knew
we	had	to	move	out	 of	Bagram.	The	 awesome	transformative	power	of	 the	U.S.
military	 logistics	system	was	changing	Bagram	from	 a	South	Bronx	shithole	into
an	Upper	 East	Side	 condominium	 right	 in	 front	 of	 our	 eyes.	Technology	 and
comfort	items	 such	as	the	Internet,	satellite	television,	 and	hot	chow,	are	hugely
net	positive	for	 men	and	women	 serving	long	 tours	in	 a	combat	zone.	But	 they
also	combine	to	 create	subtle	intrusions	 that	slowly	 but	 surely	rob	 a	warrior	 of
his	most	precious	weapon:	time	 to	saturate,	incubate,	and	illuminate.	 I	turned	 to
Jimmy,	 “What’s	 up,	 boss?”	he	 asked.	“Let’s	 pack	 it	 up,	 Jimmy,”	 I	 answered.
“We’re	 heading	for	the	frontier.”

186
                                                         16



                            EXPLORIN	     G	TH	  E	FRONTIER:


                            RECOGNIZING	  ENEMY	 PATTERNS


                                            January	   12,	2002


The	safe	house	in	Gardez	(see	Map	5)	was	a	typical	Afghan	rural	home	that
consisted	of	four	thirty-foot-high	mud	walls	anchored	by	watchtowers	in	each	of
the	four	corners,	which	encased	a	large,	barren	courtyard	the	size	of	a	football
field	in	 the	middle.	Calling	it	a	home	comes	with	an	asterisk.	In	Afghanistan,
most	homes	could	architecturally	qualify	as	what	the	rest	of	the	world	calls	a
fort.	Thousands	of	years	of	invading	armies	cutting	through	their	backyards	and
front	yards,	compounded	by	never-ending	ethnic	and	tribal	infighting,	were	the
likely	reasons	for	this	uniquely	Afghan	interpretation	of	a	home’s	functionality.
To	most	Afghans	the	home	isn’t	so	much	a	place	you	stay	in	to	live,	as	it	is	a
place	you	live	in	to	stay	alive.
   We	were	hunters,	and	hunters	have	to	be	where	they	can	access	their	prey,	but
hunters	also	have	to	understand,	respect,	and	interact	with	the	locals	whose	lands
the	prey	inhabit.	We	believed	in	Mao’s	axiom	on	guerrilla	warfare:	warm	the
waters	and	the	fish	will	  flourish,	chill	 the	waters	and	the	fish	 will	 die!	 The
people	are	the	waters	and	at	that	moment,	we	were	the	fish.	We	spent	a	lot	of
time	and	effort	building	relationships	and	establishing	rapport	with	the	locals.
   I	 stared	out	from	my	panoramic	perch	on	the	southeastern	watchtower	of	the
safe	house	and	studied	the	terrain	of	the	treeless,	snow-blasted	mountains	that
surrounded	us.	Spread	out	all	around	the	safe	house	was	a	scene	reminiscent	of	a
Civil	War	bivouac	site:	more	than	a	hundred	white	tents	that	housed	more	than
four	hundred	of	our	Afghan	allies.	Each	cluster	of	tents	had	a	small	campfire
with	five	 or	six	 newly	recruited	Afghan	warriors	sipping	green	tea	and	likely
reflecting	on	their	new	lot	on	top	of	the	Afghan	food	chain.
   There	were	about	fifty	  Americans	living	 in	 and	operating	out	of	 the	safe

187
house.	At	7,800	 feet	above	sea	level,	 the	thin	 air	 provided	 the	added	bonus	of
allowing	 us	 to	acclimate	 for	 future	 forays	 in	 the	 surrounding	 mountains.	The
courtyard	 was	  the	 hub	  of	  all	  combat	 preparation	  activity;	   vehicles	 were
constantly	being	loaded,	unloaded,	or	maintained.	Men	 of	all	shapes,	sizes,	ages,
and	ethnicities	were	 constantly	milling	  around	and	mingling.	  The	one	common
denominator	among	all	 of	 us	was	weapons:	everyone	had	 a	weapon	of	 various
size,	shape,	caliber,	and	origin	 strapped	to	whatever	part	of	 the	body	 individual
preference	and	physiology	allowed	them	to	get	to	it	the	quickest.
   Sleeping	  arrangements	reflected	 the	 age-old	 war-zone	 law	  of	 first	  mover
advantage.	While	 the	 Special	 Forces	 and	 CIA	 teams	 slept	 inside	 the	 warm,
protective	bosom	of	the	fort’s	 spacious,	hollow	 walls,	AFO	 occupied	a	large	tent
in	the	courtyard.	No	 one	complained:	I	liked	 the	fresh	air	and	the	chance	to	stare
at	the	stars	each	night	before	I	went	to	bed.
   Air	  force	 C-130s	 air-dropped	 food	 and	 water	 once	a	 week.	 There	was	 no
running	water	 and	no	plumbing;	 we	 crapped	in	 a	gigantic	 hole	that	the	 medics
covered	with	 chemicals	 at	the	 end	of	 each	day.	The	 tactical	 operations	center
(TOC),	 where	 we	 prepared	for	 and	 monitored	 our	 missions,	 was	austere	but
incredibly	 functional.	  Probably	 designed	as	 a	living	  room	 it	  measured	about
twenty	feet	by	 thirty	 feet.	Glenn	(our	 intel	analyst)	 transformed	the	room	within
minutes	of	 his	arrival.	 Maps	were	 pinned	to	 the	mud	walls,	 plastic	 sheets	were
used	to	 cover	 the	glassless	 windows,	 and	 radios	and	 laptop	 computers	 were
slaved	to	generators	that	hummed	away	in	the	courtyard	24/7.
   In	 a	few	 days,	without	any	 official	 document	or	 directive	to	 guide	us,	we	had
dramatically	 reorganized	 the	 U.S.	 force	  structure	 occupying	 outposts	 in	 the
frontier	 areas	all	  across	Afghanistan.	 The	 whole,	  made	up	 of	 AFO,	  Special
Forces,	and	the	CIA,	 was	 now	much	 stronger,	and	 much	more	 lethal,	than	 the
sum	of	its	parts.
   The	 lack	of	 distractions	and	the	medieval	ambience	made	it	as	good	as	it	 gets
for	a	warrior.	 This	 was	our	hunting	 lodge,	and	I	 felt	 like	we	 were	ready	to	start
the	hunt.	It	 was	 time	to	 start	developing	 the	situation	 in	 the	mountains	 around
Gardez.
   A	  few	  days	after	  I	 settled	 in,	 Chris	  H.	 (the	 Special	 Forces	 commander)
arrived,	and	we	agreed	to	join	his	Special	Forces	TOC	in	the	same	room	with	our
AFO	TOC.	 A	 few	days	later,	 the	best	combat	leader	in	the	CIA	  showed	up;	we
called	 him	 Spider.	 Physically	 unremarkable,	 he	 wore	 his	 six-foot,	  superwiry
frame	like	 his	nickname.	Spider	and	I	 had	met	while	 conducting	 gorilla	 warfare
operations	in	Bosnia	a	 few	years	earlier.	Everyone	 has	different	 opinions	of	 the

188
CIA,	 but	like	the	military,	  their	effectiveness	in	 most	situations	depends	in	large
part	on	the	leaders	they	have	working	the	mission.	Spider	was	a	living,	 breathing
example	of	how	 good	the	CIA	 could	 be	when	they	had	their	 best	leaders	on	the
ground.	His	 affable	personality	 and	deep,	passionate	dedication	 to	the	warriors
working	 the	mission	on	the	ground	 earned	him	great	respect	among	my	military
comrades	wherever	he	showed	up.r
   As	  the	 pilot	  team	 in	  Gardez	 continued	 to	  gather	 intelligence	  and	 build
situational	 awareness,	we	 made	 sure	 we	 took	  time	 to	 think.	  We	 created	 a
“required	reading”	 table	with	 a	sign	 above	it	that	 read	“Need	to	 Share.”	Strewn
across	the	table	were	the	seminal	documents,	books,	maps,	and	reports	that	were
required	  reading	 for	   everyone	  on	 the	  team.	  Together	  they	  formed	  our
foundational	logic.
   Before	 deploying	 to	Afghanistan,	 the	Unit	 gave	each	of	 us	two	 books	on	the
Soviet	war	in	 Afghanistan:	The	 first,	The	Other	 Side	of	the	Mountain,	 contained
firsthand	 accounts	 of	  combat	  lessons	from	  the	  perspective	 of	  mujahideen
fighters.	 The	second,	 The	Bear	 Went	 over	 the	Mountain,	  contained	 firsthand
accounts	of	  combat	 lessons	from	  the	 Soviet	  perspective.	 Both	 books	 were
cowritten	 by	Lester	Grau,	 a	retired	U.S.	 Army	 officer,	 and	Ali	  Ahmad	 Jalali,	a
former	Afghan	mujahideen	commander.
   We	 learned	a	lot	from	 these	books;	they	were	chock-full	 of	 insights,	and	over
many	nights	of	 discussing	and	thinking	 about	 them,	three	key	 points	stood	out.
The	first	 was	 affirmation	 of	 what	 Ali	 Mohamed	 told	 us:	the	 mujahideen	were
creatures	of	 habit—they	 almost	 always	 returned	to	 terrain	 they	 were	familiar
with	and	had	fought	from	 before.	Both	books	contained	detailed	maps	portraying
the	exact	locations	 of	the	 battles	the	mujahideen	 fought	 and	the	redoubts	from
which	they	 based.	We	cross-referenced	the	locations	with	 other	intelligence	 we
had,	and	then	marked	all	of	the	locations	on	our	own	 maps.	The	other	two	points
were	as	much	clues	as	they	were	key	learnings.	First,	the	mujahideen	were	not	a
self-sustaining	fighting	  force.	They	 didn’t	 live	 off	 the	 land	like	 the	Viet	 Cong,
who	at	times	subsisted	on	wild	 plants	and	wild	 animals.	Instead,	the	mujahideen
were	almost	completely	dependent	on	what	we	called	 an	urban	umbilical	 cord—
close	proximity	  to	an	urban	 area	for	 food,	 water,	and	sustainment	items.	 Last,
both	books	continuously	 referenced	a	legendary	mujahideen	commander	named
Jalaluddin	 Haqqani.1	 Haqqani	  commanded	 more	 troops,	 and	 perhaps	 more
respect	than	any	 other	 mujahideen	commander.	 While	 reading	 the	 books,	we
discovered	one	of	Haqqani’s	 greatest	battlefield	 victories	 occurred	near	a	little-

189
known	place	called	Shahi	Khot.
   Clues	 are	really	 just	dots	that	 lead	you	 to	other	dots.	 To	follow	  up	the	clues
from	the	 two	books,	 we	searched	the	greatest	clue	depository	 in	the	 world:	 the
World	Wide	 Web.	A	couple	 hundred	hyperlinks	later,	our	efforts	 were	rewarded.
First	we	located	a	declassified	Soviet	 report	with	 lessons	learned	from	the	battle
at	Shahi	Khot.	  The	Soviet	 report	 described	in	 detail	 how	 the	mujahideen	 had
used	the	mountainous	 terrain	 around	Gardez	 to	 their	 advantage.	They	 always
fought	from	  the	high	 ground.	“Look	  up,”	 the	 Russian	extolled,	 “you	 will	  find
them	up,	 always	 up.”	 The	 report	also	 described	how	 the	 mujahideen	 fighters
used	the	dry	creekbeds	to	position	 their	artillery	  and	as	lines	of	 communication
to	bring	in	food	 and	water	from	nearby	towns.
   Next	  we	 discovered	 that	 Jalaluddin	 Haqqani	 was	 now	 the	 senior	 military
commander	of	the	retreating	Taliban	army.	In	 late	October,	after	retreating	to	his
sanctuary	in	Pakistan,	he	gave	an	interview	 to	a	mysterious	Arab	 journalist	 who
somehow	talked	his	 way	 into	Haqqani’s	 secret	lair.	 The	 Internet	enabled	us	 to
find	 the	interview;	  our	Arab-American	  adviser	 allowed	 us	to	 translate	it	 from
Arabic	to	English.	 Here’s	what	Haqqani	had	to	say:
	
   “We	  will	 retreat	 to	the	mountains	 and	begin	a	 long	guerrilla	  war	 to	reclaim
our	pure	land	 from	[American]	  infidels	and	free	 our	country	 like	we	did	 against
the	Soviets.	The	Soviets	were	a	brave	enemy	and	their	 soldiers	 could	withstand
tough	conditions.	The	Americans	are	 creatures	of	comfort.	They	will	 not	 be	able
to	sustain	the	harsh	conditions	that	 await	them.	.	.	.	Afghanistan	 will	 prove	to	be
the	graveyard	of	the	Americans.”2	 (October	29,	2001.)
	
   Haqqani	 was	telling	 us	that	 he	and	his	fighters	 were	going	 into	hiding	 in	 the
mountains	in	preparation	for	 guerrilla	 warfare	against	U.S.	 forces.	This	creature
of	habit	 was	sure	 that	the	“creatures	 of	 comfort”	  he	was	fighting	  wouldn’t	 be
willing	 or	 capable	of	 coming	 up	into	 the	 harsh	Afghan	 mountains	and	 finding
him	and	his	men.	 They	would	 be	safe	in	the	mountains!	 Haqqani	believed	what
he	was	saying;	it	was	his	reality.
   All	  of	us	read	the	Haqqani	reality.
   Despite	 all	the	clues	that	 continued	to	congeal	into	 patterns	that	pointed	us	to
this	place	called	Shahi	 Khot,	we	 still	 didn’t	 know	 where	it	 actually	was,	 or,	for
that	matter,	whether	 the	enemy	was	 actually	 occupying	it.	 There	 was	no	place
called	Shahi	 Khot	  on	 any	map	 of	 Afghanistan.	  As	 it	 turned	 out,	 it	 was	 Ali

190
Mohamed’s	“dated”	 tacit	knowledge	that	allowed	 us	to	track	it	down.
   “To	  find	  Al	 Qaeda,	 ask	 the	shepherds,	 ask	the	 shopkeepers,	ask	 the	 taxi
drivers,”	 Ali	 Mohamed	 had	told	me.	The	Special	Forces	had	already	established
ties	 with	  most	 of	  the	 local	  mayors	 and	 tribal	  chiefs.	  This	 was	 a	  critical
component	of	what	they	called	foreign	 internal	defense.	But	Ali	 Mohamed	didn’t
advise	us	to	ask	the	mayor,	and	ask	the	tribal	chiefs	for	good	reason:	to	him	 they
weren’t	the	guys	 on	the	ground.	So	we	decided	 to	spread	out	across	the	frontier
and	double	our	efforts	 with	the	 common	folk.	 I	was	part	 of	a	team	consisting	of
four	Americans	and	two	 Afghans	trolling	  the	countryside	east	of	our	safe	house.
We	had	been	at	it	 all	day	and	had	learned	a	lot,	 but	as	we	 were	driving	 back	to
the	safe	house	we	 spotted	a	shepherd	tending	 his	 flock	 a	few	 hundred	 meters
from	the	 road.	Up	to	 this	point,	 we	 hadn’t	come	across	any	real	 shepherds;	the
shepherd	was	only	a	metaphor.	But	there	was	something	about	the	way	 this	guy
stared	at	us.	It	 wasn’t	 the	 stare	of	cautious	 concern	or	 contempt	that	 we	most
often	encountered	in	those	early	days;	instead,	it	 seemed	beckoning,	like	he	had
something	he	wanted	to	say.	Abdul,	our	 Afghan	driver,	 must	have	been	thinking
the	same	thing	because	he	slammed	on	the	brakes	and	without	saying	a	word	all
six	of	 us	jumped	out	 of	the	 vehicle	and	headed	across	the	muddy	 field	 to	meet
the	metaphor.
   An	 old	 man	with	  gentle	eyes,	he	greeted	us	with	 a	placid	 smile.	 He	seemed
genuinely	appreciative	when	we	politely	 asked	for	permission	to	speak	with	him.
After	 twenty	 or	 so	minutes	of	 small	 talk	 with	 our	 Afghan	 allies,	 Abdul	 asked
him	if	  he	knew	 where	the	Al	  Qaeda	Arabs	were	 hiding.	 He	didn’t	  answer;	he
simply	gestured	for	 us	to	follow	  him	 as	he	turned	and	headed	for	a	nearby	hill.
Most	 Afghans	 we	 encountered	 had	never	 seen	 or	 used	a	 map;	 they	 simply
pointed	or	 sketched	terrain	features	in	 the	dirt	 to	 describe	directions.	 Although
the	shepherd	looked	 to	be	at	 least	seventy-five	 years	old,	 he	quickly	  shattered
any	preconceived	notions	we	might	 have	had	about	age	and	fitness	when	he	put
his	hands	behind	his	back	and	 power-strode	up	the	hill	 like	 a	gold-medal	 speed
skater.	We	 followed	  him	 up	 the	 steep,	 thousand-foot	 grade	like	  a	bunch	 of
backpackers	following	 an	attractive	forest	ranger.	Arriving	 a	few	 minutes	behind
him,	our	 band	of	 superfit	 but	nonacclimated	 and	out-of-breath	 athlete	warriors
put	our	 hands	on	our	 knees	and	gasped	for	 oxygen	 as	we	 shook	our	 heads	in
awe.	We	had	a	newfound	appreciation	for	the	disparity	between	us	and	the	locals
concerning	acclimation	 to	altitude.	In	 a	few	weeks	we’d	 close	that	disparity,	 but
we	never	eliminated	it.
   Waiting	  patiently	at	the	very	 top	of	 the	hill,	 the	shepherd	stood,	pointing.	My

191
eyes	tracked	along	his	 arm	to	 the	tip	 of	his	 gnarled	and	weather-beaten	finger.
There,	guarding	the	 eastern	horizon	stood	a	 daunting	palisade	of	 ten-thousand-
foot	  cross-compartmented	  escarpments;	  most	  of	   which	  defied	   accepted
topographic	symbology.	 The	 shepherd	mumbled	 something;	I	 only	 understood
two	words:	“Shahi	 Khot.”
   Abdul	  translated.	He	told	 us	that	Shahi	Khot	 was	actually	 the	local	 name	for
the	villages	inside	the	valley,	 but	most	now	 referred	to	the	entire	valley	 as	Shahi
Khot.	We	 stood	spellbound	for	what	 seemed	like	a	couple	of	 minutes.	From	our
hilltop	 perch	it	was	easy	to	understand	why	the	enemy	believed	the	area	to	be	all
but	inaccessible.	A	 force	 that	 held	the	 high	 ground	around	 the	valley	 enjoyed
commanding	 views	 of	 all	 likely	  approaches	and	 would	 have	 plenty	 of	 early
warning	to	prepare	for	an	attack.
   For	 me,	staring	at	those	mountains	was	like	staring	at	a	gift	 horse.	It	reminded
me	of	 Montana.	 In	 combat,	 once	 you	recognize	 the	 patterns	 that	 inform	 the
behavior	of	your	enemy,	you	can	adapt	to	them,	and	your	enemy’s	toast.
   As	 we	continued	 our	long,	 slow	drive	 back	to	the	safe	house,	my	 mind	raced
ahead.	To	understand	what	 was	going	 on	inside	 Shahi	Khot	 we	 needed	to	put
guys	in	 the	mountains.	We	 had	to	 get	“eyes	on	 the	target.”	 Our	 challenge	was
how	to	get	close	enough	to	confirm	 the	enemy’s	presence	without	compromising
the	potential	for	a	larger	operation	to	destroy	them.
   Inside	 the	dimly	  lit	 TOC	 that	night,	 we	brainstormed	 the	dilemma.	 To	“find
’em	and	destroy	’em”	  we	would	 have	to	maintain	 the	advantage	of	surprise.	To
the	Unit	  guys	 who	 had	worked	  with	 me	 on	 other	 battlefields,	 there	 was	no
surprise	when	 I	  reiterated	 to	 everyone	present	 that	 “there	 will	  be	 no	 direct
helicopter	 infiltrations	  of	 AFO	 teams	anywhere	 near	 the	valley.”	  There	 were
plenty	of	 helicopters	 flying	  around	Afghanistan	 during	 that	 time;	 I	 just	 didn’t
want	any	going	near	Shahi	Khot.	If	 the	AFO	reconnaissance	teams	were	going	to
get	close	 enough	to	 confirm	 the	 enemy’s	 presence,	they	would	  have	to	 do	it
without	 the	enemy	knowing	 they	 were	there;	they	 would	 have	to	do	 it	the	 old-
fashioned	way,	by	walking	 through	the	mountains	without	being	seen.
   I	  had	a	 personal	“no	 heavy-lift	  helicopter”	  policy	  for	 any	 operation	I	 was
involved	  in.	   The	  historical	   pattern	  of	   failed	   missions	  and	  squandered
opportunities	 in	 Vietnam,	  Iran,	 Somalia,	 and	 the	 “empty-target”	  raids,	 were
deeply	etched	 in	 my	  mind.	 Two	 common-denominator	  lessons	linked	  all	 of
them;	 first,	  the	 obvious:	 helicopters	  make	 it	 all	  but	 impossible	  to	 achieve
surprise	on	an	 enemy-occupied	target.	The	 long-range	 wap-wap	and	 thumpity-
thump	created	by	the	turbo-powered	heavy-lift	 rotors	inevitably	 alert	 any	and	all

192
enemy	personnel	occupying	a	target	 to	the	approaching	 heliborne	assault	force.
After	 Somalia,	every	 despot,	drug	kingpin,	 and	dictator	 who	 had	any	reason	to
believe	that	the	United	States	might	be	coming	for	him	 expected	that	when	and	if
we	actually	came,	we’d	 come	in	 helicopters.3	Imagine	 the	hyper-paranoid	UBL
sitting	in	 the	middle	of	 nowhere	in	Afghanistan,	 hearing	the	distinctive	Doppler-
induced	noise	signature	of	 multiple	 heavy-lift	  helicopters	flying	  toward	 him.	It
wasn’t	 likely	 that	 he	was	 going	 to	 mistake	or	 dismiss	 the	sound	 as	that	 of	 a
wayward	traffic	 helicopter	that	took	a	wrong	 turn	in	New	York.
   Second,	 I	 believed	  that	 operationally	 defaulting	  to	 the	 use	 of	 helicopters
stymies	any	 potential	 to	 discover	 the	 type	 of	 out-of-the-box	  creative	 options
required	for	 successfully	 accomplishing	the	 most	difficult	  missions.	 The	art	 of
war	is	 the	 art	 of	 outthinking	  your	 enemy	 with	 strategies	and	 tactics	 such	as
disguises,	deception,	diversions,	and	stealth.	There	are	no	shortcuts;	you	have	to
immerse	yourself	 in	the	 essence	of	the	situation	 and	imagine	 every	possibility.
At	the	opposite	end	of	the	spectrum	is	 the	medieval	mindlessness	of	the	head-on
assault.	Once	it’s	decided	that	helicopters	 will	 be	used	to	attack	a	target,	there’s
no	longer	any	perceived	 need	to	develop	a	high-resolution	 understanding	of	 the
enemy	situation,	and	no	need	to	develop	out-of-the-box	 options	to	address	them.
Defaulting	 to	  helicopter-centric	 operations	 is	 an	 intellectual	  cop-out	 from	  a
leader’s	responsibility	  as	an	artisan	of	 the	 art	of	 war.	 Planners	spend	all	 their
time	focusing	 on	weather	 and	fuel	 loads	instead	of	 whether	the	 enemy	posts	a
guard	at	night,	or	when	the	enemy	gathers	for	their	 daily	 meals.	Helicopters	also
usually	end	up	becoming	 the	end-all	component	 of	the	mission;	 in	other	 words,
leaders	end	up	 making	  key	 decisions	about	 the	 mission	 based	solely	 on	 the
capabilities	 and	 limitations	   of	 the	 helicopters	  instead	 of	 how	  to	 best	 take
advantage	of	the	enemy	situation	to	accomplish	the	mission.	A	 prime	example	is
weather.	Bad	weather	 is	the	 best	time	 to	attack	 a	target;	 the	enemy	 is	usually
buttoned	up	to	stay	 warm	or	 dry,	and	visibility	  is	 limited,	 which	 almost	always
favors	our	 forces	 and	 our	superior	 ability	  to	 operate	in	 harsh	 conditions	 and
limited	visibility.	  But	 bad	weather	also	means	that	the	helicopters	either	can’t	fly
or	won’t	 fly	 as	well,	 so	even	if	 the	 enemy	situation	looks	 good,	the	 decision	is
usually	to	postpone	the	operation	 until	the	 weather	improves.	Helicopter-centric
operations	are	the	 modern-day	 equivalent	 of	 the	 head-on	assault,	and	 history
attests	that	head-on	assaults	usually	result	in	mission	failure.	 It’s	 common	sense
to	use	your	head	instead.
   Before	  we	sent	 teams	into	 the	 mountains	 to	 risk	 their	 lives	 for	  the	actual
mission,	we	 needed	to	 know	 how	 the	 environment	 affected	 their	 life-support

193
equipment.	 We	  needed	to	  conduct	 environmental	  recons.	 These	  were	 not
practice	runs.	 Years	of	 recon	training	 in	 the	 military,	  and	years	of	 long-range
backpacking	 excursions	 while	  off-duty	  had	 taught	 me	 that	  every	 mountain
environment	 is	 slightly	  different,	  and	 that	 it’s	 the	 little	  things	  you	 have	 to
overcome	to	master	the	 mountains.	We	 needed	to	see	how	 far	we	 could	travel
each	night;	 what	 type	of	 clothing	  we’d	 need	to	 keep	warm	 and	 dry;	 whether
there	were	any	 water	sources	available;	 and	in	 aggregate,	whether	it	 was	even
feasible	to	infiltrate	  through	these	barren	inhospitable	 mountains	without	  being
detected.
   To	 conduct	the	ultra-aggressive	recons,	I	needed	more	men.	Not	just	any	men,
mind	you:	there	were	only	 a	handful	of	men	on	the	planet	who	 could	attempt	the
kind	 of	mission	 I	 had	in	 mind	 and	have	 any	chance	of	 succeeding.	Luckily,	  I
knew	some	of	them	personally;	they	were	the	same	men	I	had	commanded	while
walking	 through	the	mountains	 of	Montana	 six	 months	earlier.	I	 figured	 that	at
least	three	teams	of	four	or	five	men	each	would	suffice.	I	 called	back	to	the	Unit
that	night	 and	gave	the	men	a	heads-up.	“Start	 getting	 your	stuff	 ready,”	 I	 told
one	of	them.	“Do	you	 have	permission	from	the	commanding	general?”	he	asked
with	an	air	of	heavy	skepticism.	 “Not	 yet,”	I	replied,	 “but	I’m	 working	 on	it.”
   In	 his	seminal	account	of	 Operation	Anaconda,	Not	 a	Good	Day	 to	Die,	Sean
Naylor	describes	AFO’s	higher	 headquarters	during	the	early	days	of	January:

           It	  started	 the	 war	  as	 Task	 Force	 Sword,	 but	 by	  January	 had	 been
           renamed	 Task	Force	 11.	 Task	Force	 11	 had	 only	 one	goal:	 to	 kill	  or
           capture	  so-called	 “high-value	   targets”	  (HVTs),	  the	 phrase	 the	 U.S.
           military	    used	 to	  describe	  senior	  Al	  Qaeda	  and	 Taliban	   leaders.
           Reporting	 to	 TF	 11	 was	a	 small	 organization	 that	 would	 soon	have	 a
           major	 impact	on	 the	war.	Called	 Advance	Force	Operations,	or	 AFO,	its
           mission	  was	to	  conduct	 high-risk	  reconnaissance	missions	 deep	 into
           enemy	territory.	 AFO	 was	not	a	standing	organization	 back	in	the	States,
           but	 rather	 a	 concept	 .	.	 .	 that	could	 draw	 personnel	 from	 any	 special
           operations	 unit	 to	 meet	a	 particular	  mission’s	requirements.	 .	 .	.	 “The
           intent	 is	to	 tailor	 the	force	for	 the	situation,	 so	it’s	 never	quite	the	same,
           but	 it’s	  always	small,	 it’s	  always	cross-functional,	  and	it’s	  always	the
           best	of	the	best	working	in	 it,”	 said	an	officer	 familiar	 with	AFO.

   As	 Naylor	 points	 out,	AFO	 was	only	 a	tiny	 slice	of	 TF	 11.	In	 early	January,
the	main	body	 of	TF	 11,	also	known	 as	the	assault	force,	consisted	of	 the	navy
SEALs,	Army	 Rangers,	and	a	large	armada	of	special	operations	helicopters,	all

194
co-located	at	Bagram	Air	Base.
   The	  commanding	  general	 of	  TF	 11	  had	 returned	  to	 the	  United	  States
immediately	 after	the	Tora	 Bora	effort.4	 To	 act	as	his	proxy	 in	 country,	he	left
his	deputy	commanding	 general	(DCG),	 who	was	 a	one-star	air	force	 general.5
The	DCG	was	a	fervently	 religious	 officer,	 who	 sported	a	tall	gangly	 frame	and
a	perfectly	 coiffed	  helmetlike	 hairdo,	 which	 he	 constantly	 raked	back	 with	 a
purple	plastic	 palm	comb	he	kept	 in	his	 cargo	pocket.	With	 thousands	of	 hours
flying	 aircraft	  all	 over	the	 globe,	 the	DCG	 was	 an	exceptionally	  experienced
special	operations	pilot.	 But	with	 thousands	of	 hours	flying	 aircraft	 all	 over	the
globe,	he	 was	 also	an	 exceptionally	  inexperienced	special	 operations	 ground
commander.6	 Without	  any	  firsthand	  experience	 in	  any	 type	  of	  maneuver
warfare,	 when	  it	 came	 to	  commanding	  a	 highly	  complex	  manhunt	 in	  an
unforgiving	 environment	such	as	Afghanistan,	 he	was	the	military	 equivalent	 of
a	caveman	staring	at	a	rocket	ship.
   But	 the	DCG	 wasn’t	the	 architect	of	this	 quixotic	 command	arrangement;	the
Department	of	Defense	assigned	him	 to	his	 position	as	the	second	in	 command
of	our	 higher	headquarters	under	the	guise	of	 “jointness,”	 and	the	commanding
general	appointed	him	to	command	our	task	force	in	Afghanistan	 under	the	guise
of	dogma;	the	military’s	  rule	of	 thumb	in	 Afghanistan,	 was	that	no	organization
could	operate	in	 country	without	 a	 general	officer	 commanding	and	controlling
it.	With	 an	open	disposition	 and	the	right	 people	around	them,	an	accomplished
leader	can	effectively	  lead	 just	 about	any	 type	 of	 organization.	 Even	without
context-specific	  experience,	  a	  good	  leader	  can	  contribute	  by	  adding	   a
perspective	that	looks	 at	 things	through	 a	fresh,	 untainted	lens.	 But	 to	do	 this
effectively,	 a	 leader	 must	 possess	some	key	 traits,	 specifically	  openness,	an
adaptive	approach	to	thinking	and	making	 decisions,	and	constant	deferral	to	the
guy	on	the	ground.	 By	 this	point	 in	the	 war	on	terror,	 I	had	 gotten	to	know	 the
DCG.	He	was	a	nice	guy,	 but	an	accomplished	leader	he	was	not.	As	 one	of	my
comrades	from	 the	 Unit	 had	 so	sagely	 reflected,	 “My	  uncle’s	 a	 construction
worker—and	 a	really	 nice	guy—but	 I	 would	 never	allow	 him	 to	command	 my
men	in	a	combat	zone.”
   To	 assist	the	DCG	in	Afghanistan,	 he	had	a	staff	of	 more	than	a	hundred	men
and	women	 occupying	  a	small	  operations	center	 in	 Bagram,	 and	 a	 massive
tactical	operations	 center	(TOC)	 a	 thousand	miles	 away	 in	the	 Persian	Gulf.7
These	well-meaning	  and	highly	  educated	military	  professionals	 worked	 long
hours	and	with	 great	passion	to	do	whatever	the	DCG	 told	 them	to	do.	With	 all

195
the	latest	 whiz-bang	  technology	 and	 massive	databases	and	communications
pipes	at	their	disposal,	there	was	a	constant	self-generated	pressure	to	put	all	the
technology	to	good	use,	to	do	something.	 Unfortunately,	 that	something	was	the
unending	creation	  of	 timelines,	 policies,	  and	plans—the	 embalming	  fluid	  of
organizational	  nimbleness.	  The	   unfortunate	  object	  of	   their	   bureaucratic
embalming	fluid	 was	the	TF	11	main-body—the	SEALs	 and	the	Rangers.
   Despite	 the	obvious	benefits	 of	going	 where	the	enemy	is	 located	in	 order	to
hunt	him	 down,	 and	organizing	 special	operations	forces	 based	on	the	mission
and	the	environment,	 the	commanding	general	 had	left	 strict	orders	to	 his	staff
on	how	 the	 SEALs	 and	the	 Rangers	were	 supposed	to	 conduct	operations	 to
accomplish	their	mission.	As	Naylor	 describes	it:

           Some	in	TF	 11	were	also	unhappy	with	commanding	 general	and	DCG’s
           concept	 for	 how	 the	task	force	 was	 to	operate,	 which	 was	to	 keep	the
           direct	 action	force	 .	.	.	based	intact	at	Bagram,	waiting	 for	 intelligence	.	.
           .	 .	to	pinpoint	 a	high-value	 target,	at	which	 point	 the	door-kickers	would
           launch	 on	a	 raid	 to	kill	 or	 capture	 the	target.	 The	hours	required	 to	fly
           from	 Bagram	 to	 the	 eastern	provinces	 where	bin	 Laden	 and	the	 other
           senior	 enemy	figures	 were	 probably	 hiding	  made	some	think	 it	  would
           have	 been	better	to	 divide	 the	direct	 action	 force	into	 smaller	 elements
           and	 push	 them	out	 to	 safe	 houses	in	 those	provinces.	 “It	   became	an
           unwieldy	 process,”	 an	 operator	 said.	“Most	  of	the	 guys	knew	it	 wasn’t
           the	best	way	of	 operating.	.	 .	.	You	cannot	fly	 in	a	helicopter	 in	real	 time
           to	  a	 target	  from	 Bagram	  and	 have	 a	 high	  likelihood	  of	 killing	   or
           capturing	 someone.	You	have	to	be	deployed	forward.”

   Despite	 having	two	 of	our	operational	 hands	tied	behind	our	backs,	there	was
no	wall-kicking	  frustration	  among	my	 comrades	and	 me.	By	 this	 point	 in	 the
War	 on	  Terror	  we	 were	 accustomed	 to	  the	 obstinacy	  and	 illogic	   of	 our
organizational	 reality.	 Don’t	  attack	 the	 machine-gun	 nest,	go	 around	  it.	 We
would	have	to	adapt!
   Although	 there	were	plenty	 of	recon	specialists	in	country,	 the	most	important
task	I	had	as	the	leader	of	 AFO	 was	to	make	sure	I	 got	the	best	people	 “on	the
bus”	 for	 this	 mission.	 To	  get	approval,	 I	  flew	 back	 to	 Bagram	 for	  a	video
teleconference	(VTC)	 with	 the	 DCG,	 who	 was	in	 his	tent	 in	 Masirah,	and	 the
commanding	general,	sitting	  in	his	 office	 in	 North	 Carolina.8	 I	 was	genuinely
proud	of	 what	 we’d	 accomplished	 thus	far.	 I	 was	confident	 that	 we	 had	very
likely	 found	 the	general	location	 of	 the	 enemy;	now	 all	 we	needed	was	a	 few

196
good	men	so	we	could	pinpoint	their	location	 for	destruction.
   The	 VTC	 was	contentious;	the	commanding	general	openly	 scoffed	at	AFO’s
presumption	that	there	was	 a	large	“pocket”	  of	Al	 Qaeda	fighters	 hiding	 out	in
the	Shahi	Khot	 Valley.	  From	 his	office	 in	 North	 Carolina,	 it	 just	 didn’t	 make
sense	to	him.	But	in	the	end,	he	begrudgingly	approved	two-thirds	 of	 my	request
for	additional	  men.	I	 would	 learn	later	 that	his	 skepticism	 of	AFO’s	  ability	 to
find	 a	 “large	 pocket”	  of	 enemy	was	 more	 than	 just	 operational;	 it	 was	 also
personal.	This	 quote	 in	 Sean	Naylor’s	  book	 from	  one	of	 the	 general’s	 most
trusted	confidants	describes	his	perspective	on	our	relationship:

           “Their	   personalities	 are	oil	 and	 water—they	 don’t	 mix,”	  said	a	 JSOC
           officer	 who	 knew	both	men.	“There’s	  not	a	 lot	of	 love	there.”	  .	.	.	 [The
           commanding	 general]	  thought	 Blaber	 and	 his	 AFO	 troops	 in	  Gardez
           were	  exceeding	 their	  authority	   with	  their	  ambitious	  plans	  for	  the
           Shahikot	  and	 their	 close	 coordination	  with	  the	 CIA	 and,	 when	 they
           arrived,	   the	 conventional	  forces.	 The	 JSOC	  commander	 found	 this
           frustrating.	  .	.	.	[T]he	 perception	 is	that	Pete	Blaber	 is	running	 the	show
           and	running	 amok,”	 the	JSOC	of	ficer	said.9

   I	 was	 aware	of	 the	commanding	 general’s	 personal	animosity	 toward	 me.	 I
was	also	aware	that	the	independent	role	we	had	carved	out	by	reorganizing	 and
operating	from	 our	frontier	 outposts	had	some	high-ranking	 staff	 officers	 at	TF
11’s	Masirah	 headquarters	referring	 to	 me	 as	“Peter	 the	Great”	 and	 “Colonel
Kurtz”	 from	the	movie	 Apocalypse	Now.10	None	of	this	gave	me	the	least	pause.
I	could	 understand	why	 many	 of	them	 were	skeptical	 of	 what	we	 were	doing.
This	wasn’t	how	 they	were	trained	to	conduct	military	 operations;	to	 them	it	was
surreal.
   But	 I	 saw	the	 skepticism	and	 sarcasm	as	net	positives,	because	it	 bought	us
time.	I	 was	convinced	that	it	 was	far	better	 to	be	doubted,	mocked,	and	ignored
than	to	  be	 micromanaged.	 The	 technological	 and	 proximal	  isolation	  of	 the
Gardez	safe	house	greatly	inhibited	 the	generals	in	Masirah	 and	North	 Carolina
from	 interfering	  with	 our	 ability	  to	 be	innovative,	  to	 be	adaptive,	 and	 to	be
audacious.



                                              February	     14,	 2002

197
Our	 recon	 specialists	  arrived	 via	  C-17	  only	 forty-eight	   hours	 after	  I	 had
requested	them.	All	  were	 from	 the	 same	squadron	 I	 had	commanded	 a	 year
earlier.	 Coincidence?	Perhaps!	 No	 strangers	 to	 Afghanistan,	 all	 had	 been	 in
Afghanistan	 during	  the	  empty-target	 raid	  and	 had	  taken	 part	 in	  the	  first
reconnaissance	missions	in	and	around	Kandahar.	I	 gathered	all	 of	them	 in	our
TOC	in	 Gardez	to	 explain	our	 mission.	Spider	 and	some	of	 the	Special	Forces
guys	also	attended.
   “Our	 mission	 is	to	develop	the	situation	to	 find	the	enemy;	to	do	this,	 we	need
to	recon	 the	routes	around,	 and	eventually	 into	 the	 interior	 of	 the	Shahi	 Khot
Valley.	 We’re	  operating	in	  the	enemy’s	 backyard,	 so	 we	have	 to	 ensure	we
understand	how	he	thinks.	 I	want	 every	man	to	 read	everything	available	 about
this	 area,	 talk	  to	 our	  Afghan	  allies	 about	 the	  enemy,	 and	 constantly	  ask
yourselves,	‘If	 I	 were	the	enemy,	 how	would	 I	 defend	this	 valley?’	 ”	 Finally,	 I
summed	up	my	guidance	to	them	by	 reiterating	Patton’s	three	principles	 of	 war:
audacity,	audacity,	and	audacity.	I	wasn’t	 trying	 to	give	a	Knute	 Rockne	speech.
That	stuff	 doesn’t	really	 hold	 water	with	 the	 type	of	 mature	warrior	 who	 made
up	AFO.	Instead	I	was	trying	 to	underscore	something	I	was	just	coming	to	grips
with	 myself—that	 to	 be	successful	at	developing	 the	situation,	 you	 have	to	 be
audacious.	Anyone	 can	 recognize	 a	pattern;	 it’s	  having	 the	 courage	of	  your
convictions	 to	 act	on	 it	 that	 matters.	Audacity	  isn’t	 taking	 senseless	risks,	or
being	rash;	it’s	  a	natural	 by-product	 of	 confidence	 and	knowledge,	 and	I	 was
supremely	confident	 in	my	 people	and	 in	how	 much	we	 knew	 about	what	was
going	on	around	us.
   We	  divided	  our	 initial	   recon	 missions	 into	  two	 phases.	 The	 first	  phase
consisted	of	vehicle	recons.	We	considered	the	roads	and	trails	around	the	valley
as	our	enablers.	These	were	the	access	corridors	that	would	allow	us	to	infiltrate,
exfiltrate,	and	resupply	 our	reconnaissance	teams.	Opening	the	roads	would	turn
out	to	be	the	decisive	point	for	 us	to	execute	our	mission	in	Shahi	Khot,	 in	much
the	same	way	 as	 slowing	 the	 vehicle	 down	 was	the	 decisive	 point	 for	 us	 to
execute	our	gorilla	warfare	mission	in	 Bosnia.
   The	 second	phase	was	 what	we	 called	 our	 environmental	 recons,	with	 two
teams,	one	from	the	north	and	one	from	 the	south,	probing	 the	perimeter	of,	 but
not	entering,	the	 Shahi	Khot	 Valley.	 Each	team	would	 establish	an	observation
post	in	the	mountains,	and	then	return	to	Gardez	to	share	lessons	and	prepare	for
the	actual	mission	into	the	valley.
   The	 newly	  arrived	 operators	from	  the	Unit	  organized	 themselves	into	 two
teams:	India	team	and	Juliet	team.	Juliet	 team	was	the	larger	of	 the	two.	Master

198
Sergeant	Kris	K.	led	 a	team	that	totaled	five	 men.	Kris	 was	from	West	Virginia,
in	his	 mid-thirties,	  and	about	 five	 feet	ten	 with	 a	 very	 athletic	 build.	 He	was
quiet	and	 reserved,	and	 his	work	  reflected	 his	demeanor:	 always	 precise	and
always	thorough.	Accompanying	 Kris	 were	three	other	Unit	 members	and	an	air
force	combat	controller	(CCT).
   India	 team	had	only	 three	men.	Not	the	optimal	 number	for	 a	mission	such	as
this	one,	but	what	 they	lacked	 in	numbers,	they	 more	than	made	up	 for	in	 skill
and	experience.	The	team	leader	was	a	thirty-six-year-old	 Kentuckian	 we	called
Speedy.	He	did	everything—run,	 shoot,	and	talk—fast.	 Born	 and	raised	in	 rural
western	Kentucky,	Speedy	grew	up	in	 the	woods.	Legend	had	it	 he	once	shot	an
acorn	out	of	 a	squirrel’s	 paws—with	  a	BB	 gun.	Speedy’s	partner	 was	a	man	 I
considered	to	be	the	poster	child	 of	a	Delta	 operator.	Bob	was	born,	 raised,	and
still	longed	 to	return	to	Austin,	 Texas.s	He	was	as	all-around	fit	as	anyone	in	the
Unit,	and	 like	Speedy,	a	world-class	 hunter	who	 never	came	home	from	 a	hunt
empty-handed.
   As	 I	 told	  Sean	Naylor,	 “If	  you	 needed	two	 men	to	 track	 a	 chipmunk	 in	 a
hundred-thousand-acre	forest	and	 kill	  it	 with	  one	bullet,	 these	 were	the	 two.
Although	 two	 operators	 were	less	than	 I	 would	 have	 said	were	 needed	for	 a
mission	such	as	this,	 these	two	 were	living	  proof	 of	why	 you	 never	say	 never
with	 regard	 to	 rules	 governing	  tactics.	 Having	 Speedy	 and	 Bob	 on	 a	 team
together	was	 like	  having	  Daniel	 Boone	 and	 Simon	 Kenton	  together	 in	 the
frontier	days—as	hunters	and	athletes,	they	had	no	peer,	anywhere.”
   The	 teams	 approached	both	 phases	of	 the	recons	 with	 true	 entrepreneurial
spirit—always	 pushing	the	envelope	 with	 a	“whatever	 it	takes”	 approach	and	a
“nothing	 ventured,	nothing	 gained”	perspective	on	 risk.	To	 find	 their	way,	 they
did	 what	  successful	 explorers	  and	 entrepreneurs	 have	  always	 done:	  they
experimented.	They	experimented	with	 every	conceivable	 method	of	movement
—trucks,	cars,	horses,	donkeys,	and	 of	course	feet.	You	 name	it—they	  tried	it.
They	tried	 different	  routes	to	 get	into	 and	 around	the	 mountains.	They	 tested
different	  camouflage	 patterns,	 different	  night	  vision	  devices,	 and	  different
weapons.	Little	  by	 little	  the	 guys	 were	 developing	 the	 situation,	 and	 in	 the
process	figuring	out	exactly	what	they	needed	to	accomplish	their	mission.
   Most	 everything	 they	came	up	with	 they	 came	up	with	 on	their	 own.	My	 job
as	the	leader	wasn’t	 to	 try	 to	 tell	 them	how	 to	 do	their	 jobs;	 rather,	it	 was	 to
provide	an	 environment	 that	fostered	 experimentation,	 followed	 by	 thoughtful
and	honest	reflection	 on	 what	 we	learned	 and	how	 we	 could	apply	 it.	 As	 the
leader	of	AFO,	 my	most	important	 task	during	 this	phase	was	to	ensure	that	my

199
men	and	I	had	time	 to	develop	the	situation.	 You	have	to	make	time	to	saturate,
incubate,	and	illuminate.
   While	  the	teams	experimented,	they	read	all	 the	same	books	 and	papers	that
the	rest	of	AFO	 had	already	read.	The	TOC	 was	busy	twenty	hours	a	day.	Most
of	us	slept	about	four	 hours	a	night	during	 that	period—not	 because	we	were	on
any	type	of	time	 schedule	but	because	we	couldn’t	 lie	down	 without	 a	new	idea
popping	into	 our	heads.	The	saturate,	incubate,	illuminate	cycle	 never	ends.	The
teams	never	stopped	preparing.	 They	 pored	over	 maps	and	 satellite	 photos	to
study	the	terrain	 and	search	for	 evidence	of	 enemy	activity.	  Our	Afghan	 allies
proved	invaluable	 during	this	 phase.	The	teams	continuously	bounced	ideas	off
the	Afghans,	  and	 tapped	into	  their	 on-the-ground	 knowledge	  of	 the	 terrain,
weather,	and	local	populace.
   During	 the	 environmental	recons,	both	teams	probed	deep	into	 the	mountains
under	 the	  worst	  possible	 conditions—driving	    snowstorms	 and	 ice	  storms
combined	with	 uncharted	and	unforgiving	 mountainous	terrain.	Harsh	landscape
and	weather	aside,	the	fact	that	we	still	 didn’t	 know	 how	many	 enemy	were	out
there,	or	where	they	actually	were,	never	wandered	far	from	any	of	our	thoughts.
   Within	  a	week,	we	felt	 we	had	a	high	degree	of	familiarity	  with	 the	lay	of	 the
land	around	 the	Shahi	 Khot.	 We	 had	solid	 time/distance	 estimates	for	 all	 the
roads,	and	felt	confident	 traveling	on	 them	as	long	as	we	stayed	small,	fast,	and
unobtrusive.	With	 regard	 to	the	 terrain,	much	 like	 in	 Montana,	 we	learned	we
could	move	 up,	over,	 and	through	 the	toughest	 of	 Afghan	 mountain	terrain	 in
one	twenty-four-hour	  period.	Also	 like	 Montana,	 we	 discovered	that	 the	hard-
packed	snow,	which	blanketed	the	mountains	made	it	 easier	for	us	to	move.	The
frostbite-inducing	 temperatures	made	 it	 unlikely	  that	our	 ill-equipped	  and	ill-
prepared	adversaries	would	be	out	and	about	to	bump	into	 us.	We	had	the	finest
cold-weather	 clothes,	 boots,	 and	  equipment	 that	 science	 and	 money	  could
produce.	  The	  harsh	  weather	  and	  inhospitable	   conditions	  were	   definite
advantages	for	us.	But	the	more	we	learned	about	the	vastness	of	the	Shahi	Khot
Valley	 and	surrounding	 mountains,	the	more	 we	became	convinced	we	 needed
another	team.
   While	 Jimmy	 was	running	things	for	 AFO	back	at	Bagram,	my	 sidekick	while
I	traveled	the	Afghan	 frontier	 and	operated	around	Gardez	was	a	wizened	SEAL
sniper,	appropriately	 named	Homer.	A	 large	 lumbering	man	 in	his	 late	thirties,
Homer	had	 long	 wavy	 black	 hair	 and	a	mad,	 triumphant	 smile.	 I	 rarely	 went
anywhere	 without	  Homer.	  It’s	  hard	 to	 describe	 how	  valuable	 a	  top-notch
sidekick	 is	for	  a	leader	 in	 a	combat	 zone.	Homer’s	 advice	 and	 counsel	were

200
nested	in	just	about	everything	I	 did.	“You’re	  on	the	right	track,	 you’re	 smoking
crack,	let	me	 and	the	guys	handle	that,”	 all	 those	little	 things	that	 in	aggregate,
allowed	 me	to	 maintain	 a	cruising	  altitude	 where	I	 could	 filter	  out	 the	white
noise	of	pride,	 prejudice,	and	politics	 and	hone	in	 on	the	key	 patterns	that	were
essential	for	understanding	 what	was	 going	on	 around	us.	 While	 Homer	 and	I
were	checking	 on	our	 Afghan	 guards	late	 one	night,	 he	mentioned	 to	 me	that
some	of	 his	SEAL	  reconnaissance	brethren	were	growing	  restless	waiting	 for
actionable	intelligence	 back	at	Bagram.	“They’re	  chomping	at	the	 bit	to	 get	out
of	their	 barracks	and	into	the	 hunt,”	 Homer	implored.	 The	next	 day	I	 contacted
the	 SEAL	   commander	  at	  Bagram,	  and	 asked	  him	  for	  “however	   many
reconnaissance	men	he	could	spare.”	Within	hours	he	quietly	 sent	us	a	five-man
team.	The	team’s	 call	sign	 was	Mako	 31.	 Mako	 31	was	led	 by	a	 lanky,	 good-
natured	 SEAL	  named	 Mike,	  but	  known	  to	 most	 everyone	  simply	  by	 his
diminutive	 Goody.
   I	 continued	 to	 report	 everything	 our	teams	discovered	 from	 our	 recons	and
from	our	 day-to-day	 interactions	with	 the	people	 on	the	frontier	 in	 a	document
we	called	the	AFO	commander’s	 sit-rep.11	It	was	our	way	 of	sharing	everything
we	discovered	each	day,	along	with	 how	each	new	discovery	 fit	 into	the	overall
pattern	of	 enemy	activity	  in	 and	around	the	 Shahi	Khot.	 Unbeknownst	 to	 me,
these	reports	were	also	the	first	thing	General	Tommy	Franks	read	each	day	back
at	his	headquarters	in	Tampa.	 He	would	 turn	out	 to	be	a	 huge	supporter	of	 our
entrepreneurial	efforts,	 constantly	lecturing	 subordinate	 generals	that	AFO	 was
the	most	efficient	and	effective	 force	he	had	on	the	ground	in	 Afghanistan.	Even
though	our	own	 chain	 of	command	 didn’t	 believe	our	 efforts	 would	 amount	to
anything,	 General	Franks	 did.	 So	 he	 assigned	the	 mission	 of	 destroying	 the
enemy	that	he	 was	now	 sure	AFO	 was	within	  days	of	 pinpointing	 to	 the	only
conventional	infantry	 unit	 in	country,	 and	they	were	more	 than	willing	 to	 get	in
on	the	hunt.
   On	 February	 14,	 Major	 General	 Buster	 Hagenbeck	and	 his	10th	 Mountain
Division	 staff	assumed	control	 of	planning	 for	what	 his	staff	 would	 soon	name:
Operation	Anaconda.	 Under	 General	Hagenbeck	were	 three	battalions	 of	 U.S.
conventional	  infantry,	  consisting	  of	  two	  battalions	  from	  the	 3rd	  Brigade
(“Rakkasans”)	  of	 the	  101st	 Airborne	  Division	   and	 one	  battalion—the	  1st
Battalion,	87th	Regiment	(1-87)—of	 the	10th	Mountain	 Division.
   General	 Hagenbeck	assumed	operational	command	of	all	 American	 forces	in
Afghanistan,	with	  just	one	 exception:	TF	 11	 and,	by	 proxy,	 AFO.	 Despite	the
fact	 that	 we	  had	 no	 official	   command	 and	 control	  link	  to	 either	  General

201
Hagenbeck	or	 the	10th	 Mountain,	  I	 immediately	 moved	 Jimmy	 into	 the	 10th
Mountain	 TOC	  at	 Bagram,	 so	we	 would	  be	 hardwired	 into	  his	 people	and
organization.	Both	 Jimmy	 and	I	agreed	that	there	 was	no	sense	in	building	 this
wealth	of	situational	 awareness	without	sharing	it	with	the	staff	 and	commanders
whose	troops	would	 be	with	  us	on	the	 ground,	fighting	  the	enemy.	So	while	 I
commanded	AFO	 from	 Gardez,	Jimmy	 ensured	that	everything	 we	 discovered
was	shared	with	 General	Hagenbeck	 and	his	 staff.	 Jimmy	 also	attended	every
important	briefing	 and	rehearsal	that	the	 10th	Mountain	 held.	Critically,	  Jimmy
occupied	a	table	within	 arm’s	 length	and	whisper	 range	of	 General	Hagenbeck.
With	 a	wall	 of	 tech	gear	 in	front	 of	 him,	 Jimmy	 was	able	 to	share	everything
AFO	 learned	in	real	 time	 by	simply	 leaning	 back	on	 his	chair,	 putting	 his	lips
together,	and	you	know	the	deal.
   To	 officially	  kick	 off	preparations	for	 Operation	Anaconda,	a	meeting	was	set
up	for	all	 participating	 units’	 key	leaders.	The	meeting	took	 place	at	the	Special
Forces	safe	house	in	 Kabul.12	 The	 goal	 for	 the	meeting	 in	 Kabul	 was	to	 get
everyone	on	the	same	sheet	of	music.	My	personal	intent	was	to	share	everything
AFO	had	learned	to	this	point,	 and	to	build	a	good	enough	shared	vision	of	 what
was	actually	happening	on	the	 ground.	I	wanted	 to	create	a	shared	reality,	not	a
plan.
   To	 kick	 off	 the	meeting,	Glenn	 shared	everything	we	knew	 about	the	enemy.
All	 source	intelligence	led	 us	to	believe	that	there	were	between	two	 hundred	to
a	thousand	enemy	fighters	in	the	valley.	The	terrain	and	weather	were	harsh,	and
the	people	in	the	area	were	precariously	ambivalent.
   Glenn	 was	followed	 by	a	major	 who	was	serving	 as	the	operations	officer	for
the	infantry	units	from	 the	101st	Airborne	 Division.	 The	101st	is	the	army’s	only
all-helicopter,	all-the-time	 division.	 They	 were	one	of	the	first	 units	to	 adopt	the
air-assault	 concept	 in	  the	 mid-’60s,	   which	  at	 the	 time	  was	  considered	 a
revolution	 in	 military	  tactics	and	 techniques.	The	air	 assault	was	 first	 used	in
combat	during	 the	opening	battle	 of	 the	Vietnam	 War,	the	 Battle	of	 LZ	 X-ray,
which	 was	later	 made	famous	 by	 the	book	 We	 Were	Soldiers	 Once	.	 .	 .	and
Young.
   The	 major	didn’t	 waste	any	words;	 he	unabashedly	announced	to	everyone	in
attendance	that	“the	 key	 to	success	here	is	 the	air	 assault	[helicopter	 assault].
Throughout	 history	 the	 helicopter	 has	 struck	 fear	 in	 the	 enemy’s	 heart.	The
psychological	impact	of	 helicopters	full	 of	troops	descending	suddenly	out	of	the
sky	will	 unhinge	 the	enemy	fighters.”	 With	 jaws	agape,	most	of	 the	special	ops
guys	in	the	room	just	stared,	waiting,	hoping	 that	maybe,	just	maybe,	there	was	a

202
punch	line,	but	 there	was	none.	I	knew	the	 major	from	 many	years	back	when	I
was	a	Ranger.	He	was	a	fine	infantry	officer.	 I	also	understood	that	this	was	how
he	was	trained:	he	believed	what	 he	was	saying,	it	 was	his	reality.	 The	meeting
ended	like	most	meetings	do,	with	a	decision	to	meet	again	the	next	day.
   The	 meeting	 took	 place	at	 Bagram	 inside	 a	tent	 that	bizarrely	  was	located
inside	a	warehouse.	Many	 of	the	 same	“players”	 were	present	for	 this	meeting,
but	in	the	twenty	 or	so	hours	that	had	passed	since	the	“psychological	 impact	of
the	helicopter”	 comments	 were	made	by	 the	major,	 his	 recommendation	to	 go
helicopter-centric	had	calcified	 into	 “the	plan.”	 AFO’s	 approach	to	preparing	by
developing	 the	 situation	  was	 colliding	   head-on	with	   the	 Military	   Decision
Making	Process.
   Standing	 in	 the	back	 of	 the	overcrowded	 tent,	 I	 listened	to	 the	same	major
brief,	 but	this	 time	 he	wasn’t	 talking	 about	 a	concept,	 he	was	talking	 about	 a
plan.	The	 101st	 was	advocating	 a	 daylight	 air	 assault	into	  the	valley.	  As	 he
talked,	a	couple	of	 leaders	from	the	CIA	 and	Special	 Forces	who	were	standing
next	to	me	near	the	back	of	the	tent	leaned	in	close	and	implored	me	to	share	my
perspectives	on	the	enemy,	the	terrain,	 and	the	use	of	 helicopters.	“Maybe	  you
can	convince	them	of	the	error	 of	their	ways,”	 they	whispered.	At	 the	end	of	 the
briefing,	 the	staff	 officer	 who	 was	facilitating	  the	 meeting	asked	if	 there	were
any	more	questions.	I	 strode	up	to	 the	front	 of	 the	tent,	introduced	 myself,	and
began	 sharing	 everything	  I	  knew	  about	  the	 enemy,	  the	 terrain,	  and	 the
environment	in	and	around	the	Shahi	Khot.
   “What	 do	you	think	 of	our	plan?”	 the	major	interrupted.
   I	  chose	my	  words	 carefully.	  “Understand	 that	 because	of	 the	 terrain	 and
altitude,	there	 are	only	 two	air	 corridors	 the	helicopters	 can	use	to	fly	  into	 the
valley,	 and	  you	 should	  assume	both	  will	  be	  covered	 by	 heavy	  weapons.
Remember	that	every	 enemy	on	 the	planet	 expects	the	U.S.	 military	  to	 attack
using	helicopters;	this	enemy	will	 be	no	different.	 The	time	it	 will	 take	the	large,
lumbering	Chinooks	 to	brake,	 flare,	hover,	 and	then	land	will	  make	you	 highly
vulnerable	to	the	enemy’s	 antiaircraft	 weapons.”	As	I	 finished	up	 my	eyes	were
drawn	 to	one	 of	 the	 leaders	in	 the	 front	 row	  whose	head	 spastically	 rocked
backward	 with	  narcoleptic	  indifference.	  Like	  many	 leaders,	  he	 likely	  was
burning	 the	 candle	 at	 both	  ends,	and	 having	 a	  hard	 time	 adjusting	  to	 the
vampire	cycle	of	combat	operations.	The	reality	 was	that	he	didn’t	 hear	a	thing	I
said;	in	actuality	 I	hadn’t	 shared	anything	with	him.	 The	planning	continued.

203
                                                         17



                                         REALITY	    CHECK:


                          WHAT’S	 YOUR	 RECOMMENDATION?

           THE	ENEMY:	Our	early	presence	in	it	gave	us	sufficient	experience	and
           much	knowledge	of	it	inside	and	out,	its	dangerous	parts	and	the	ways
           out	of	them,	and	allowed	us	to	master	their	use—by	the	bounty	of	Allah
           the	Most	 High—for	 our	 operations	with	 the	 Americans	when	Allah
           caused	us	to	encounter	them	in	that	area.	Maulawi	Jawad	was	Saif-ur-
           Rahman	Mansoor’s	military	commander	for	the	duration	of	the	previous
           phase	of	battles.	He	 had	 been	involved	in	 preparing	the	 bases	and
           occupied	with	arranging	and	fixing	 ambushes.	We	planted	land	mines
           accurately	in	the	main	roads,	which	led	 to	the	village,	and	 we	set	up
           heavy	artillery	on	the	surrounding	mountain	peaks.
              In	 the	 early	days,	we	 spent	all	 our	time	 preparing	the	 area.	Our
           numbers	totaled	  440	 mujahideen	in	  all,	  comprising	 175	  Afghan
           mujahideen	from	Saif-ur-Rahman	Mansoor’s	group,	 190	 mujahideen
           from	the	Islamic	Movement	of	Uzbekistan	under	the	command	of	Qari
           Muhammad	Tahir	Jan	(this	was	the	largest	group),	and	about	75	Arab
           mujahideen,	the	majority	of	whom	had	previous	military	knowledge	and
           training.”1

To	ensure	we	stayed	in	sync	with	 the	10th	Mountain	Division,	 Spider	and	I
traveled	from	the	Gardez	safe	house	to	Bagram	once	or	twice	each	week	to	meet
face-to-face	with	  General	Hagenbeck.	Dressed	 in	 the	  half-Afghan,	 half-
commando	motif	of	scarves,	chitrali	hats,	hip	holsters,	and	long,	unkempt	hair
and	beards,	we	blended	in	well	with	the	Afghans,	but	stood	out	like	sore	thumbs
back	at	Bagram,	where	the	desert	utility	uniform	was	all	the	rage.
   By	this	point	we	had	developed	a	solid	relationship	with	General	Hagenbeck.
Based	mostly	on	mutual	respect,	Spider	and	I	admired	the	guy	as	both	a	general
officer	and	as	a	person.	He	was	a	great	listener	and	seemed	to	have	a	mission-
first,	people-first	approach	to	every	decision.	He	didn’t	always	agree	with	what

204
we	had	 to	 say,	but	 he	 was	 always	 willing	  to	 discuss	and	 dive	 deeper	in	 an
attempt	to	come	to	a	mutual	understanding.
   Although	  he	technically	  had	no	 formal	 authority	 over	 either	 of	 us,	I	 didn’t
need	a	memo	or	an	organizational	 line	 and	block	chart	 to	tell	 me	that	I	 worked
for	him.	 He	was	 the	commanding	general	of	 all	 forces	that	 were	going	to	 fight
the	battle,	and	I	 was	the	commander	of	 the	interagency	reconnaissance	effort—
my	information	 was	his	information.
   I	  believed	  our	 boundary	  spanning	 to	 be	  nonnegotiable	 at	 this	  stage	of
preparation	for	the	operation.	 I	was	going	 to	send	my	men	into	 the	valley	 ahead
of	his	troops,	 and	both	of	 our	forces	were	 going	to	 be	fighting	 the	same	enemy
on	 the	 same	 chaotic	  battlefield.	  Lack	  of	 communication	  and	 coordination
between	 our	  organizations	 would	   be	 a	  surefire	  recipe	 for	  fratricide	   and
squandered	 opportunities.	    Unfortunately,	   my	   belief	   in	    the	  import	    of
boundarylessness	was	not	shared	by	my	administrative	higher	headquarters.
   Somehow,	  word	  of	 AFO’s	   collaborative	  relationship	  with	  the	 CIA	  and
General	 Hagenbeck	 got	 back	 to	 the	  TF	 11	 commanding	  general	 in	 North
Carolina,	and	word	on	the	street	was	that	he	was	furious.2
   Later	 that	 night,	after	 returning	 to	Gardez,	 I	was	 talking	 with	 Speedy	in	 the
TOC	when	the	satellite	phone	rang.	It	was	a	colonel	from	 the	TF	11	headquarters
back	in	North	Carolina.3
   “Pete,	 the	CG	[commanding	 general]	is	really	 pissed	at	you.	He	thinks	 you’re
pushing	the	envelope	by	 sending	your	guys	 into	that	 valley,	 and	it’s	 infuriating
him	 that	 you’re	 working	  so	 closely	 with	  the	10th	 Mountain	  and	 CIA.	  He’s
talking	 about	relieving	 you	 and	bringing	 you	 home	unless	you	 stop.”4	I	 didn’t
respond;	I	couldn’t	  respond;	I	 was	floored.	 How	much	 more	bizarre	 could	 this
get—up	until	  this	 point	 I	  had	 been	dealing	 with	  three	 major	 obstacles:	 the
terrain,	 the	weather,	and	the	enemy.	Now	there	were	four.	 I	thanked	the	colonel
for	the	heads-up	(he	was	taking	a	huge	career	risk	by	calling	me	and	sharing	that
information)	 and	told	him	I	needed	time	to	think	 about	what	he	said.
   I	 hung	up	the	receiver	and	walked	 outside.	The	road	in	front	 of	the	safe	house
was	closed	to	vehicular	traffic.	  We	had	two	checkpoints	 manned	by	our	Afghan
allies;	each	checkpoint	 was	 positioned	one	 and	a	half	 miles	 down	 the	road	 in
opposite	directions	from	the	safe	house	front	door.	With	 the	ever-present	howl	of
wild	Afghan	 dogs	in	the	distance,	I	buttoned	 up	my	collar,	 pulled	my	chitrali	 hat
down	over	my	ears,	leaned	westward	into	the	wind,	and	started	walking.
   Even	 though	it	was	freezing	cold	 outside,	I	was	smoking-hot	 pissed-off	on	the

205
inside.	As	I	walked,	 my	emotions	began	to	run	rampant	over	 my	common	sense.
What	the	hell	 does	this	guy	 got	against	me?	What	 the	hell	 did	I	 do	to	 piss	him
off?	Screw	him,	screw	me,	screw	this,	 screw	that	was	pretty	 much	the	upshot	of
my	irrational	 and	short-lived	 brooding.	 Time	spent	walking	 through	 the	Afghan
night	 was	 the	 best	 prescription	  to	 counteract	 and	 stabilize	 my	  emotionally
plagued	mind.	The	common	sense	of	the	3Ms	provided	the	cure.
   What	 was	my	mission?	I	asked	myself.	Go	 out	there	and	find	’em,	 then	kill	 or
capture	’em,	was	what	 General	Franks	told	 me.	It	 also	was	what	I	 was	sure	the
American	people	 and	the	president	expected	me	 and	my	 men	were	risking	 our
lives	 for.	  That	  was	 my	  mission,	 and	  we	 were	  doing	 the	  right	  things	 to
accomplish	it.
   What	 was	my	responsibility	 to	my	 men?	Under	my	command	 in	Gardez	were
three	operational	  teams	totaling	  thirteen	 men,	 seemingly	 paltry	  numbers	 by
classical	dismounted	 warfare	  standards,	but	 they	 were	 thirteen	 of	  the	 finest
warriors	to	 have	ever	 stepped	foot	 on	any	battlefield.	  They	had	 prepared	their
entire	 lives	 for	 a	 mission	 like	  this	 one.	 Over	 the	 past	few	  weeks	they	 had
repeatedly	risked	their	 lives	 to	 develop	the	 situation	and	 the	opportunities	 that
now	lay	 before	 us.	We	 weren’t	 in	 competition	 with	 the	 10th	Mountain	  or	the
CIA,	and	I	 never	thought	of	them	as	separate	organizations;	I	considered	them	as
fellow	 Americans.	To	 accomplish	our	 common	mission,	 we	had	to	work	 with	 a
common	purpose,	not	at	 cross	purposes.	Those	were	the	men,	and	I	 was	sure	I
was	doing	the	right	thing	by	 all	of	them.
   As	 for	 me,	I	 wondered	what	 the	opportunity	 cost	would	 be	if	 we	 didn’t	 take
advantage	of	 this	 situation.	 We	 estimated	that	 there	were	 three	 hundred	to	 a
thousand	enemy	  fighters	 occupying	  the	 same	 valley	  stronghold	  where	 the
mujahideen	had	fought	 and	 defeated	the	Soviets	 just	fifteen	 years	 earlier.	The
enemy	was	concentrated	in	one	large—albeit	 difficult-to-access—location.	 How
many	of	 them	 were	directly	 or	 indirectly	  involved	 in	 9/11?	How	  many	future
suicide	 bombers	 could	 we	  kill	  or	 capture	 now,	  while	  they	 were	 clustered
together	in	 the	Afghan	 mountains,	 before	 they	had	 an	opportunity	 to	 disperse
across	the	globe	and	kill	innocent	civilians	 in	the	future?
   By	  refocusing	 on	the	 mission	 and	the	 men,	and	 leaving	 the	 me	out	 of	 the
equation,	I	 was	able	to	view	 the	 overall	 situation	from	 an	altitude	 that	allowed
me	to	understand	the	 key	 underlying	 patterns	through	 the	unemotional	 lens	of
common	sense.
   I	 vowed	 I	 wouldn’t	  waste	another	precious	 second	worrying	 about	 why	 the
commanding	 general	disliked	  me,	or	 whether	 he	 would	 relieve	 me	 from	 my

206
command	 and	 destroy	 my	  career.	 Operationally	  pushing	 the	 envelope	 and
closely	coordinating	 with	 General	Hagenbeck	and	the	CIA	 were	the	right	things
for	the	 mission,	the	 right	 things	for	 my	 men,	and	(as	an	 American	 citizen)	 the
right	thing	for	 me.	I	had	a	mission	to	accomplish,	and	the	men	were	waiting.



                                                    February	    26


In	 the	  small	 windowless	  rooms	  below	  the	 towers,	  the	 three	 AFO	  teams
conducted	final	 preparations	for	 their	 infiltrations.	  The	teams	pored	over	 maps
and	imagery	of	their	routes	and	objectives	in	an	attempt	to	collaboratively	 update
what	they	 already	 knew,	 and	corroboratively	  refine	 what	 they	 still	 needed	to
know.	Not	 a	single	PowerPoint	 slide	was	ever	shown,	there	were	no	 VTCs,	and
there	was	no	traditional	plan.
   Later	 that	day,	a	thin,	unkempt	 Afghan	male,	 with	dust	on	his	 face,	an	AK-47
on	his	back,	and	a	chip	on	his	shoulder,	walked	up	to	one	of	our	 checkpoints	and
requested	to	 “talk	  with	  the	 Americans.”5	  The	 individual	  professed	 to	 be	 a
Taliban	squad	leader	with	thirteen	soldiers	in	 his	squad.	He	estimated	there	were
somewhere	between	580	and	700	 enemy	in	 the	Shahi	 Khot	 Valley,	 occupying
fighting	 positions	 in	 the	mountains.	He	 explained	 that	the	fighters	 came	down
only	 to	get	 food,	 which	 was	delivered	 daily	 by	 couriers	 from	 a	 nearby	town.
When	asked	about	 his	motivation	  for	 telling	 us	 the	information,	  he	explained
that	it	 was	because	he	was	fed	 up	with	 the	 way	the	 foreign	 Al	 Qaeda	fighters
treated	the	Afghans.	 “Like	  we	are	dogs,”	 he	explained.	 The	enemy	 segregated
itself	 into	  three	 tiers,	 with	  Al	  Qaeda	 (foreign	  Arabs)	 on	 top,	  Uzbeks	 and
Chechens	in	the	middle,	 and	Afghan	 Taliban	 on	the	bottom.	 A	 caste	system	of
sorts,	where	  the	 Arab	 fighters	  actually	  forbade	 the	 Taliban	  from	 speaking
directly	to	 them.6	A	rigid	 hierarchy,	no	communication,	 no	shared	reality,	 we’re
in	business,	I	thought.



                                            Sunrise,	  February	     27


The	teams	were	now	ready.	All	 of	 AFO	 gathered	in	the	Gardez	TOC.	A	 vicious
blizzard	 howled	outside,	 the	wind	  pounding	the	 loose	plastic	 on	 the	windows
with	every	 blow.	 It	was	really	 cold,	so	everyone	migrated	 toward	the	 potbellied

207
stove	in	the	 center	of	the	 room.	Spider	and	 many	of	 the	Special	Forces	leaders
along	with	 the	overall	 Afghan	 commander	also	were	present.	Each	team	shared
the	details	of	 their	mission—their	  routes,	their	observation	 post	(OP)	locations,
the	 equipment	  they	  would	  carry,	  their	  communications	   information,	  and
anything	else	they	could	think	of.
   Everyone	  in	 the	 room	 had	 the	 opportunity	  to	 ask	 questions	 and	 provide
advice.	The	Afghan	 commander	opined	that	avoiding	 contact	with	 civilians	 was
likely	  our	  toughest	 challenge	 for	  remaining	  undetected	 during	  infiltration.
“Whenever	possible,	avoid	contact.	If	 they	get	only	 a	brief	look	 at	you,	they	will
be	unsure	of	themselves,	and	 it	may	 be	days	before	 they	come	in	 contact	with
anyone	to	tell.	But	 if	they	 see	you	face-to-face,	they	will	 likely	 feel	 they	have	to
report	you	for	 fear	 of	Taliban	 retribution,”	  he	explained	in	 broken	English.	 We
took	his	commonsense	advice	to	heart.	All	 the	teams	added	clothing	 accessories
that	helped	disguise	their	 non-Afghan	 profiles	 when	viewed	 from	 afar,	or	 from
cursory	glances	closer	up.	The	 teams	never	stopped	adjusting	and	refining	 their
concepts;	for	AFO,	the	window	 for	good	ideas	never	closed.
   Juliet	 team	 (five	 men)	 would	 infiltrate	  from	 the	north	 and	 occupy	the	 high
ground	on	the	east	side	of	 the	valley	 (see	Map	5).	 They	would	 not	 be	walking.
After	 hundreds	of	hours	of	 experimenting	and	studying	 the	northern	approaches
to	the	 Shahi	Khot,	 Kris	  K.	 and	his	 team	came	up	 with	 a	 novel	 idea	for	 their
infiltration—the	  use	of	 all-terrain	 vehicles	(ATVs),	  to	 penetrate	the	valley	 and
climb	up	the	eastern	ridge.7	But	 these	were	not	your	run-of-the-mill	  ATVs;	 they
were	specially	 modified	 by	the	 Unit	 mechanics.	Engines	and	suspensions	were
beefed	up,	 and	 superquiet	mufflers	  were	 the	standard.	 Juliet	 team	 would	 be
riding	into	 battle	on	four-wheeled	chariots.
   India	 team	(three	men)	 would	walk	 into	 the	valley	 from	 the	west	and	occupy
the	high	ground	in	the	southwestern	portion	of	the	valley.	 They	would	 overwatch
the	main	 enemy	(and	friendly)	  avenue	of	 approach	into	 the	valley,	 which	 was
shaped	like	and	appropriately	named	the	fishhook.
   Mako	 31	(five	 men)	would	move	along	the	route	that	India	 team	reconnoitered
during	their	 environmental	 recon,	to	a	spot	that	 all	of	 us	believed	to	 be	the	key
piece	of	terrain	in	the	valley.	 Called	the	finger,	it	 was	on	the	southern	edge	of	the
valley,	 and	jutted	  northward	 like	 a	 dagger	at	 the	 heart	of	 the	 valley.	  If	 you
controlled	the	finger,	you	 could	control	the	entire	valley	 (see	Map	5).
   When	 occupied,	we	 believed	these	three	positions	 would	 provide	 us	with	 an
eagle-eye	view	 of	the	 entire	valley;	 and	 collectively	 allow	  us	to	see	the	 entire
battlefield.

208
   After	  all	three	teams	had	shared	their	concepts,	I	 gave	them	a	quick	 recap	of
my	expectations.	We	had	three	primary	tasks:	to	confirm	 or	deny	the	presence	of
the	enemy;	to	 check	 that	the	 helicopter	 landing	 zones	were	clear	 for	 the	10th
Mountain	troops;	 and	to	destroy	 or	capture	the	enemy.	While	 I	 talked,	I	 looked
into	the	eyes	of	each	man	and	sensed	that	this	might	have	been	the	first	time	that
some	of	them	 grasped	the	collective	 audacity	of	 what	they	 were	about	to	 carry
out.	Sneaking	 up	 and	 over	ten-thousand-foot	 snow-covered	 mountains	 into	 a
valley	 occupied	  by	 three	 hundred	 to	  a	 thousand	 hard-core	 enemy	 fighters
without	 being	 detected	 hadn’t	 been	attempted	 too	 many	 times	 before	 in	 the
history	 of	 modern-day	combat,	 so	they	 definitely	  had	reason	to	 be	 reflective.
Most	of	the	guys	were	also	still	 a	bit	skeptical	 that	we	were	actually	going	 to	get
final	 approval	 for	 the	 mission.	 Like	  me,	 they	 had	all	 been	 through	 a	 lot	 of
mission	 preparations	that	 went	 right	 up	 to	 the	 threshold	 of	 execution	 before
someone	lost	his	nerve	and	called	 the	whole	thing	 off.	 “Guys,”	  I	told	 them,	“at
this	point	we’re	 not	waiting	 for	 permission;	we’re	 going	in	 tomorrow	 night.	The
mission’s	a	go.”
   Afterward,	 I	 walked	outside	with	 Speedy.	As	so	often	happened	in	Gardez,	the
weather	changed	180	degrees	in	minutes.	The	sky	was	now	clear,	the	moon	was
full,	 and	its	reflective	glow	 off	 the	surrounding	snow-covered	mountains	made	it
seem	like	  daylight	  in	 a	 black-and-white	  movie.	  With	  one	 of	 his	 signature
sarcastic	smiles	creeping	onto	his	face,	Speedy	spoke	first.	“Sir,	 now	 I	know	 for
sure	you	 don’t	 really	 care	 whether	 I	 live	 or	 die.”	 I	 smiled	 back	 and	replied,
“Speedy,	your	 dying	 is	none	of	 my	 concern.	It’s	 not	 that	I	 don’t	 care,	it’s	 just
that	I	know	how	 good	you	are,	so	I	don’t	 have	to	worry	about	you	 dying.	You’re
uniquely	 qualified	  to	 execute	this	 mission.	 This	 is	 your	 destiny.”	  We	 shook
hands	in	  the	 moonlight;	  then	 Speedy	 turned	 and	 headed	back	  to	 his	 tent.
“Thanks,	 sir!”	  he	yelled	  over	 his	 shoulder.	“For	  what?”	 I	  yelled	 back.	 “For
letting	me	fulfill	  my	destiny.”	 I	couldn’t	 tell	 if	 he	was	being	sincere,	sarcastic,	or
both.
   Next	 I	headed	over	to	see	if	Goody	had	any	final	 issues	or	questions.	I	wanted
to	make	 sure	I	 reinforced	  to	him	  how	 important	 I	 believed	 his	mission	 was.
Since	 Goody	 and	 his	  SEALs	  were	 late	 arrivals,	  they	  hadn’t	 had	 time	  to
participate	in	the	environmental	recons	with	 the	other	two	teams.	But	Goody	had
done	a	great	job	of	tapping	 into	the	other	teams’	 knowledge	and	lessons,	and	he
had	read	all	the	context-rich	information	  that	the	rest	of	us	had.	He	and	his	team
were	in	 the	courtyard	 conducting	 final	 precombat	 checks:	test-firing	 weapons,
conducting	radio	checks,	and	ripping	apart	their	 backpacks	one	last	time	to	see	if

209
they	could	find	any	weight	 savings.
   “So	 what	 do	 you	think?”	  I	 asked	him.	 “Sir,	 this	 is	 one	hell	 of	 a	mission.	 I
really	appreciate	you	 bringing	 us	out	 here	to	 be	a	part	of	 it.”	  “Hey,	 I’m	 really
glad	you’re	 here,”	I	 told	him.	 Then	I	 nudged	his	shoulder	to	 ensure	that	he	was
looking	at	 me.	“Goody,	 the	success	or	failure	of	 your	mission	 will	 predicate	the
success	or	 failure	 of	  the	 entire	 operation;	 you	 have	 to	 make	 it	  to	 that	 OP
[observation	post]	 before	 H-hour.”	 Goody	 didn’t	 flinch;	  it	 seemed	like	 he	had
already	 internalized	  how	  critical	  his	  OP	 was	  to	 the	  overall	  mission.	 He
responded	with	the	courage	and	candor	of	a	true	warrior.	 “Sir,	I’ll	  make	it	 to	my
OP	come	hell	 or	high	 water,	 if	 we’re	 hurting	 on	time,	 we’ll	 drop	 our	rucks.	 If
we’re	still	 having	problems,	we’ll	  keep	dropping	gear	until	 five	naked	guys	with
guns	are	standing	on	the	OP	at	H-hour.”	Where	do	we	get	such	men?	I	thought	as
Goody	went	back	 to	his	precombat	checks.	As	 I	 walked	away,	Goody	 yelled	 to
me,	“Hey,	 sir,	 do	 you	 think	 I	 should	 take	a	 camera	with	 me?”	 “What’s	  your
recommendation?”	 I	 responded.	 “Well,	  if	  we	 find	 some	 critical	  intelligence
that’s	important	  to	the	 rest	 of	 the	force,	 I	 always	 figure	 a	 picture	is	 worth	 a
thousand	words,	so	I	 think	 we	should	take	 it.”	 He	didn’t	  need	me	to	affirm	 his
rationale;	 he	was	 already	 stuffing	 the	 camera	back	 into	 his	 backpack.	 “Hey,
Panther,”	he	added,	“just	 make	 sure	those	10th	Mountain	 guys	 know	 we’re	up
there.”	 Like	 the	 rest	 of	 us,	Goody	 was	 worried	  about	the	 high	 potential	 for
fratricide.
   The	 10th	Mountain	plan	was	based	on	the	classic	military	“hammer	 and	anvil”
maneuver.	The	 Special	 Forces	 in	 Gardez	 (the	 hammer)	 would	  lead	 a	truck
convoy	of	 Afghans	 from	 our	safe	house	to	the	 fishhook	 (see	Map	5)	 and	enter
the	Shahi	Khot	 Valley	 from	 the	west	to	 clear	the	western	portion	 of	 the	valley.
Planners	believed	this	 maneuver	would	 cause	the	enemy	to	 flee	 east—into	the
anvil.	 The	responsibility	  for	 the	anvil	 went	 to	the	 soldiers	from	 the	 101st	and
10th	Mountain,	 who	 would	 fly	 into	 the	valley	 on	 CH-47s,	and	land	 on	eastern
sections	of	the	valley	floor.t
   The	 plan	didn’t	  make	much	 sense	to	a	lot	 of	 the	participants,	 especially	the
Special	Forces.	With	well	 over	four	 hundred	Afghans	they	 had	the	biggest	force
on	the	battlefield,	 and	had	the	 most	to	lose	if	 any	 of	the	 complex	intricacies	 of
the	plan,	such	as	the	timing	 or	 the	location	 of	 the	CH-47	 landings	didn’t	 occur
exactly	when	and	where	they	 were	supposed	to.	An	anvil	 is	 by	nature	supposed
to	be	solid,	 yet	 the	plan	 for	 the	 positioning	 of	 the	anvil	 seemed	quite	 porous.
There	was	 a	 lot	 of	 derision	 back	 at	 Bagram	 between	leaders	 of	 the	 Special
Forces	and	the	101st	over	 the	plan,	 but	I	 couldn’t	 worry	 too	 much	about	 what

210
was	out	of	AFO’s	 control.	 I	figured	 that	as	long	as	the	three	AFO	teams	got	into
position	to	 dominate	the	valley	 from	 the	key	 terrain,	we	could	 buy	time	 for	 the
troops	on	the	ground	until	they	got	it	 right.



                                    Sundown,	    February	    27,	 2002


On	the	road	 in	 front	 of	 the	safe	house,	the	 three	teams	prepared	to	 move	out.
Two	 Toyota	4x4	 trucks,	 driven	 by	 five	 AFO	 members	would	  carry	India	 and
Mako	31	teams	to	their	 drop-off	 points	south	of	 the	valley.	 Lined	 up	behind	the
Toyotas	were	the	four	 ATVs,	  on	which	 the	five	 members	of	 Juliet	team	would
ride	into	 battle	 (one	ATV	  would	 carry	 two	 men).	 Up	 in	 the	air,	 prowling	 the
teams’	routes	ahead	of	them	was	an	armada	of	pilotless	surveillance	aircraft	 that
beamed	their	images	back	to	our	TOC	and	many	others	around	the	globe.
   Seconds	after	darkness	won	its	 nightly	 duel	with	 light,	 I	 watched	through	my
night-vision	 goggles	as	the	convoy	 slowly	 rolled	away	 from	 the	safe	house	and
headed	southeast	toward	the	mountains	surrounding	Shahi	Khot.	Within	 seconds
Juliet	team	split	 off	 from	the	convoy	 and	headed	overland	to	proceed	with	 their
infiltration.
   With	  night-vision	 goggles	on	their	 heads	and	ATVs	beneath	their	 hinds,	they
used	GPS	navigation	devices	strapped	to	the	gas	tank	between	their	legs,	to	pick
their	way	 through	 the	hardscrabble	and	deeply	 rutted	 terrain	along	 their	 route.
The	radio	  headset	each	man	 wore	 allowed	 him	  the	option	  of	 talking	  to	 his
teammates,	talking	 directly	  with	 the	 surveillance	 aircraft	  flying	  overhead,	or
talking	with	 me	and	Glenn	back	in	 Gardez.	Even	though	their	 original	 route	had
them	circumnavigating	 all	human-occupied	areas,	the	canalized	terrain	left	 them
with	 no	 choice	 but	  to	 drive	 smack	 through	 the	 middle	  of	 the	 tiny	  enemy-
occupied	town	of	Menewar	 (see	Map	5).	The	superquiet	mufflers	and	their	20/20
night	 vision	 capability	 allowed	 them	 to	 surgically	 pick	 their	 way	 through	 the
town	with	 only	a	few	 dogs	detecting	their	presence.	Outside	the	town	they	broke
into	the	gently	 ascending	slopes	of	the	Shahi	Khot	 Mountains.	 The	team	passed
through	an	enemy	minefield,	underneath	an	enemy-occupied	heavy	machine-gun
position,	 and	up	 the	 side	of	 the	 eastern	wall	 of	 the	 valley.	 Their	 first-choice
observation	post	 (OP)	 didn’t	  have	 sufficient	  cover	 and	concealment,	 despite
what	the	map	and	satellite	photo	had	portrayed,	so	they	 continued	moving	 south
along	the	 ridge	toward	 their	 alternate	 OP,	which	 they	 found	 to	 their	 mission-
oriented	liking.

211
   At	 4:45	A.M.,	 Kris	 called	me:	“Juliet	 team	is	in	position.”
   South	 of	the	 valley,	 two	4x4	 pickup	 trucks	approached	India	 and	Mako	 31’s
drop-off	 position	with	 lights	 off,	 night-vision	 goggles	on,	and	guns	up.	 As	soon
as	the	 vehicles	 stopped,	 members	of	  India	 and	 Mako	 31	  unloaded	in	  slow
motion,	taking	 great	care	 to	prevent	 any	hard	object	 from	 clanging	 against	the
metal	cab	of	the	vehicle.	 Once	unloaded,	the	men	silently	 slung	their	 backpacks
over	their	shoulders,	tightened	their	 straps	down	as	tight	as	their	biceps	allowed,
and	began	their	stealthy	treks	upward	into	the	mountains.
   After	  a	kilometer	 of	 moving	together,	 the	teams	split	 toward	their	 individual
OPs.	India	  team’s	 route	 was	 short	 and	 steep;	 a	 seven-kilometer	 movement
seemed	like	park	strolling	 compared	to	 the	“into	 thin	 air”	 movement	they	made
during	their	 environmental	recon,	just	 three	days	earlier.	At	 10,500	feet,	 India’s
team	of	 three	stopped	just	 short	 of	 the	edge	of	 the	cliff.	  All	  three	India	 team
members	 laid	  down	   flat	  to	  avoid	  being	  silhouetted	  from	   below.	  After
unshouldering	 his	ruck,	  Bob	 H.	 scootched	forward	  on	his	 belly.	  He	 stopped
behind	a	 small	 pile	 of	  rubble.	 Canting	 his	 head	slowly,	  he	 spied	the	 valley
below.	His	 eyes	and	 ears	strained	to	detect	 any	unnatural	 noise	or	 movement;
Bob	was	focused,	 like	 a	man	whose	finely	  tuned	autonomic	 nervous	system	is
programmed	to	maintain	 perfect	 equilibrium	 between	the	 thrill	 of	 the	hunt	 and
the	thrill	  of	 the	 chase.	Bob	 understood	his	 status	as	 both	the	 hunter	 and	the
hunted.	He	liked	 it	that	way.	 If	 you	could	 have	peered	back	through	his	thermal
scope,	you	 would	 have	 seen	an	 unmistakable	gleam	 in	 his	 eyes—it	 was	 the
gleam	of	pure,	unadulterated	courage.	Courage	has	been	called	a	contradiction	in
terms,	meaning	a	strong	desire	to	live	manifest	as	a	readiness	to	die.	It	described
Bob	and	his	mates	to	a	tee.
   From	 their	perch,	India	 team	could	directly	 overwatch	the	 fishhook	as	well	 as
the	southern	end	of	 Tergal	Ghar.	 They	were	 in	position	 to	 cover	the	route	 that
the	Special	Forces	and	 Afghans	 planned	to	use	 to	enter	the	 valley.	 As	 was	so
often	the	case,	India	team	confirmed	 to	their	 toughest	critics—themselves—that
they	had	chosen	their	position	well.
   At	  5:22	 A.M.,	 Speedy	 radioed	me	 with	 a	 simple	 message:	“India	 Team	 is
in.”8
   After	 breaking	 away	from	 India,	Goody	and	his	team	of	 five	 plodded	upward.
Snow,	rain,	 and	fierce	 winds	 swept	the	 ridgeline	 in	 waves.	Sometimes	misery
comes	with	an	asterisk.	It’s	 much	 easier	for	men	to	 tolerate	the	unrelenting	hell
of	 wet-cold,	 when	 they	 understand	 it	 also	 provides	 them	 with	  a	 hell	 of	 an
advantage	over	the	 enemy.	Although	  the	weather	 treats	both	sides	 with	 equal

212
disdain,	in	 this	 case,	the	 weather	definitely	  favored	 the	attackers.	 The	enemy
guards	standing	watch	 around	 the	valley	 were	 confined	 to	 the	abridged	 time-
distance	umbilical	  cord	 of	 their	 shelters	or	 warming	 fires,	  which	 meant	they
wouldn’t	 be	out	checking	the	perimeter	for	potential	Goodys	or	 Bobs.
   Goody	 coaxed	his	 men	onward.	 Despite	 their	 best	efforts,	 as	light	 began	to
peek	over	the	mountains,	Goody	 realized	he	would	 not	have	sufficient	  cover	of
darkness	to	reach	his	OP	before	daylight.	The	 final	 portion	of	 his	route	required
tortoiselike	 movements	 and	 surgical	 care	 to	 avoid	  detection	 by	 the	 enemy.
Goody	stopped	the	team	a	 thousand	meters	from	the	 OP.	At	 5:15	A.M.	  Goody
called	me	and	passed	both	his	location	and	his	intention	 of	 staying	still	 until	 the
next	night.	It	would	 turn	out	to	be	a	sagacious	decision.



                                            Sunrise,	  February	     28


Throughout	 the	night	  Juliet	 team	methodically	  trolled	 the	 surrounding	 valley
with	 their	 thermal	 night	 sights,	 catching	 numerous	enemy	 while	  they	moved
around	their	well-concealed	 fighting	 positions.	 They	immediately	 went	 to	work
pinpointing	 and	plotting	 the	locations.	 As	the	sun	rose,	Kris	 and	team	carefully
studied	the	Tergal	 Ghar	ridgeline	 with	  their	high-power	 spotting	 scopes.	Their
assessment:	Tergal	Ghar	was	infested	with	 enemy	fighting	 positions.	 After	 five
or	six	separate	reports,	he	called	me	on	the	satellite	radio	and	summarized,	“The
enemy	is	everywhere.”
   At	 about	midday,	Juliet	 team	alerted	to	the	sound	of	snow-crunching	footsteps
approaching	their	OP	from	 behind.	With	 cheeks	melded	to	their	 M-4	stocks,	the
entire	team	watched	as	four	fast-talking	enemy	fighters,	 carrying	their	 RPGs	and
AK-47s	like	 luggage,	walked	 directly	 in	front	 of	their	 position	and	stopped.	The
enemy	stared	at	 the	ATV	  tracks	 in	 the	snow.	 While	 Kris	  watched	the	 drama
unfold	from	 his	well-concealed	 nook	on	the	boulder-strewn	 cliff,	 he	steadied	his
team.	Then,	using	the	slow,	deliberate	whisper	 of	a	man	within	 spitting	 distance
of	the	enemy,	he	contacted	me	on	the	radio	and	asked,	“What	do	you	want	me	to
do?”
   “What’s	  your	recommendation?”	I	whispered	back.
   “Well,	  if	  we	kill	  ’em	 now,	 the	whole	 valley	 will	  know	 we’re	 up	 here,	and
we’ll	 lose	the	 element	of	 surprise.	Let	 me	see	what	 they	do	 next.	I’ll	  call	 you
back.”
   While	   literally	   scratching	 their	  turbans	 in	  complete	  befuddlement,	 they

213
appeared	to	 be	discussing	 the	 same	question.	 Mother	  Nature	 made	up	 their
minds	for	 them	 with	 gale-force	 winds	 and	 thick,	 eye-poking	 snowflakes.	 The
four	fighters	 ducked	their	 snow-caked	beards	into	 their	 coats	and	continued	on
their	fast-talking	 way	down	toward	the	valley.
   Kris	 called	 me	and	described	the	situation.	“They	 didn’t	  seem	that	interested,
almost	like	they	were	too	busy,	or	had	to	be	somewhere.”
   Then	 he	added,	“We’ve	plotted	 the	grid	for	 the	cave	entrance	they	walked	out
of	and	will	  coordinate	a	bombing	 mission	on	it	 at	H-hour.”	  For	the	four	 enemy
fighters,	it	was	not	a	good	day	to	die.
   I	 sent	 a	summary	 of	 Juliet	team’s	 reports	 to	all	 other	 units	 involved	 in	 the
operation.	I	ended	the	message	with	three	words:	We’re	in	business.

           THE	  ENEMY:	   The	 snowfall	  upon	 the	 area	  intensified	 until	  it	  was
           entirely	 covered,	which	 delayed	the	time	of	 battle	we	had	scheduled.	We
           took	 advantage	 of	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 was	Eidu	  and	we	 spent	the	 day	 in
           renewing	 our	resolves,	preaching	to	one	another,	 and	praying	for	 victory
           or	 martyrdom.	 The	Uzbek	mujahideen	 also	held	 a	big	 party,	which	 was
           attended	by	most	of	the	mujahideen	in	the	area.



                                          Sundown,	   February	     28


When	night	returned,	Goody	and	his	team	began	methodically	slothing	 their	way
through	 the	  rocks	 toward	  their	  OP.	 Once	  again,	 the	 treacherous	 weather
befriended	them.	Thick	snowflakes	mixed	 with	 fog	erased	their	image	from	sight
of	any	 eyes	more	 than	a	few	 feet	 distant.	 Six	 hours	hence,	Goody	 called	 and
reported	he	had	stopped	a	few	hundred	meters	short	of	the	OP.
   A	 few	 moments	later	I	received	word	 from	 Jimmy	that	H-hour	 (the	scheduled
start	time	for	the	10th	 Mountain	attack)	 was	delayed	twenty-four	 hours.	“Why?”
I	asked.	“The	 bad	weather	made	 it	too	 risky	 for	 the	helicopters	to	 fly,”	  Jimmy
replied.	Once	again,	the	 capability	 and	limitations	 of	 helicopters,	instead	of	 the
enemy	situation	on	the	ground,	were	driving	 the	operational	decision-making.	H-
hour	was	 now	 set	for	 March	 2,	 at	6:30	 A.M.	  Although	 less	than	 thirty	 hours
away,	it	 was	 thirty	 additional	 hours	 that	 the	three	 AFO	 teams	would	 need	to
remain	undetected	from	the	enemy	while	 expending	another	day’s	worth	 of	life-
sustaining	battery	power	and	water	in	the	process.

214
                                                 Dawn,	   March	   1


Despite	the	reassurances	that	“every	available	satellite	 and	sensor”	was	focused
on	the	valley	 the	week	prior,	 none	of	the	satellites	or	 spy	planes	that	scoped	the
area	had	detected	or	revealed	any	enemy	 activity	 or	weapons	in	 the	mountains
around	the	 Shahi	 Khot.9	 The	 technological	  all-clear	 further	 convinced	 some
leaders	back	in	the	 States	that	it	 made	no	sense	to	risk	 men’s	lives	 conducting
long-range	infiltrations	  through	 the	mountains	 in	 inclement	 weather.	After	 all,
the	most	 technologically	 advanced	surveillance	 sensors	had	produced	 pictures
that	proved	there	were	no	enemy	and	no	weapons	to	be	found.	The	sit-reps	from
Juliet	team	already	told	 us	they	were	wrong,	 Goody	and	his	 team	were	about	to
prove	it.
   Much	  like	 in	  Vietnam,	 the	 enemy’s	 use	of	 low-tech	  guile	 in	 the	 form	 of
camouflage	tarps	 and	face-to-face	 communication	 was	 proving	 to	 be	 an	able
match	 for	  the	 highest	  of	  our	 high	  technology.	  The	 military	   and	 civilian
technocrats	back	home	didn’t	 understand	that	you	 can’t	 enforce	Moore’s	 Lawv
on	a	jurisdiction	such	as	Afghanistan:	Hajji	 don’t	 play	that	game.
   Worming	 their	 way	forward,	 the	SEAL	 snipers	spotted	movement.	There,	just
fifty	 meters	in	front	 of	them,	casually	strolling	 around	the	rock	cliff	  at	the	end	of
the	 finger,	   was	  a	 clean-shaven	  enemy	 fighter	   with	   reddish-brown	  hair,
camouflage	pants,	and	a	Gore-Tex	 jacket.	Off	 to	 his	right	 was	a	large	 tent,	too
large	for	a	 single	man.	A	 small	pipe	 protruded	from	 the	tent	top	 venting	smoke
from	what	 was	likely	 a	heating	and	cooking	 stove.	The	snipers	scanned	back	to
the	left;	 there,	on	the	tip	 of	 the	finger,	 the	exact	spot	we	had	designated	as	key
terrain	in	 the	 valley,	 stood	a	 tripod-mounted	 DShK	 antiaircraft	  weapon.	With
ammunition	 loaded	 and	stacked	 to	 the	 side	for	  immediate	 reload,	 the	heavy
machine	 gun	 was	 perfectly	  oriented	 toward	 the	 main	  helicopter	 infiltration
corridor	through	which	 the	lumbering	helicopters	planned	to	fly	 at	sunrise.
   The	 SEAL	  snipers	 steadied	their	 handheld	 digital	 camera	 to	 capture	clear
pictures	of	both	 the	DShK	 and	the	enemy	fighter.	 They	then	wormed	 backward
to	their	hidden	cove	in	the	rocks.
   Goody	 worked	 with	the	 sense	of	urgency	driven	by	 the	understanding	that	he
had	life-or-death	  information	   that	 needed	sharing.	 Blowing	   on	 his	 exposed
fingers	to	 make	them	nimble,	 he	pulled	 out	 his	Libretto	  mini-laptop	 computer,
and	connected	it	via	 a	USB	 port	to	 his	satellite	radio.	 He	then	downloaded	 and
labeled	the	photos	 “AFO	  commander	eyes	only.”	  He	sent	 the	photos	 to	me	 a

215
minute	later.	The	label	Goody	chose	was	meant	to	connote	the	“stop	the	presses”
importance	of	  the	pictures.	 He	 knew	 these	 three	or	 four	 pictures	 captured	 a
reality	that	up	 until	that	 moment	had	only	existed	 in	the	heads	of	the	men	in	 the
Gardez	safe	house.
   I	  forwarded	  the	 photos	 to	 Jimmy	  so	he	 could	  share	them	  with	 General
Hagenbeck	and	his	 staff.	 I	 also	attached	a	 note	underscoring	 that	 the	fighters
seen	by	Mako	 31,	India,	 and	 Juliet	were	 well	 armed,	on	 the	high	 ground,	and
ready	 to	 fight.	  Then	 I	  added,	 “The	  three	 AFO	  teams	are	 now	  occupying
dominant	terrain	and	are	a	few	 hours	away	from	 being	in	position	 to	control	 the
entire	valley.”
   Because	Goody	 was	within	 whisper	 range	of	 the	enemy,	he	used	secure	text
messaging	to	discuss	the	situation	with	me:
   Goody:	 What	do	you	want	me	to	do	about	the	enemy?
   Me:	 What’s	your	 recommendation?
   Goody	 (long	 pause):	I	want	to	make	sure	we	maintain	 the	element	of	surprise
as	close	to	H-hour	as	possible.	I	will	 wait	until	 H	minus	two	 [hours].	At	 H	minus
two	I	 will	 start	 moving;	 that	will	 allow	 me	 to	take	my	 time	 getting	in	 position.
I’ll	 engage	at	H	minus	one,	and	then	follow	up	with	 AC-130.
   He	 then	 sent	a	follow-up	  message:	I	 understand	that	you	 have	to	 make	the
decision	on	this	and	I’ll	 support	any	decision	you	make.
   I	 sent	him	a	two-word	reply:	 “Good	 hunting.”
   Goody	 would	 later	tell	 me	 how	relieved	 he	was	to	 get	my	 response.	He	was
worried	that	 someone	higher	in	the	TF	 11	chain	of	 command	would	 disapprove
of	 his	 recommendation	 to	 take	 out	 the	enemy	 OP	 because	Mako	  31	 was	a
reconnaissance	team,	not	an	assault	team.10	As	it	turned	out,	 he	was	right.	 The
message	I	 sent	 with	  the	 pictures	 attached	caused	 quite	 a	 bit	 of	  anxiety	 at
Masirah.	E-mails	 bounced	back	and	forth	advising	 that	AFO	should	 not	jump	 to
conclusions	 that	 this	 was	 the	 enemy,	 and	 that	  Mako	 31	 did	  not	 have	 the
sufficient	 amount	 of	 men	 to	attack	 the	 position,	 or	 the	doctrinal	  authority	 to
conduct	a	 direct	action	 mission.	 None	 of	 those	staff	 officers	 fully	  understood
AFO’s	mission,	 AFO’s	men,	or	me!
   A	 few	minutes	later	I	 sent	Goody	his	mission	statement.
   “Terminate	 with	 extreme	prejudice.”
   “Aye	 aye,”	 Goody	responded,	using	his	Navy	vernacular.w
   With	  each	new	report	of	 enemy	activity	  and	each	interactive	communication
among	the	teams,	I	 was	learning	 that	 commanding	a	 mission	 such	as	this	one

216
required	a	 delicate	balance	 between	asking	 and	telling,	  and	between	 working
with	 and	working	 for	 my	men.	As	 the	central	 gatekeeper	of	information	 to	 and
from	the	teams,	I	 may	have	had	the	best-aggregated	understanding	of	what	 was
going	on	 all	around	 the	valley,	 but	my	 understanding	of	 what	was	 going	on	 in
front	of	 each	team	was	dated	by	the	time	the	descriptive	words	left	their	 mouths.
I	could	 never	understand	the	reality	on	 the	ground	in	 front	of	 each	of	the	 teams
as	 well	  as	 they	  could.	 That’s	  reality,	   and	 coming	  to	  grips	 with	   it	  was
empowering.	The	success	or	failure	 of	 our	mission	 depended	on	their	ability	  to
execute;	my	job	 as	the	commander	was	to	 make	sure	they	 had	everything	 they
needed	to	make	it	happen.
   Both	  Goody	 and	Kris	  had	asked	me	 for	 guidance	 concerning	the	 life-and-
death	situations	confronting	 their	teams.	My	 response	in	both	situations	was	the
question	“What’s	 your	 recommendation?”	 While	 listening	 to	 their	 responses,	I
discovered	that	once	 the	man	on	 the	ground	 begins	describing	 the	situation	 in
front	of	 him,	 he	almost	always	ends	up	 revealing	the	solution	 nested	within	 his
description.	For	 AFO,	 the	 primary	 purpose	of	 the	 radio	 wasn’t	 command	and
control;	it	was	to	network	 ideas	and	insights	and	create	a	shared	reality.
   While	  Goody	 and	his	men	 laid	 in	 wait	 a	few	 feet	from	 the	 DShK	 position,
India	and	 Juliet	continued	 scrolling	 their	 prying	 eyes	across	the	valley.	 As	 the
day	wore	 on,	their	 reports	 of	 enemy	activity	  continued	to	 pile	 up.	They	 grew
concerned.
   “I	  would	 highly	 recommend	against	landing	 on	the	 valley	floor,”	  India	 team
said.
   “If	  they	land	as	planned,	they’ll	 be	pinned	 down,	and	there’s	no	way	 we’ll	 be
able	to	prevent	them	[the	enemy]	from	escaping,”	Juliet	 advised.
   The	 plan	was	 based	on	the	supposition	 that	the	 Afghans	and	 Special	Forces
would	 flush	 the	enemy	 from	 the	villages,	 directly	  into	 the	air	 assault-enabled
blocking	 positions.	But	 the	reality	 in	 the	valley	 was	that	the	enemy	was	 dug	in
on	the	high	ground,	not	 the	low,	 and	they	appeared	ready	to	fight,	not	 to	flee.	If
the	infantry	landed	on	the	valley	 floor,	the	only	 thing	they	would	 end	up	flushing
was	the	plan.
   Jimmy	    passed	  everything	   the	   teams	   reported,	   along	   with	   AFO’s
recommendations	concerning	the	plan,	 to	the	mountain	 staff.	 Nothing	 changed.
So	Jimmy	gathered	up	all	 the	pictures	and	reports	and	laid	them	out	 for	General
Hagenbeck’s	chief	 of	 staff	 (a	full	  colonel).	 “Sir,	 do	not	 land	 those	helicopters
[there],”	 Jimmy	 pleaded	while	pointing	 at	 the	valley	 floor.	 “The	 current	plan	is
not	going	 to	 work	  out	 for	 you.”	 The	 chief	 of	 staff	  replied	 apologetically,	 “I

217
know,	Jim,	but	it’s	 too	late	to	do	anything	about	it.”
   Authors	 of	 the	plan	at	Bagram	would	 later	explain	that	it	 was	unreasonable	to
expect	wholesale	 changes	because	writing	  the	 plan	 had	been	 such	a	 painful
process	of	compromise	 and	negotiation	 that	nobody	 could	face	the	 prospect	of
tearing	it	 up—or	  even	significantly	  modifying	  it	 at	 the	 eleventh	hour	 simply
because	the	enemy	might	not	be	where	they	were	supposed	to	be.
   Jimmy	  called	 me	back	 with	  the	sobering	 news.	 “They	 say	 it’s	 too	 late	 to
change	it;	they’re	still	 planning	to	land	on	the	valley	 floor.”
   I	 stepped	outside	into	the	courtyard	and	realized	that	once	again	the	tyranny	of
the	plan	was	trumping	 updated	information	 from	 the	man	on	the	ground	 and	its
by-product,	common	sense.	There	was	no	way	to	turn	 the	planning	machine	off,
and	 there	 was	 no	 way	  to	  alter	 its	  course.	 Even	 though	  we	 had	 updated
information,	 the	 plan	 was	the	 plan,	and	 the	staff	 had	 put	 so	much	 work	 into
putting	it	 together	that	 the	mission	itself	 no	 longer	had	anything	 to	do	 with	 the
reality	on	the	ground;	the	mission	was	to	execute	the	plan	on	time.
   To	 me	 that	moment	 perfectly	 summed	up	the	 futility	  of	traditional	  planning
versus	the	utility	 of	developing	 the	situation.	By	 pledging	 their	allegiance	to	 the
plan,	the	10th	 Mountain	 had	inadvertently	 surrendered	their	freedom	of	 choice.
As	a	result,	 the	entire	 force	was	operationally	  incarcerated	in	the	 prison	of	 the
plan,	and	this	plan	appeared	to	be	escape	proof.

           THE	  ENEMY:	  “The	  traitors	  and	 their	 American	  allies	 are	 going	 to
           attack	 soon,	we	need	to	bring	reinforcements	to	the	village.”
               “There	  is	  no	 need,”	 Maulawi	  Saif-ur-Rahman	  Nasrullah	 Mansoor
           responded.	 “We	  were	  in	 Shahi	  Koht	 during	  the	 first	  Afghan	  jihad
           [against	  the	Soviets].	 There	were	 six	mujahideen	 in	 total	 and	we	were
           surrounded	 by	 ten	tanks.	 Over	five	 air	 attacks	 were	staged	 on	us	 in	a
           single	  day	 and	 there	  were	 about	 one	  hundred	 Soviet	 soldiers	  who
           attacked	 us	from	 the	land.	 But	 all	 Praise	 belongs	to	 Allah	 alone—they
           were	 not	 able	to	 set	foot	 on	a	 single	hand-span	 of	the	 village,	 and	 we
           remained	 in	this	 same	state	for	about	one	week.”	 (These	were	the	words
           by	 which	Maulawi	 Saif-ur-Rahman	 Nasrullah	 Mansoor	responded,	when
           asked	 about	 the	  possibility	  of	 increasing	 the	  reinforcements	 for	  the
           village,	 to	prepare	for	 the	anticipated	American	 attack.)

   Ignoring	   the	 advice	  from	  his	  foot	  soldiers	 on	  the	 ground,	  the	  enemy
commander	was	adamant	that	 there	was	 no	need	for	 reinforcements.	 Mansoor
had	fought	under	 Haqqani	when	they	 defeated	the	Soviets	on	this	 very	 ground,

218
so	he	was	confident.	The	harsh	terrain	and	the	inhospitable	weather	would	surely
allow	 him	  to	 defeat	the	 lesser	 “creatures	 of	 comfort”	  Americans.	  That	 was
Mansoor’s	reality,	 and	he	made	it	clear	that	he	wasn’t	going	 to	change	his	mind,
no	matter	what	his	men	advised.	With	 his	decision,	the	enemy	fighters	inside	the
Shahi	Khot	 were	also	 operationally	 incarcerated;	along	 with	 their	 commander,
they	were	prisoners	of	precedent.

219
                                                         18



                                     THE	  BATTLE	   BEGINS:


                                         STAY	CALM,	 THINK!


                                          Sundown,	  March	   1


The	convoy	of	trucks	that	would	carry	our	Afghan	allies	into	battle	lined	up	on
the	road	outside	the	Gardez	safe	house.	I	watched	from	my	perch	in	the	northeast
watchtower	 as	  four	  hundred	 Afghans	  attempted	 to	  assemble	 into	  a
“Westernized”	version	of	a	military	formation.	There	was	something	odd	about
the	scene.	This	was	not	how	the	Afghans	were	used	to	organizing	themselves.
After	a	few	minutes	of	futility,	someone	screamed	something	in	Pashto,	and	they
all	raced	toward	their	assigned	trucks.	Like	a	circus	clown	car	in	reverse,	four
hundred	Afghan	soldiers,	each	with	his	own	weapon	and	pack,	stuffed	himself
into	the	eight	dilapidated	“jinga”	trucks.x	With	the	temperatures	diving	into	the
midtwenties,	the	Afghans	likely	appreciated	their	sardine-like	predicament	for
the	warmth	it	would	 provide	during	the	expected	two-hour	journey	down	the
lunar	landscape	road	that	led	to	the	Shahi	Khot	(see	Map	5).
   Just	before	midnight,	one	of	the	top-heavy	jinga	trucks	caromed	off	a	crater
and	tumbled	onto	its	side.	Seven	Afghans	were	wounded,	one	critically.	Men
were	screaming,	the	road	was	blocked,	and	the	convoy	fell	behind	schedule.
Two	more	 trucks	would	 tumble	before	the	 convoy	reached	the	valley.	The
insidious	effects	of	battlefield	friction	were	beginning	to	take	their	toll	 on	the
Afghan	soldiers	and	their	Special	Forces	advisors,	and	they	had	yet	to	encounter
a	single	enemy.
   A	 few	ticks	 after	midnight	(it	 was	now	March	2),	Goody	assessed	that	the
time	was	right	to	start	moving	into	position.	With	two	men	in	overwatch,	Goody
and	another	sniper	crept	forward.	Goody	was	cautious.	His	concern	was	with	the
unpredictability	of	the	human	animal.	You	can	never	predict	when	someone	will
decide	to	get	up	and	go	out	to	stretch	his	legs,	or	seek	out	a	place	where	he	can

220
be	alone,	or	to	find	a	spot	to	relieve	himself.	With	 this	fact	 in	mind,	although	still
hours	before	he	expected	to	initiate	 his	assault,	Goody	coordinated	with	 an	AC-
130	gunship	flying	 high	overhead	to	cover	his	movement.	Just	in	case!
   At	 exactly	 4:00	A.M.,	  just	as	Goody	expected,	the	unexpected	occurred.	One
of	 the	enemy	 fighters	 burst	 out	of	 the	 tent	 in	 search	of	 a	spot	 to	 relieve	 his
bladder.	As	 he	 meandered	purposefully	 through	 the	 rocks,	his	 path	 took	 him
directly	toward	 the	stock-still	 snipers.	Whether	he	caught	sight	of	the	Americans
or	whether	his	 senses	naturally	alerted	him	to	 something	unnatural,	no	 one	will
ever	know.	 Luckily	 for	 the	 team,	his	emotions	 betrayed	his	common	 sense:	he
panicked.	As	 if	 on	fire,	  he	ran	screaming	 toward	the	 tent	to	 alert	 his	sleeping
comrades.	Goody	 chose	to	 open	 fire,	 and	 with	 his	 feather-light	  touch	to	 the
trigger	of	 his	 M-4,	 he	fired	 the	 opening	shots	 of	Operation	 Anaconda.	 Within
minutes,	three	 of	 the	 five	 enemy	were	 dead;	 two	 others	clawed	 and	 crawled
toward	the	 valley.	 As	 Goody	pulled	 back,	 the	AC-130	  took	over	 and	used	its
precision	optics	and	lethality	to	 stop	their	crawl.
   Goody	 called	 me.	“Mission	  accomplished.	Position	 terminated	with	  extreme
prejudice.”
   “Good	  job,”	 I	  responded.	“Any	  intel?”	 Goody	 located	 one	of	  the	fighters’
journals;	 inside	  was	 the	 fighter’s	  commentary	  on	 the	 enemy’s	  day-by-day
activities	leading	 up	to	 the	battle.	It	 also	 contained	an	encyclopedia	of	 terrorist
tactics	and	 tricks,	  which	 included	 highly	  detailed	 sketches	and	 formulas	 for
booby	traps,	bombs,	 and	bombers.	The	 one	chapter	it	 didn’t	  have	was	how	 to
defend	against	Americans	who	infiltrate	 over	eleven-thousand-foot	peaks.
   All	  three	AFO	teams	were	now	in	position	to	dominate	the	valley.
   Sitting	  in	the	 Gardez	TOC,	 I	 pulled	 out	the	interview	  article	 from	 Haqqani.
Don’t	 believe	everything	you	hear	 about	Americans	being	 creatures	of	comfort,
Mr.	Haqqani.	 It’s	not	reality!

           THE	 ENEMY:	  At	 midnight	 on	Saturday,	 the	airplane	 activity	  upon	the
           village	  increased,	 which	  caused	some	 brothers	  to	 anticipate	  a	 near
           attack.	 No	sooner	 did	the	 clock	strike	 four	 in	 the	morning,	 than	the	 air
           attacks	began	on	the	area,	especially	 the	peaks	surrounding	the	village.	I
           asked	the	 brothers	to	 head	for	 their	 assigned	areas,	behind	 the	village,
           and	 I	 myself	 remained	with	 the	 group	 to	 take	care	 of	 some	necessary
           matters	and	then	followed	 them	when	the	situation	permitted	me	to	do	so.
           During	   this	 time,	 the	  bombardment	 had	 increased	 greatly	  and	 was
           repeated	in	 more	than	one	area,	and	no	sooner	had	I	prayed	the	morning
           Fajr	  prayer	with	 the	brothers	 who	remained	 with	 me,	than	we	began	to

221
           see	helicopters	hovering	 above	us.	There	were	many	of	them—more	than
           twenty	aircraft	  in	total,	including	 the	fighter	 planes.



                                                D-Day,	   March	    2


There	were	no	self-congratulatory	 high	 fives	among	 AFO	or	 anyone	else	in	the
safe	house	in	Gardez.	For	the	next	 two	and	 a	half	hours,	it	 was	thirteen	 against
450.	 All	  AFO	  members	 were	 engaged	 in	  a	 continuous	 cycle	  of	  locating,
marking,	 and	destroying	 enemy	targets	 inside	 the	valley,	 while	  maintaining	 a
hyperalert	 security	 status	for	 enemy	 fighters	 trying	  to	 do	 the	same	 to	 them.
Minutes	 after	 Mako	 31	 stole	 their	 OP	 from	 the	 enemy	 fighters,	 our	 Special
Forces	and	Afghan	brethren	were	victims	of	a	friendly	 fire	 incident	involving	  the
same	AC-130	that	 supported	Mako	 31’s	 assault.	The	toll	 was	tragic:	 four	 U.S.
and	Afghan	 vehicles	destroyed,	three	killed	  (one	American,	 two	Afghans),	 and
seven	wounded.1
   As	 the	 remaining	Special	 Forces	and	Afghan	 soldiers	 loaded	their	 dead	and
wounded	on	 an	 evacuation	 helicopter,	 enemy	 mortars	 fired	 from	  the	 top	 of
Tergal	Ghar	 slammed	 into	 the	 earth	around	 them	 like	 explosive	 exclamation
points	(see	Map	 5).	Demoralized	 from	 three	 vehicle	rollovers	 and	 the	AC-130
friendly	 fire	 incident,	 many	of	 the	 Afghans	simply	 dropped	 their	weapons	and
began	walking	north,	on	the	road	back	to	Gardez.	Exposing	themselves	to	enemy
fire,	 Chris	 H.	 and	his	 men	 attempted	to	 herd	individual	  Afghans	 into	 groups
where	they	could	coax	and	coddle	them	to	hang	in	 there	and	stay	the	course,	but
the	Afghans	had	collectively	  had	enough.	Chris	called	 me	to	share	his	fatalistic
assessment:	“We’ve	 tried	 everything.	 They	 say	they’re	 done.”	 A	 minute	 later
Chris	added,	“We’re	heading	back	to	the	Gardez	safe	house.”
   The	hammer	was	broken.
   On	 the	other	 side	of	 Tergal	Ghar,	 the	first	 CH-47s	 began	touching	down	 on
the	snow-carpeted	valley	floor.	  As	the	men	ran	 out	the	backs	of	 the	helicopters
they	 were	 greeted	 by	 a	 hailstorm	  of	  enemy	 mortar	 and	 machine-gun	 fire.
Between	 twelve	 and	 seventeen	soldiers	 were	 wounded	  within	  the	 first	 few
minutes	of	landing.	The	anvil	 was	getting	hammered.
   Jimmy	  called	 and	informed	  me	that	 General	 Hagenbeck	and	 his	 staff	 had
decided	to	call	 off	 the	 second	wave	of	 helicopters.	The	 combination	 of	enemy
mortar	and	machine-gun	 fire,	 worsening	weather,	 and	the	need	to	evacuate	the

222
wounded	 drove	 their	 decision.	 Just	 a	few	  hours	 into	 the	 start	 of	 Operation
Anaconda,	General	Hagenbeck	and	 his	staff	 were	forced	 to	 focus	all	 available
resources	toward	evacuating	the	wounded	 and	moving	 the	few	 troops	who	 had
made	it	into	the	valley	out	of	 the	enemy’s	kill	 zone.
   The	  Chinese	 symbol	  for	  crisis	 is	  “danger-opportunity,”y	   which	  roughly
translates	to	“without	  the	 danger	there	cannot	 arise	the	opportunity.”	  2	 In	 the
midst	 of	 the	 10th	 Mountain	 crisis,	 pinned	 down	 on	 the	 valley	 floor,	  and	 in
danger	of	destruction	from	 an	enemy	who	outnumbered	and	outpositioned	them,
a	bountiful	opportunity	 arose	for	AFO.

           THE	  ENEMY:	  The	 fact	 was	 that	 the	 village	  of	 Shahi	 Khot—despite
           having	 expanses	of	land	 on	all	  sides—was	completely	surrounded	 by	a
           group	 of	 high	 mountains,	which	 brought	 the	element	of	 coldness	to	the
           area,	 and	so	was	very	rarely	bare	of	snow.
               After	  about	an	 hour	 of	 continuous	 circling	  over	 the	 village	 and	 its
           surroundings,	 the	American	 troops	were	 dropped	by	parachute	 from	the
           planes	on	three	locations.	 The	first	drop	was	on	the	primary	 area	that	fell
           on	 the	peaks	of	the	 overlooking	 mountains	at	 the	entrance	of	 the	valley
           that	 leads	to	the	 rear	bases,	where	they	were	faced	 by	the	brothers	 who
           had	 left	 us.	They	were	 about	ten	 Arab	 brothers	under	 the	 command	of
           Brother	 Ghazi,	 who	 affiliated	 with	 two	groups	 that	 were	centralized	 on
           one	 of	the	 peaks	that	was	opposite	 that	of	 the	airdrop.	  The	two	groups
           were	composed	of	Uzbek	and	Afghan	brothers.
               We	 had	 some	rear	  bases	that	 had	 been	 established	to	  protect	 the
           village	 and	 that	were	 reached	via	 a	long	 valley	surrounded	 by	the	lofty
           mountains.	 These	bases	are	the	ones	that	we	used	when	we	encircled	the
           American	 airdrops	 from	 behind,	such	that	 the	enemy	fell	in	 the	clutches
           of	  those	 who	 surrounded	  them	 on	 one	 hand,	  and	 those	 who	 were
           stationed	 in	 the	village	  on	the	 other.	 By	the	 Grace	of	 Allah	 alone,	 we
           were	able	to	 inflict	 great	losses	on	the	enemy	ranks	through	these	tactics.

   The	  enemy	 forces	 around	 the	 valley	 likely	   could	 not	 believe	 their	  good
fortune.	The	 Americans	had	 landed	their	 helicopters	on	the	 valley	 floor	 and	in
full	 view	  of	 the	 fighters	 dug	 in	 on	 the	 high	 ground	 surrounding	 the	 valley.
However,	 as	was	 so	often	 the	 case	during	 the	 battle,	 distance	mattered.	 The
Shahi	Khot	 Valley	 is	expansive.	 The	maximum	 effective	 range	of	 the	enemy’s
AK-47	 rifles	 was	three	hundred	 to	four	 hundred	meters.	 To	kill	  the	vulnerable
Americans	on	the	 valley	floor,	 they	 had	to	get	 close	enough	to	hit	 them.	To	 do

223
so,	the	overeager	enemy	spilled	 out	 of	their	 well-protected	 and	 well-concealed
nests	and	unknowingly	exposed	themselves	to	the	targeting	lasers	and	predatory
eyes	of	the	AFO	teams	perched	above	them.
   Enemy	 mortar	crews	were	vaporized,	command	and	control	 sites	ceased	to	do
either,	and	 enemy	fighters	 moving	  between	positions	 to	 re-arm	 and	reinforce
never	showed	up.	The	three	AFO	 teams	were	engaged	in	 a	continuous	cycle	 of
describing	 targets,	  vectoring	  attack	 aircraft,	  making	  corrections,	  and	 then
moving	on	 to	new	targets.	At	 times	 the	only	 limiting	 factor	 was	the	speed	with
which	they	could	speak	into	their	headsets:

       •	 Corkscrew	5-0,	 this	is	 Juliet	1,	enemy	command	 and	control	site,	located
           at	grid	 15119100,	position	marked	with	 laser.
       •	 Juliet	 1,	this	 is	 Corkscrew	5-0,	 I	 have	two	 1,000-pound	 JDAMs.	 I	 tally
           your	 laser	at	grid	15119100.
       •	 Corkscrew	5-0,	you’re	 cleared	hot.
       •	 Roger,	bombs	away,	33	seconds	until	impact.	(33	seconds	later)
       •	 Corkscrew	5-0,	nice	work.	 Target	neutralized.3

   Inside	 the	TOC	in	Gardez,	I	 wondered	out	loud	why	 the	enemy	didn’t	seem	to
recognize	the	pattern	of	 ever-growing	 numbers	of	 their	comrades	who	 were	no
longer	answering	radios	or	showing	up	for	their	 rendezvous.
   “It’s	  ’cause	 they	don’t	 talk	 to	 each	other,”	 was	Glenn’s	 insightful	  response.
“Remember	what	the	Taliban	informer	 told	us:	the	Al	 Qaeda	fighters	don’t	allow
the	Afghan	Taliban	to	talk	 to	them.”
   Glenn	 hit	 it	  on	the	 head:	the	 enemy	didn’t	  understand	what	 was	 going	 on
around	 them	  because	 they	  weren’t	  talking	   to	  each	 other.	  Their	   rigidly
hierarchical	  caste	  system	  prevented	  them	   from	   sharing	  mission-critical
information.
   Along	   with	  their	 eagle-eyed	 view	  of	 the	  battlefield,	  one	 of	 the	  biggest
advantages	the	AFO	 teams	had	was	their	 boundaryless	 communications.	Each
team	maintained	continuous	 communication	 with	  their	fellow	  AFO	 teams,	the
aircraft	flying	  overhead,	and	with	 the	10th	Mountain	 troops	on	 the	valley	floor.
The	multiple	 radios	at	each	OP	empowered	the	teams	to	ask	questions,	listen	 to
each	other’s	insights,	 and	understand	the	friendly	  and	enemy	activity	 going	 on
around	them.
   Even	 though	the	enemy	fire	 began	to	slacken,	there	just	wasn’t	 a	lot	 the	10th
Mountain	 soldiers	 could	do	 on	 the	valley	 floor	  except	lie	 low	  and	search	for
cover	from	the	oppressive	enemy	fire.	They	were	in	dire	 straits.

224
   Jimmy	  called	  and	 updated	 all	 of	  AFO	  on	 General	 Hagenbeck’s	 current
thought	process.	“If	  they	 can	stabilize	 their	 wounded	and	 get	the	rest	 of	 their
forces	inserted,	they	might	 be	able	to	turn	the	tide;	 they	want	to	 know	if	 we	can
buy	them	some	time.”	 All	 three	AFO	 teams	had	the	same	response:	“As	long	as
they	need.”
   Although	  none	of	us	 verbalized	it,	 we	recognized	 that	the	law	 of	 unintended
consequences	was	on	our	 side.	 The	dire	 straits	 of	 the	 10th	 Mountain	 troops,
exposed	and	vulnerable	on	 the	valley	 floor,	 was	the	 bait	that	 continued	to	 lure
the	enemy	fighters	out	of	 their	protective	positions,	 where	AFO	 could	target	and
destroy	them.	Without	the	danger	there	cannot	arise	the	opportunity.
   In	 the	 late	 afternoon,	the	 101st	ground	 force	 commander,	whose	 helicopter
landed	 just	 below	  the	 OP	 that	 Goody	  now	  occupied,	 assessed	the	 enemy
situation	and	the	 status	of	his	forces	 in	the	 valley.	 With	 the	Afghans	 in	retreat,
there	was	no	hammer.	The	portion	 of	his	forces	 that	made	it	into	 the	valley	 was
pinned	down	and	out	of	 position,	so	by	 proxy,	there	was	no	anvil.	 He	decided	it
was	time	to	 flush	the	 plan.	He	attempted	to	 call	 General	Hagenbeck	and	report
his	prognosis,	but	discovered	that	his	radio	had	“gone	 to	shit.”	 Since	Goody	was
only	a	stone’s	throw	away,	the	101st	commander	asked	to	borrow	Goody’s	 radio
and	made	his	call	 on	the	 AFO	 satellite	radio	 net.	Jimmy	 answered	and	handed
the	headset	to	 General	Hagenbeck.	 The	 101st	commander’s	 tone	 was	urgent.
“Recommend	 we	 exfiltrate	  all	 forces	 from	  the	 valley	  at	nightfall.”	   General
Hagenbeck	listened	to	his	 commander	on	the	 ground,	paused,	and	then	agreed.
All	 of	AFO	was	listening.
   After	  hearing	the	 sit-rep	from	 the	 Special	Forces	a	few	 hours	 earlier,	I	 now
realized	that	the	 three	main	American	 forces	 on	the	Shahi	 Khot	 battlefield	 had
three	distinctly	different	 pictures	of	how	 the	battle	was	going.	In	combat,	when	it
comes	to	 understanding	the	 reality	 of	 the	 situation	 and	seeing	the	 battlefield,
geography	and	psychology	are	inexorably	linked.
   The	  Special	  Forces	 and	  Afghans	  were	  on	  the	 outside	  of	  the	  valley.
Demoralized	 by	battlefield	  friction	  and	by	 their	 inability	  to	 get	in,	 they	 were
forced	to	 withdraw	 to	 the	safe	house	in	 Gardez	to	fight	 another	 day.	The	 10th
Mountain	forces	were	 inside	the	valley.	 Pinned	down	and	exposed	on	the	valley
floor,	they	assessed	their	situation	as	hopeless,	and	decided	their	best	option	was
to	withdraw	  back	to	 Bagram,	 to	fly	  again	another	day.	 The	 three	AFO	 teams
occupied	the	 key	 terrainz	  that	 dominated	 the	ground	 inside	  and	outside	 the
valley.	 From	 their	 eagle-eye	 perches,	the	 three	 teams	had	 superb	situational
awareness,	which	they	 continued	 to	translate	 with	 devastating	lethality	  on	the

225
unwitting	 enemy.
   Seconds	after	General	Hagenbeck	got	off	the	radio,	I	got	 on.
   “Jimmy,	  pass	this	sit-rep	to	the	commander	[General	Hagenbeck].”
   Unbeknownst	 to	me,	Jimmy	 put	me	on	the	speakerphone.	General	Hagenbeck
and	his	two	 deputy	generals	were	standing	behind	him	 listening	 to	everything	 I
said.
   “I	  believe	 that	 pulling	  out	 would	 be	 a	 huge	mistake;	 the	 AFO	  teams	are
decimating	the	enemy	and	continue	 to	hold	 almost	all	 of	the	key	 terrain	around
the	valley.”
   I	 also	shared	what	we	had	on	deck	for	the	next	twenty-four	hours.
   “We’ll	   continue	 to	 bomb	 the	key	 enemy	 positions	 on	Tergal	 Ghar.	 We’ve
identified	 the	 enemy’s	 key	 trail	 networks	 behind	 the	 mountains,	which	  we’ll
bomb	and	cut	 off	 tonight.	 We	 have	a	 resupply	scheduled	for	 tonight	 that	 will
allow	the	 teams	to	stay	in	 position	and	 support	the	10th	Mountain	  forces	while
continuing	  to	 destroy	  the	 enemy	  for	  another	 four	  days.”	  I	  paused,	 then
summarized:
   “We	  believe	this	is	 the	battlefield	 opportunity	 of	 a	lifetime.	 AFO	 is	 going	to
stay	in	position	and	keep	on	killing	 until	 there’s	no	more	killing	 to	be	done.”
   I	 wasn’t	 trying	 to	engage	in	histrionics,	 nor	was	I	 trying	 to	criticize	 anyone’s
decision	to	pull	  out,	I	 simply	 recognized	the	same	lesson	we	 had	learned	from
the	warlord	in	 Orgun:	the	best	way	to	create	an	accurate	portrayal	of	reality	 is	to
share	information.	On	this	account,	I	also	felt	 complicit.
   As	  Jimmy	  described	it	  later:	 “General	  Hagenbeck	 huddled	 with	  his	 key
leaders	in	the	corner	of	the	10th	 Mountain’s	 Bagram	TOC.”	 He	had	had	no	idea
how	successful	the	overall	battle	 had	actually	been	up	to	 that	point;	all	 he	knew
was	that	it	hadn’t	gone	according	 to	the	plan.	Once	he	fully	 understood	the	AFO
reality,	he	had	a	completely	 different	 picture;	he	could	 see	the	battlefield	and	he
knew	what	the	right	thing	 was	to	do.
   General	 Hagenbeck	then	did	 something	that	should	 provide	a	salutary	 lesson
for	all	future	 leaders	in	every	profession:	he	changed	his	mind!	He	did	 this	based
on	the	reality-correcting	 context	of	 the	guy	on	the	ground.	Despite	having	 stated
his	 previous	  decision	  over	  a	  satellite	 radio	  heard	  by	  his	  superiors	 and
subordinates	all	across	the	globe,	General	Hagenbeck	pushed	aside	his	 ego	and
did	the	right	 thing.	It	 would	 turn	out	to	be	the	right	 decision	for	 the	mission,	the
right	decision	for	 his	men,	and	the	right	decision	for	General	Hagenbeck.
   In	 the	chaos	of	 the	moments	that	followed,	  the	10th	Mountain	 warriors	 went
entrepreneurial.	They	innovated,	 they	adapted,	they	 were	audacious,	and	in	 the

226
end,	they	were	victorious.

227
                                                         19



                                            TAKUR	    GHAR:


                  WHEN	ALL	 THE	 LAUGHTER	 DIED	 IN	SORROW


     Sundown,	  March	  2	(fourteen	   hours	 after	  Goody	 initiated	   the
                                                      battle)


           THE	ENEMY:	We	spent	our	night	alert	and	on	guard,	to	deter	any	more
           airdrops	throughout	the	night,	as	was	expected.	Before	performing	the
           morning	Fajr	prayer,	we	divided	the	brothers	into	three	groups:	the	first
           joined	the	group	of	 Maulawi	Saif-ur-Rahman	Mansoor,	for	he	needed
           more	people;	 the	 second	took	 position	 where	the	 Shillika	 ZSU-23
           antiaircraft	cannon	was	situated,	at	the	entrance	to	the	valley;	which	left
           myself	along	with	three	other	brothers	as	support	for	any	of	the	groups
           that	needed	more	men.	To	begin	with,	we	headed	toward	the	location	of
           the	Shillika	and	took	our	positions	in	the	rear,	 to	help	curb	the	aerial
           bombardment,	which	had	 increased	significantly.	 During	 the	 entire
           period,	the	enemy	did	not	cease	to	spray	the	mountain	peaks	and	valleys
           with	the	lava	of	bombs	and	missiles,	while	machine	guns	sprayed	their
           bullets	in	every	direction.	The	martyrs	were	too	many	to	count.	Many	of
           the	Afghans	were	now	martyrs.	One	brother	tried	to	hide	in	a	trench	from
           the	bombs,	but	the	trench	was	full	to	the	top	with	dead	Uzbeks.

The	DCG	was	monitoring	the	battle	from	his	TOC	at	Bagram.	Congratulatory
phone	calls	for	 what	AFO	 had	accomplished	were	streaming	in	from	 high-
ranking	leaders	across	the	globe.	Many	of	the	high-ranking	leaders,	along	with
their	staffs,	let	the	DCG	know	that	they	planned	to	stay	glued	to	their	satellite
radios	for	the	remainder	of	the	battle.
   My	 secure	satellite	phone	rang	inside	the	safe	house	in	Gardez.	It	was	the
DCG.1	“Pete,	wonderful	job.	 Look,	we	 can’t	ask	you	guys	to	 continue	this;

228
you’re	 not	set	for	 that.	 What	I	 want	 to	 do	is	 turn	this	 over	 to	the	 SEALs.	 Let
them	command	it,	 and	 let	them	 continue	 prosecuting	the	 fight.	 You	 and	AFO
need	to	be	out	looking	for	 the	next	battlefield.	 I	want	to	send	some	SEALs	down
and	I	want	you	to	get	these	guys	in	there	as	quick	as	possible.”
   When	 he	 called,	all	 three	 AFO	 teams	were	 engaging	enemy	fighters	 in	 the
valley,	and	all	 three	had	various	issues	and	requests	that	required	my	immediate
attention	and	facilitation,	  so	while	 the	DCG’s	 bizarre	 suggestion	definitely	 met
my	criteria	 for	 red-alert	 status,	my	 men	were	my	 priority,	  and	I	 needed	to	get
back	on	the	radio	and	get	my	mind	back	into	the	battle.
   I	 responded	with	 rapidity:	 “Sir,	  my	teams	are	fine	 for	 at	least	 another	forty-
eight	hours;	I	 recommend	that	any	 team	going	 into	the	valley	 goes	through	 the
same	routine	as	the	three	teams	already	in	the	valley.	 Before	they	infiltrate	  they
need	to	spend	 some	time	 at	Gardez	 so	they	 can	acclimate	 to	the	 altitude	 and
study	the	terrain	and	the	history	of	the	Shahi	Khot.	 They	need	to	talk	to	 the	CIA,
the	Special	Forces,	and	 the	Afghan	 militiamen	  who	 have	been	working	 in	 the
area.”	I	threw	in	 what	I	thought	 would	be	the	clincher:	 “Sir,	 sending	those	teams
in	 without	 any	 time	 to	 prepare	for	 the	 environment	 doesn’t	 make	 sense;	it’s
setting	them	up	for	failure.”
   Glenn,	 whose	 bloodshot	eyes	and	 tangled	hair	 from	 forty-eight	  hours	of	 no
sleep	had	earned	him	 the	nickname	 “the	 mad	professor,”	 shook	 his	head	with
resigned	frustration.	“I	 knew	it;	 they	have	no	idea	how	 much	preparation	we	put
in	to	ensure	those	teams	could	operate	in	this	environment.”
   To	 those	in	 Bagram,	Masirah,	 and	North	Carolina	 monitoring	 the	 battle	over
the	satellite	radio	 and	watching	the	sporadic	 images	beamed	back	to	earth	from
unmanned	aerial	aircraft,	 it	probably	 seemed	simple	enough:	 put	a	team	on	 the
high	ground	with	 a	radio	and	let	 them	call	in	 precision	air	 strikes	on	the	enemy.
But	as	 would	 happen	so	many	 times	in	 the	 next	hundred	 hours,	those	leaders
were	making	decisions	based	on	a	false	reality:	they	had	no	context.



                                               Sunrise,	   March	    3


As	 sunrise	 approached,	a	 wintry	  haze	 settled	 over	 the	 Shahi	 Khot	  Valley,
preventing	 the	 AFO	  teams	 and,	 by	  proxy,	 everyone	  else	 from	 seeing	 the
battlefield	 for	 at	 least	a	 few	 more	 hours.	I	 had	 been	up	 for	 almost	 fifty-five
hours.	Everyone	has	their	psychological	or	visual	cues	that	tell	them	they	need	to
sleep.	With	 me,	it’s	  all	 visual.	I	 remember	 looking	 out	 the	window	  at	a	large

229
rock	and	thinking	 it	 looked	very	 much	like	 a	cartoonish	apparition	of	 a	washing
machine.	“What	 is	 that	washing	 machine	doing	 out	there?”	  I	took	 my	 headset
off	and	headed	for	our	tent.
   Two	 hours	later,	my	 watch	alarm	went	 off.	 Not	yet	lucid,	 I	 grabbed	my	pistol
from	 under	 my	  pillow,	  tucked	  it	 into	  my	 belt,	  and	 stumbled	 out	 into	  the
courtyard	to	relieve	 myself	 and	brush	my	teeth.	The	sky	 above	was	presidential
blue,	and	it	was	noticeably	 warmer.	 The	snow	will	 be	melting	and	 we’ll	 need	to
adjust	our	  camouflage	 pattern,	 I	 thought.	 I	 could	 smell	 beans	and	 rice,	 and
someone	was	listening	 to	 the	song	 “Kashmir”	  by	 Led	 Zeppelin	 in	 one	of	 the
tents.	I	had	always	loved	that	song.	I	headed	back	to	the	TOC	to	get	an	update	on
what	had	occurred	while	I	was	asleep.
   Walking	 through	 the	muddy	courtyard,	I	 noticed	at	least	two	new	vehicles	and
a	bunch	 of	  unfamiliar	  faces	 scurrying	 about.	 Glenn	 ran	 up	 to	  me;	 he	was
frustrated	and	talking	 fast:	 “Two	 teams	of	 SEALs	 drove	into	 the	compound	an
hour	ago.	The	officer	in	charge	of	them	is	waiting	 for	 you	in	the	TOC.”
   Sometimes	when	 I’m	 sleep	deprived,	I	 don’t	 wake	up	real	 well;	 this	was	one
of	 those	mornings.	 Why	did	  they	come	down	 here	 without	 calling	  us	first?	  I
thought.	 The	 Afghans	  operating	 our	  checkpoints	 were	 on	  high	 alert;	  they
believed	in	shooting	first	 and	asking	questions	later.
   The	 new	arrivals	 included	two	 SEAL	 teams	code	named	Mako	30	 and	Mako
21.2
   “What	  are	you	doing	here?”	 I	asked	the	SEAL	 officer,	 whose	name	was	Vic.
He	 told	 me	 that	 the	 DCG	 ordered	 him	 “to	  C2	 [command	  and	control]	  the
SEALs,”	 and	that	he	had	orders	to	infiltrate	  the	two	SEAL	 teams	into	the	 Shahi
Khot	as	soon	as	possible	to	support	the	fight.3
   I	 grabbed	the	satellite	phone	and	walked	outside	to	call	the	DCG.
   “What’s	  going	 on,	sir?”	 I	 asked	incredulously.	 “Same	 thing	I	 told	 you,”	 the
DCG	replied.	 “I	 want	these	guys	in	 the	fight.	 Vic	 is	in	 charge	of	 the	Blue	guys
(Blue	is	a	nickname	some	use	to	refer	to	SEALs,	 referring	to	the	color	 of	water),
you	just	 stay	in	 charge	of	the	 AFO	 guys,	and	when	 do	you	think	 you	 can	turn
them	over	to	Blue?”
   “Sir,	 there’s	no	need	to	shove	these	guys	into	the	fight.	I	 don’t	need	to	put	two
more	teams	in	tonight,	 we	control	the	 valley,	not	 them—”	 He	cut	me	off.	 “Pete,
put	both	SEAL	 teams	into	the	fight	 tonight.	 That’s	an	order.”4	 He	hung	up.	The
operational	sweetspot	was	shutting	down.
   In	 a	few	 hours	I	 was	scheduled	to	accompany	Spider	 and	the	Special	Forces

230
teams	back	to	the	 valley	 to	reinsert	the	 Afghans.	The	 number	of	 military	  units
now	on	the	battlefield	 would	make	this	a	complex	maneuver.	We	believed	 it	was
critical	 that	all	 three	leaders—Spider,	 Chris	H.,	 and	I—move	 forward	 with	  the
Afghans.	 Our	proximity	  would	  allow	 us	 to	see	the	 battlefield	 together,	 make
face-to-face	coordinations	and	 decisions,	and	do	everything	 we	could	 to	reduce
the	risk	 of	friendly-fire	   incidents.	The	 reinsertion	of	 the	four	 hundred	 Afghans
would	 finally	 allow	  us	to	seal	 the	entire	 valley.	 We	could	 then	 move	into	 the
valley,	capture	the	remaining	 enemy,	collect	 fresh	clues,	and	follow	 any	 and	all
leads	to	potentially	deliver	the	deathblow	 to	Al	Qaeda	forces	in	Afghanistan.
   Inside	  the	 now	 bustling	  Gardez	TOC,	  SEALs,	  AFO,	 and	 Special	 Forces
members	scrutinized	maps	and	prepared	for	the	night’s	operations.
   One	 of	 the	recently	 arrived	 SEAL	 team	 leaders	was	a	 good	friend	 of	 mine
whom	 I	 had	worked	 closely	 with	  during	 numerous	other	 real-world	 missions
around	the	globe.	His	name	was	Slab.	Built	 like	a	marathon	runner,	he	was	quiet
and	introspective,	and	never	wasted	words.	I	was	glad	to	have	Slab	at	Gardez;	he
was	one	of	a	handful	of	guys	I	 would	pick	 for	any	 team	or	any	mission;	I	trusted
him	 inherently.	 I	 grabbed	him	 in	 the	 TOC	 and	 walked	 outside	to	 talk	 in	 the
courtyard.
   “Slab,	 I’m	 really	 uncomfortable	 with	 you	guys	 going	right	 in,”	 I	 told	him.	 “I
want	to	make	sure	you	get	all	the	advantages	that	the	other	guys	had.”
   “I	 totally	 agree,”	Slab	replied.	“But	 I	 do	what	I’m	 told,	and	we’re	being	 told	to
go	in	tonight.”5
   A	 few	hours	later	the	SEAL	 teams	briefed	their	plans.	One	of	the	SEAL	 teams
(Mako	21)	 would	fly	 into	 the	valley	 on	a	CH-47,	land	 on	the	valley	 floor	 near	a
secure	10th	Mountain-occupied	 position,	 then	move	 by	 foot	to	 link	 with	 Juliet
team,	drop	 off	 much-needed	supplies	for	  Juliet,	then	 continue	 moving	 east	to
their	OP	on	the	eastern	ridge	of	the	valley.	Simultaneously	a	second	CH-47,	with
Slab	and	Mako	30	 onboard,	would	 fly	 to	a	landing	 zone	1,300	meters	northeast
of	Takur	Ghar,	called	 LZ	 1	(see	Map	6).	From	Landing	 Zone	1,	Mako	 30	would
hike	up	to	 the	top	of	 Takur	 Ghar	and	establish	their	 OP.	An	 AC-130	 would	fly
over	both	landing	 zones	before	the	helicopters	 landed,	to	ensure	they	were	 free
of	enemy.
   Both	  plans	would	  break	our	 unofficial	  no-helicopter	 rule,	 but	 at	 this	 point
there	was	no	other	alternative.	The	 DCG	had	ordered	them	in	 that	night	 and	the
time/distance	reality	meant	there	was	no	other	way.
   To	 make	it	to	 his	OP	on	top	of	 Takur	Ghar	before	daylight,	 Slab	deduced	that
he	and	his	team	had	to	be	inserted	as	early	in	 the	cycle	 of	darkness	as	possible.

231
Slab	estimated	it	would	take	a	minimum	of	 four	hours	to	make	the	ascent.
   On	 the	road	in	front	of	 the	safe	house,	a	new	and	improved	truck	convoy	lined
up	to	ferry	 the	Afghans	back	to	the	battlefield.	 My	 vehicle	was	positioned	 in	the
middle	of	the	column.	 My	vehicle	 was	outfitted	with	 a	sat-com	radio	as	well	as	a
more	 dependable	 line-of-sight	  radio.	  It	  also	 had	 a	 ruggedized	 mini-laptop
computer	 to	 send	 and	receive	 digital	  messages.	The	 vehicle	  was	 rigged	 to
provide	me	with	 the	same	communications	 capabilities	that	 I	had	in	 the	Gardez
TOC.	Tera	and	I	worked	 feverishly	to	 test	and	install	the	equipment	and	to	make
sure	everything	was	ergonomically	positioned	 to	allow	me	to	operate	in	the	dark,
while	driving,	 or	while	 under	fire.
   At	  10:00	 P.M.,	  thirty	  minutes	 before	 the	 SEAL	  teams’	 helicopters	  were
scheduled	to	arrive,	Vic	  approached	me	and,	after	engaging	in	 small	talk	 about
my	 vehicle,	 began	discussing	the	 concept	 of	 switching	 Mako	 30’s	  helicopter
landing	zone	from	 LZ	1	 to	the	top	of	 Takur	Ghar	Mountain.	 He	had	brought	 the
same	idea	up	hours	 earlier,	but	 both	Slab	 and	I	 had	dismissed	the	 concept	for
tactical	reasons.	Fully	 aware	that	 Mako	 30	was	only	 thirty	 minutes	 away	from
moving	 to	their	 landing	 zone,	I	cut	 right	 to	the	 chase.	“There’s	 nothing	on	 the
ground	cueing	 us	to	 make	a	change,	so	it	 doesn’t	 make	sense	to	 change	it.”	 I
added	that	even	if	 we	wanted	to	 adjust	the	landing	 zone	location	 the	helicopter
pilots	would	 never	consider	any	change	at	the	eleventh	hour;	it	was	against	their
standard	operation	  procedure.	 Finally,	  I	  told	  him	 that	  Jimmy	  had	 already
coordinated	 Mako	 30’s	 mission	  with	 all	  other	 units	 on	 the	 battlefield.	  “No
problem,”	 he	 responded,	 not	 pressing	the	 issue.	 We	 talked	 for	  a	few	  more
minutes	about	coordination	for	 the	night’s	 operations,	during	 which	I	 reinforced
to	him	that	I	would	 be	running	things	from	 my	vehicle	 near	the	fishhook	and	that
if	he	had	any	questions	or	issues,	he	should	call	me	immediately.
   “You	  got	it,”	 he	replied	as	he	walked	away	into	the	dark.
   Why	would	 he	ask	to	change	the	helicopter	landing	 zone	thirty	 minutes	before
take	off?	I	wondered.	It	didn’t	 make	sense.
   Somewhere	 around	 10:30	 P.M.,	  both	 SEAL	  teams	 moved	 to	 the	 Gardez
landing	zone,	a	few	hundred	meters	behind	the	safe	house.
   At	 11:23	 P.M.,	 two	Chinook	 helicopters	 arrived.6	 After	 a	series	of	airspace-
related	delays,	both	 helicopters	developed	engine	 problems.	The	 pilots	radioed
back	to	 the	TF	 11	 TOC	 at	Bagram	 for	 guidance,	then	 informed	 Slab	that	 the
earliest	they	could	 get	 him	and	 his	team	 into	his	 designated	landing	 zone	was
2:30	A.M.	  With	 sunrise	at	6:00	 A.M.,	 Slab	 instantly	 recognized	that	he	would
not	have	 enough	cover	 of	 darkness	to	 climb	 to	 the	 top	 of	 the	mountain.	 His

232
recommendation	was	to	delay	the	mission	 twenty-four	 hours.7	Vic	 then	decided
to	call	the	 TF	11	TOC	 at	Bagram	on	the	satellite	 radio	and	discuss	the	situation
with	 the	 next-higher-ranking	  officer	 in	  his	 chain	 of	 command.	 “The	 earliest
infiltration	 time	 possible	is	now	2:45	 to	3:00	A.M.,”	  Vic	 told	the	officer.	 “Mako
30	[Slab]	 requests	to	delay	 twenty-four	 hours.	What	 would	 you	 like	 to	tell	 the
team?”	The	message	that	the	TF	11	TOC	 sent	back:	“We	 really	need	you	to	 get
in	there	tonight.”8	 With	 that	de	facto	order,	Vic	 resurrected	the	concept	of	flying
Mako	 30	  directly	  to	 the	 top	 of	  Takur	  Ghar.	 He	 began	 by	 discussing	  the
particulars	of	his	plan	with	 the	MH-47	 pilot	in	 charge.
   The	 pilot	 calculated	the	effect	of	 flying	 a	couple	 of	thousand	feet	higher	 than
the	original	 landing	 zone.	“I	 can	get	 you	there,	but	 I	 don’t	 know	that	 there’s	a
suitable	landing	zone	at	your	OP.”	(He	was	referring	 to	the	top	of	the	mountain.)
   “It	  should	 be	 no	 problem,”	 Vic	  advised,	 then	added.	 “I’ve	  seen	[satellite]
imagery.”	 The	mission	was	 back	on	again,	the	helicopter	 pilots	 agreed	to	insert
Mako	30	directly	 on	top	of	the	Takur	Ghar	peak.
   On	 the	frozen	blackness	of	the	Gardez	landing	zone,	Vic	 had	made	a	decision
about	a	mission	 he	was	unsure	of,	 against	an	 enemy	he	was	 unaware	of,	 on	a
battlefield	 he	had	never	stepped	foot	on.	 In	the	chaos	of	 the	moment,	when	 the
mission	and	 his	men	 were	counting	 on	 him	 to	 look,	 listen,	 and	ask	questions
about	 what	 was	 going	 on	 around	  him,	 he	 disregarded	 the	 reality-revealing
context	of	the	man	standing	next	to	him	(Slab),	and	the	guys	on	the	ground	a	few
hundred	meters	 away	 (AFO),	 and	 decided	 to	 defer	 to	 his	 military	  hierarchy
instead.
   The	 hierarchical	decision-making	 process	implies	that	the	leader	at	every	level
of	 the	pyramid	  is	 the	person	 in	 charge	of	  deciding	 and	directing	  everything
below	him.	 By	proxy,	 the	highest-ranking	 individual	 is	 the	one	who	always	 has
the	best	answers,	the	deepest	understanding,	and	the	best	solutions.	The	unstated
“right”	  of	Vic,	 and	the	 TF	11	leaders	in	 the	Bagram	TOC	 to	 override	Slab	and
make	 the	 Takur	 Ghar	 decision	  was	 both	 a	 prime	 example	  of	 how	  deeply
entrenched	the	process	is	in	the	military,	 and	of	its	 unsuitability	 to	ever	produce
optimized	decisions	in	fast-moving	 and	complex	situations.
   Rigid	 adherence	to	the	hierarchy	is	enforced	 on	the	modern-day	battlefield	 by
the	satellite	radio,	 the	VTC,	  and	hubris.	 Although	 Slab	knew	 exactly	 what	the
right	thing	 was	to	do,	his	 officer	 in	charge,	Vic,	 standing	right	 next	to	 him,	was
the	one	discussing	the	decision	on	the	satellite	radio	back	to	the	TOC	at	Bagram.
On	the	other	end	of	the	radio	were	Vic’s	 Navy	superiors	at	Bagram,	who	 were	in

233
turn,	getting	guidance	from	 their	superior,	 the	DCG	(an	Air	 Force	general),	who
was	 deferring	  to	 the	  guidance	 he	 was	  getting	  via	 daily	  VTCs	  from	   the
commanding	general	(an	Army	 helicopter	pilot)	 in	 North	Carolina.9	 Each	leader
in	the	 precarious	chain	likely	  felt	 the	implied	 cultural	 pressure	to	 provide	 “the
answer,”	and	in	the	process,	to	display	his	 deep	understanding	of	the	situation	at
hand.	 Ironically,	   one	  of	  the	 most	  contributive	  ways	  to	  show	  that	  deep
understanding	is	not	to	answer	at	all,	and	instead	to	conduct	a	reality	check.
   All	  anyone	at	 any	level	 of	 the	TF	 11	 multilayered	 hierarchy	 had	to	 do	was
make	a	 perfunctory	 call	  to	 Slab,	Jimmy,	  or	 me,	and	 ask	 a	simple	 question:
“What’s	 your	  recommendation?”	 Our	 reality	 was	 that	 there	was	 no	 mission-
critical	 requirement	to	 get	a	team	on	 top	of	 that	mountain	 that	night,	 and	there
may	not	 have	been	the	next	 night	 either.	 The	enemy	was	 already	teetering	 on
their	last	 legs—we	 controlled	 the	valley,	 not	 the	enemy.	 Slab	recommended	a
twenty-four-hour	 delay	to	provide	 him	 with	adequate	time	to	move	 to	the	top	of
the	mountain	under	the	cover	of	darkness.	If	someone	had	asked	either	Jimmy	or
me,	we	would	 have	 asked	or	deferred	to	 Slab.	Always	 listen	 to	the	guy	 on	the
ground.
   No	 one	in	AFO	 was	privy	to	 the	discussions	or	the	decisions	made	by	Vic	and
the	TF	 11	 TOC	 concerning	Takur	 Ghar	 until	 many	 hours	 later.	The	 life-and-
death	decision	the	hierarchy	produced	that	night	certainly	wasn’t	optimal,	 but	the
decision	itself	was	not	fatal.	The	decision	not	to	 share	it	would	be.

           THE	 ENEMY:	  With	the	first	 signs	of	night,	[A]C-130	 planes	arrived	 that
           carried	 machine	guns	similar	  in	caliber	 to	the	DShk	(12.7mm),	although
           they	 were	also	 able	to	 fire	 missiles,	and	had	 night	 vision,	 which	would
           allow	  vision	 for	 a	distance	 of	up	 to	 six	kilometers	 away.	 We	could	 do
           nothing	  but	  raise	 our	  hands	 and	 pray	  to	 Allah.	  Our	  brothers	 had
           dispersed,	and	 were	motionlessly	positioned	in	 trenches,	for	 the	enemy’s
           weapons	 could	  detect	 any	  movement.	Since	 the	  brothers	  had	 been
           engaged	in	battle	 until	 night,	the	planes	found	us	to	be	easy	night	targets
           and	 on	that	 night,	about	 twenty	mujahideen	 were	killed	 by	their	 planes.
           Seven	 of	  them	  were	 Arabs,	  these	 being:	   Abul-Baraa	  Al-Maghribi
           (Morocco),	   Abul-Baraa	   Ash-Shami	 (Syria),	   Abu	  Bakr	  Al-Maghribi
           (Morocco),	  Abul-Hasan	 As-Somali	 (Somalia),	Khalid	  Al-Islambooli	  Al-
           Ghamidi	 (Arabian	 Peninsula),	Abu	 Bakr	Azzam	Al-Urduni	 (Jordan),	 and
           Abdus-Salam	Ghazi	Al-Misri	  (Egypt).

234
                             Takur	  Ghar	  Mountain,	   2:40	 A.M.


While	Slab	and	Mako	30	loaded	their	engine-roaring	helicopter	in	the	freezing
blackness	of	the	safe	house	landing	zone,	a	lone	AC-130	prowled	the	sky	over
the	10,469-foot	snowcapped	peak	of	Takur	 Ghar.10	The	AC-130	 had	been
trolling	the	valley	for	enemy	fighters	all	night.	Up	to	this	point,	when	the	AC-
130	was	sent	to	a	location	to	look	for	enemy,	they	searched	for	living,	breathing,
fighting	humans.	When	they	found	them,	they	destroyed	them.	The	sensor	suite
on	the	AC-130	consists	of	television	and	infrared	sensors,	and	radar.11	These
sensors	enable	the	 gunship	 to	 identify	  enemy	 targets	either	 visually	  or
electronically,	day	or	night,	 and	in	virtually	 any	 weather	conditions.	The	air
force	personnel	inside	the	AC-130	scanned	the	Takur	Ghar	 peak	with	 their
sensors.	The	sensors	worked	fine,	but	 the	 individuals	 looking	 through	the
sensors	didn’t	know	why	 they	were	 scanning	the	mountaintop.	No	one	had
shared	with	them	that	 they	were	 supposed	to	be	scanning	the	mountain	in
preparation	for	a	 helicopter	full	 of	 SEALs	 to	 land	on	 top	 of	 it.	 Despite	a
spiderweb	of	footprints	in	the	snow,	as	well	as	a	trench	encircled	DShK	tripod-
mounted	machine	gun	standing	guard	on	the	western	edge	of	the	 peak,	the
officer	 manning	the	 sensors	didn’t	see	 any	enemy,	so	 he	 pronounced	the
mountain	secure.
   At	approximately	3:00	A.M.,	the	MH-47	carrying	Mako	30	braked,	flared,	and
hovered	before	attempting	to	touch	down	in	a	small	depression	near	the	top	of
the	peak.	An	 intense	firestorm	of	RPG	 and	machine-gun	fire	enveloped	the
aircraft.12	Seven	Uzbek	fighters	fired	everything	they	could	load.	Three	RPG
rounds	slammed	into	the	aircraft,	taking	out	one	of	the	two	engines,	the	entire
electric	system,	and	the	hydraulic	systems	that	controlled	the	aircraft’s	steering.
The	aircraft	bucked	like	a	wounded	bronco,	causing	one	of	the	SEALs	who	had
positioned	himself	to	disembark,	to	tumble	out	the	back	of	the	aircraft	onto	the
snow-covered	peak	below.	The	pilot	managed	to	regain	control	of	the	aircraft	as
it	 disappeared	over	the	 backside	of	  the	 peak.	Violently	  shaking	 like	 an
“unbalanced	washing	machine,”	the	aircraft	descended	rapidly.	In	a	brilliant
display	of	airmanship,	the	pilot	and	crew	finagled	the	helicopter	to	an	upright
landing	on	the	valley	floor.	Miraculously	no	one	inside	the	aircraft	was	seriously
injured.	13
   My	 convoy	had	just	pulled	into	the	western	edge	of	the	fishhook	(see	Map	6),

235
when	my	radio	crackled	to	life;	 it	was	Slab.
   He	 was	more	excited	than	usual,	but	still	 calm	and	collected.	 Slab	told	me	his
aircraft	had	crash-landed	on	the	valley	floor	 and	that	one	man	(Neil	Roberts)	had
fallen	out	of	 the	helicopter	on	 top	of	the	mountain.	 I	instantly	 realized	what	 that
meant:	They	tried	to	land	on	top	of	the	mountain!
   I	 asked	Slab	for	his	location.	 He	paused	while	he	got	a	reading	from	 his	GPS,
and	then	recited	the	grid	 coordinates	back	to	 me.	Slab	and	the	disabled	 MH-47
were	located	in	 the	18-92	 grid	square	(see	Map	 6).	At	 this	 point	in	 the	battle	 I
didn’t	 need	to	look	at	 a	map	to	recognize	what	 part	of	the	valley	 a	specific	 grid
was	in—I	had	received	and	passed	so	many	Shahi	Khot	grid	coordinates	over	the
past	seventy-two	hours	that	the	map	was	etched	inside	my	 head;	I	could	 see	the
battlefield.	 The	helicopter	 was	sitting	 within	  close	proximity	 to	 10th	 Mountain
forces	and	 almost	 directly	  in	 front	 of	  Juliet	 team’s	 OP	 (see	Map	 6).	 I	 also
understood	the	 brutal	 reality	 of	  the	fallen	  SEAL’s	  predicament.	 I	 knew	 that
Uzbek	and	Chechen	mujahideen	 did	 not	take	prisoners.	 We	had	 to	rescue	him
immediately,	or	the	fallen	 SEAL	would	 soon	be	dead—if	he	wasn’t	already.
   Huddled	 together	with	 Chris	H.	 and	Spider	inside	the	crumbled	remains	of	 an
ancient	Afghan	 fort,	 the	first	 thing	 we	did	 was	to	 shit-can	the	plan	 to	infiltrate
the	Afghans.	 Our	 priority	  was	to	 understand	what	 was	going	 on	 around	us.	I
immediately	contacted	the	 three	AFO	teams	and	asked	them	for	 a	sit-rep.	From
their	dominating	 perch	 on	the	eastern	ridgeline,	 Juliet	 team	could	 see	both	the
top	of	 Takur	Ghar	and	the	 spot	where	the	helicopter	 crash-landed	on	the	valley
floor.	They	 quickly	 confirmed	 everything	 that	Slab	had	just	reported.	I	 used	my
line-of-sight	 radio	to	talk	 with	the	AC-130	 flying	 over	the	valley	 at	the	time,	and
kept	my	satellite	 radio	clear	 for	the	teams	who	 continued	to	 call	in	 missions	on
other	pockets	 of	 enemy	 fighters	  around	the	 valley.	  The	 AC-130	 was	 flying
directly	 over	Takur	 Ghar.	I	 requested	the	crew	to	describe	everything	 they	 saw
as	vividly	 and	with	the	greatest	detail	possible.
   The	 AC-130	 reported	seeing	an	infrared	 strobe	light	 flashing,	 and	a	growing
number	of	 individuals	 surrounding	 the	strobe	light.	  “How	 many?”	 I	 asked.	“A
lot,”	 he	 replied.	A	  few	 seconds	later,	the	 AC-130	 reported	 that	the	 strobe	no
longer	 blinked.14	 Then	 in	 an	 excited	 tone,	 he	 blurted,	 “Five	  to	 ten	 enemy,
they’re	moving	 around	now,	it’s	hard	to	keep	track.”
   As	  each	TOC	  inside	 the	 country	 and	 out	 learned	 of	 the	 incident,	 frantic
requests	for	information	 began	to	overwhelm	 and	clog	 the	AFO	 satellite	 net.	A
cacophonic	duel	erupted	between	TOCs	as	each	successive	call	“stepped	on”	 or
interrupted	the	previous	call.	The	situation	 went	from	bad	to	worse	as	each	caller

236
asked	the	other	to	repeat	what	they	were	saying	before	they	were	stepped	on.15
   Slab	 had	only	  one	thought:	 to	 return	to	 the	 peak	and	rescue	his	 teammate.
After	 being	ferried	 back	 to	 the	Gardez	landing	 zone,	 he	and	his	 team	jumped
back	on	 the	CH-47,	 and	within	  minutes,	 Mako	 30	was	 lifting	  off	 to	return	 to
Takur	Ghar.	Shortly	 thereafter,	a	Predator	arrived	in	 the	sky	above	the	peak	and
immediately	  began	relaying	  its	  images	 back	 to	 the	  TOCs	 at	 Bagram	  and
Masirah.16	Jimmy	  fed	me	 the	information	  as	he	 gleaned	it.	 It	 complemented
what	the	AC-130	was	telling	 me.
   The	 enemy	on	top	of	 Takur	Ghar	were	 milling	 around	the	peak.	Exposed	and
bunched	up,	they	were	 extremely	vulnerable.	 Slab	and	I	 discussed	the	situation
and	agreed	on	a	rescue	concept.	I	shared	the	concept	with	the	AC-130.
   “When	 Mako	 30’s	helicopter	is	between	one	and	three	minutes	out,	I	want	you
to	fire	your	 105	mm	weapon	as	close	as	possible	to	the	enemy	fighters	on	top	of
the	mountain,	 then	 watch	 to	see	if	  any	one	 individual	  breaks	away	 from	 the
group.	You’ll	  need	to	use	your	best	judgment.	 If	 you	think	 it	 may	be	the	 fallen
SEAL	 [Roberts],	 then	use	all	of	 your	 weapons	to	protect	 him.	 You	are	 cleared
hot	to	destroy	everyone	else.”
   “Roger,	  understand,”	  the	 AC-130	  radio	 operator	 responded.	 I	  continued,
“Understand	 that	 you	 must	 suppress	the	 enemy	on	 the	 mountain	 before	 the
helicopter	 arrives.	 Kill	  as	many	 as	 possible	 while	 they	 are	 in	 the	 open	and
vulnerable.	Do	not	 let	the	helicopter	land	 if	you	 haven’t	suppressed	the	enemy.”
“Roger,	 understand,”	  the	 AC-130	  repeated.	 Then	 Jimmy	  weighed	 in	  from
Bagram.	“The	enemy	is	 in	the	open;	they’re	 still	milling	  around	and	bunched	up
on	top	of	the	mountain.”
   Juliet	 team	 could	also	 see	the	enemy	 on	top	 of	 the	mountain;	 they	 injected
their	affirmation	  of	 the	concept.	 We	had	 multiple	 “guys	 on	 the	ground,”	 each
with	 a	different	 piece	of	 the	puzzle;	together	 we	had	a	shared	reality	 and	I	 felt
like	we	were	starting	to	understand	what	was	going	on	around	us.
   Slab’s	 helicopter	was	less	than	five	minutes	from	 the	peak.	Jimmy	got	back	on
the	net.	 Watching	 the	 Predator	image	 of	 the	 enemy	from	 the	 10th	 Mountain
TOC,	Jimmy’s	 intent	was	to	keep	all	 of	us	in	the	valley	 updated	with	 everything
he	knew.	“The	enemy	is	still	 bunched	up	on	top	of	 the	mountain,”	 he	reported	in
a	quick,	calm,	and	concise	manner.
   “We	 don’t	 need	you	getting	all	 worked	up	 on	the	radio,”	 the	emotion-strained
voice	of	 the	 DCG	 barked	over	 the	radio.	 “Get	 off	 the	net;	 we’ve	 got	 it.”	 The
DCG’s	 condescending	 rebuke	made	 it	 sound	 like	  Jimmy	 was	 some	random

237
outsider	who	 was	interfering	 with	 the	DCG	 and	his	TOC’s	 organizational	 right
to	issue	orders	 and	control	 the	 battle.	But	 Jimmy	  wasn’t	 trying	 to	 tell	 people
what	to	do;	he	was	trying	to	share	with	people	what	he	knew.
   From	 his	vastly	 networked	 seat	in	the	10th	 Mountain	 TOC,	 Jimmy	had	 used
his	skills	 as	a	connector	to	gather	and	share	key	pieces	of	the	battlefield	 puzzle.
He	knew	 where	all	 the	AFO	 and	10th	Mountain	 forces	 were,	he	had	a	visceral
understanding	of	the	enemy	situation	 and	the	mission,	 and	he	had	a	live	 bird’s-
eye	view	of	 the	mountaintop	from	 the	Predator	feed.	The	DCG	 had	the	Predator
image	and	he	had	his	rank.
   With	  Spider	at	my	side,	 I	checked	my	 watch;	Mako	 30’s	helicopter	 was	only
two	minutes	 away	 from	 the	mountaintop.	 I	 stared	at	 the	top	 of	 the	mountain,
adjusting	my	night	vision	 goggles	in	expectation	of	the	flashes	and	fireballs	from
the	AC-130’s	lethal	 weapons	buffet	that	I	was	certain	were	soon	to	follow.
   Inside	 the	Star	Wars-like	 TOCs	at	Masirah	and	Bagram,	the	staffs	 were	going
beehive.17	Like	 most	staffs,	their	 first	 instincts	 were	likely	  that	they	had	 to	do
something;	they	had	to	 start	planning	and	issuing	 orders.	Arrayed	like	 a	college
lecture	hall,	 the	staff	officers	 watched	 and	listened	to	the	 battle	while	 sitting	 in
their	tiered	 tables	and	seats,	transfixed	by	 the	grainy	 images	from	 the	Predator
feed,	which	 instructed	their	 reality	 from	 the	gigantic	plasma	 screen	mounted	in
the	front	of	each	room.
   The	 Predator	above	Takur	 Ghar	was	flying	  at	17,000	 feet	above	sea	level—
more	than	 a	mile	  above	the	 10,200-foot	 mountaintop.18	 Its	 images	were	 fed
through	a	satellite	in	 outer	space	that	digitally	 secured	the	signal	before	sending
it	back	to	 earth.	The	resulting	 human	images	were	of	 blurry,	 black	 Gumby-like
figures	with	 barely	recognizable	objects	in	their	 hands.	Perhaps	most	misleading
of	all,	the	Predator	view	is	narrow	 angle,	described	metaphorically	as	“looking	 at
the	world	through	 a	soda	straw.”	Through	the	soda	straw	you’re	 never	sure	what
is	really	going	on	around	your	image.
   At	  some	point	the	 DCG	 and	his	staff	 in	 Masirah	 began	to	believe	 that	their
access	to	the	satellite	radio	nets	and	especially	 the	Predator	feeds	gave	them	as
much	understanding	of	 events	in	the	 Shahi	Khot	 Valley	 as	they	needed	to	take
over	the	operation	 and	run	things	 from	their	 location.19	 Perhaps	in	response	to
the	heavy	 traffic	  that	 had	subsumed	the	 AFO	  satellite	 net	immediately	  after
Mako	30’s	 first	attempt	to	 land	on	the	mountain,	 someone	in	the	TF	11	chain	of
command	decided	it	would	be	a	good	idea	to	switch	the	satellite	radio	frequency.
From	a	higher	headquarters	perspective,	the	radio	is	a	means	to	issue	orders	and

238
provide	direction	 to	 subordinates;	changing	the	frequency	 would	make	 it	easier
for	 them	to	 do	 that.	For	 AFO	 and	 the	men	 on	the	 ground,	the	 radio	 was	our
primary	method	of	 networking	ideas	and	sharing	information;	 as	such,	it	was	our
lifeline.
   Communication	  short-circuits	  like	 this	 seem	innocuous	 enough	 when	 they
occur,	but	as	time	 continues	to	march	on,	 they	turn	 into	decision-making	 errors
that	slowly	 begin	to	accrue,	compounding	 one	on	top	of	 the	other,	indiscernibly
snowballing	toward	critical	 mass.	The	snowball	was	starting	to	roll.
   After	  switching	 to	the	 new	frequency,	 the	staff	 at	Masirah	 (1,100	 miles	and
one	time	zone	 away)	began	directing	 all	 forces	and	 all	aircraft	 involved	  in	the
rescue	of	 the	 fallen	 SEAL,	  Neil	 Roberts.	 The	 one-dimensional	 allure	 of	 the
Predator	feed	was	informing	  their	decision-making	 reality.	 Precisely	 because	it
was	one-dimensional,	it	 could	never	be	correct,	 and	because	it	wasn’t	shared,	it
could	never	be	corrected.	Like	the	warlord	 and	the	intelligence	analyst	in	 Orgun,
the	DCG	had	grossly	overestimated	the	omnipotence	of	 technology.	He	failed	 to
understand	that	the	reality	  of	the	 situation	 could	only	 be	 fully	 understood	 and
accessed	through	the	collective	omniscience	of	the	guys	on	the	ground.
   With	 a	sense	of	urgency	 fueled	by	the	knowledge	 that	a	fallen	 comrade’s	life
was	hanging	in	the	balance,	the	MH-47	pilots	 flying	 Mako	 30	from	Gardez,	flew
their	aircraft	 at	full	  throttle	 toward	 the	Takur	 Ghar	peak.	The	 orbiting	 AC-130
sighted	its	guns	and	cameras	on	the	“sitting	duck”	 enemy	fighters	who	 were	still
milling	  around	below	  them.	The	 crew	 of	  the	AC-130	  knew	 that	 somewhere
down	below	 them	 a	lone	 SEAL	  was	potentially	  fighting	 for	 his	 life.	 As	 they
readied	to	fire,	the	friendly-fire	  incident	 from	the	 opening	moments	of	the	battle
was	still	fresh	 on	their	minds.	 They	had	to	be	sure,	so	the	AC-130	 called	on	 the
recently	changed	sat-com	frequency	to	request	permission	from	the	ground	force
commander	to	commence	firing.	  Unbeknownst	 to	the	crew	 of	 the	AC-130,	 the
switch	 in	satellite	 nets	meant	 that	they	 were	 actually	 talking	 to	 a	TF	 11	 staff
officer.
   The	 man	talking	 to	the	AC-130	 was	sitting	inside	 a	tent	in	Masirah,	 Oman.	A
well-meaning	officer,	 he	still	 didn’t	 understand	that	Roberts	had	fallen	out	of	the
helicopter	on	top	 of	Takur	 Ghar.	Instead,	he	believed	 Roberts	had	fallen	 on	the
valley	 floor,	 where	10th	 Mountain	 soldiers	 were	in	 close	proximity.	  Watching
events	unfold	through	the	soda	straw	lens	of	the	Predator	feed,	he	seemed	sure	of
only	one	thing:	that	he	was	confused.
   “Are	   we	 cleared	 to	  fire?”	  the	 officer	  on	 board	  the	 AC-130	  pleaded	 in
frustration	 as	the	 enemy	 milled	 about	 below	 him,	 and	 Mako	 30’s	  helicopter

239
rapidly	closed	with	 the	peak.
   The	staff	 officer	 in	Masirah	responded:
   “Waste	 everyone.”	 Then	 before	 the	AC-130	 could	 reply,	 “Negative,	  do	not
fire;	 there	 may	 be	friendlies	  down	 there,”	 followed	  a	 few	 seconds	later	 by,
“Don’t	 worry,	 our	good	guy	has	been	picked	up	by	a	friendly	team.”20
   I	 never	heard	the	AC-130’s	 final	 request	for	permission	 to	fire,	 nor	did	I	 hear
the	contradictory	guidance	given	 by	the	bewildered	 staff	officer	 at	Masirah,	 and
was	thus	 powerless	 to	 provide	 the	 corrective	 context	  from	 my	 guys	 on	 the
ground.
   The	 designated	time	for	Mako	 30’s	landing	 had	come	and	gone.	I	hadn’t	 seen
or	heard	any	fire	from	the	AC-130;	 they	never	received	permission.
   As	 I	  gazed	up	at	 the	 top	 of	 the	mountain,	 I	 had	 no	sense	of	 the	 calamity
unfolding	in	 front	 of	me;	I	couldn’t	 see	it.	Staring	 a	hole	in	the	top	of	 the	peak,	I
pleaded	to	myself,	Why	hasn’t	the	AC-130	fired?	Something	isn’t	 right	.	.	.

           THE	 ENEMY:	  Just	then,	I	received	news	on	the	wireless	from	the	Uzbek
           brothers	 stationed	at	Mount	 Abdul-Malik	 that	 they	had	brought	 down	an
           American	  helicopter	 on	 the	 peak	 opposite	 to	 them,	 but	 that	 a	 large
           number	  of	 their	  soldiers	  were	 still	  alive.	  [Note:	  The	  helicopter	  in
           question	 was	 a	 “Chinook”	   CH-47	 and	 the	 Uzbek	Mujahideen	  shot	it
           down	 with	 the	ZSU-23	antiaircraft	  cannon.]	 Therefore,	they	asked	us	to
           hurry	  to	 Mount	 Abdul-Malik,	  because	there	 were	 only	 seven	brothers
           stationed	 there,	out	 of	whom	 three	had	already	 been	killed.	 We	did	 not
           possess	advanced	defensive	weapons	that	were	able	to	fight	 the	aircraft.
           But,	 by	the	Grace	of	 Allah	 the	Almighty,	we	discovered	 that	some	of	our
           weapons,	 despite	 their	 simplicity	  and	 oldness,	 were	 very	 effective	 at
           handling	 the	aircraft.

   The	 second	CH-47	landing	 on	Takur	Ghar	 fared	little	 better	than	the	first.	 As
the	helicopter	 attempted	 to	land,	 machine-gun	 bullets	 chewed	the	 skin	 of	 the
aircraft	 like	 it	 was	papier-mâché.	Slab	 only	 had	one	mission	 on	 his	mind:	 his
men.	With	  no	 thought	  for	 his	 own	  safety,	 he	 charged	off	  the	 back	 of	 the
helicopter,	 leading	 his	 team	 of	 six	 brave	 warriors	  through	 knee-deep	snow,
directly	 toward	 the	belly	  of	 the	bunker-encased	beast.	Despite	 having	its	 hull
splayed	open	by	 well-aimed	  machine-gun	fire,	  the	CH-47	 was	 still	 airworthy
enough	to	lift	up	and	accelerate	off	the	mountain.
   The	 completely	  frustrated	 crew	 of	  the	AC-130	  finally	  realized	 they	 were
talking	  to	  the	 wrong	   guy	  on	 the	  ground	  and	 immediately	   reestablished

240
communications	with	 me	on	the	line-of-sight	 radio.	They	narrated	what	they	saw
below.	Slab	and	 his	team	continued	 to	fire	 and	maneuver	up	 the	slope	to	close
with	 and	destroy	 the	enemy	in	 the	 bunker.	The	 AC-130	 could	 still	 see	all	 the
enemy	fighters	 below	  them,	 and	could	 have	 almost	 certainly	 had	 a	 decisive
effect	  during	  the	 opening	  moments	  of	  the	  firefight,	   but	  there	 were	  no
communications	between	Mako	 30	 and	the	 AC-130.	 The	AC-130	 crew	 all	 but
begged	for	someone,	anyone,	on	 the	mountain	 below	 to	talk	 to	 them	and	 give
them	permission	to	make	a	difference.	There	were	no	 answers	to	their	calls.	The
radio,	to	which	 they	were	calling,	 lay	 on	the	back	of	Mako	 30’s	 communication
specialist,	 Air	  Force	  Tech	 Sergeant	 John	 A.	  Chapman,	 who	  lay	  mortally
wounded	in	 front	 of	 the	enemy	 bunker.	The	 rest	of	 Mako	 30	was	 caught	in	 a
vicious	 crossfire.	 With	  one	 man	 dead	and	 another	 seriously	 wounded,	 Slab
directed	Mako	30	to	take	cover	on	the	side	of	 the	mountain.	A	few	 minutes	later,
Slab	contacted	 me	 and	 the	 AC-130	 on	 his	 handheld	 radio.	  Again,	 the	 old-
fashioned	  line-of-sight	   radio	   proved	   a	  lifesaver.	   With	   communications
reestablished,	Slab	directed	the	AC-130	 to	begin	pounding	 the	enemy	on	top	 of
the	mountain.	But	the	enemy,	having	taken	cover	during	the	opening	moments	of
the	gunfight	with	 Mako	30,	was	now	much	less	vulnerable.
   The	 image	on	 the	screen	in	 the	Masirah	 and	 Bagram	TOCs	 at	that	 moment
portrayed	the	real-time	life-and-death	struggle	 on	top	of	Takur	 Ghar	between	the
enemy	and	the	brave	warriors	of	Mako	 30.	In	a	video	 game,	when	your	guy	gets
shot,	you	hear	a	jingle	and	your	guy	gets	to	start	the	game	over.	In	real	life,	when
you	see	your	guy	get	shot	on	the	Predator	image,	you	better	do	a	reality	check,	or
your	guys	are	gonna	die.



                                              Bagram,	   3:45	  A.M.


At	Bagram,	 the	DCG	 alerted	the	Ranger	quick	 reaction	force	 (QRF).	 Believing
that	time	was	their	enemy,	the	QRF	rushed	out	to	their	pre-positioned	helicopters
on	the	Bagram	 airstrip.	When	 the	young	 captain	in	 charge	of	the	 QRF	asked	a
senior	staff	officer,	 “What’s	  our	mission?”	 the	staff	 officer	 replied,	 “We’ve	 got
to	get	you	guys	in	the	air	 and	get	you	down	to	that	 vicinity.	 When	you	 get	down
to	Gardez,	come	up	on	 the	satellite	 net.	We’ll	 give	 you	 further	instructions.”21
The	staff	officer	  believed	that	the	 priority	 of	 the	moment	was	 to	get	the	rescue
force	down	  to	the	 safe	 house	in	 Gardez,	where	 they	 would	 be	 less	than	 ten

241
minutes	from	the	mountain.	 In	theory,	a	logical	 concept	but	for	 one	small	detail:
the	QRF	helicopters	weren’t	equipped	with	 working	 satellite	radios,	so	there	was
no	 way	  to	  communicate	  or	  share	 information	   between	 the	  rescue	 force
helicopters	and	the	TOCs	in	Bagram	and	Masirah.	 Forced	to	launch	in	 the	midst
of	mayhem	and	confusion,	 the	Ranger	QRF	had	no	idea	what	 their	mission	 was
and	no	idea	what	had	happened	to	the	men	of	Mako	 30.	More	damning	 still,	 the
pilots	were	never	told	 not	to	land	on	 the	same	“lava	hot”	 landing	zone	on	which
Mako	30	had	now	landed	and	been	pummeled	twice.
   Slivers	  of	  daylight	  began	 highlighting	   the	 peaks.	 To	  ensure	continuous
communications	 with	 Slab,	 I	  had	to	  make	sure	 I	 kept	 a	 clear	 line	 of	  sight
between	my	 radio	 and	 his.	 Slab	 was	 stationary	 and	couldn’t	  move,	 so	 with
Spider	at	my	 side	and	my	radio	 on	my	 back,	I	nomadically	 wandered	the	 scrub
desert	floor	around	the	fishhook.
   “Get	 down!”	  Spider	screamed,	as	he	disappeared	into	the	dusty	depression	of
a	dry	 creekbed.	“What	 are	 you	 doing?”	 I	 yelled	 back	to	 him.	 “They’re	  firing
rockets	at	us.	 Get	down,”	  he	repeated.	“I	 can’t;	 I’ll	  lose	 comms	with	 Slab,”	 I
explained	as	 an	object	 whooshed	 over	our	 heads	and	 splashed	in	 the	 sand	a
hundred	or	so	meters	to	our	right.	 “Better	 to	lose	comms	than	lose	your	 friggin’
head,”	Spider	 lectured.	But	 Slab	was	 up	there	 fighting	 for	 his	 life;	 his	 lifeline
was	his	line-of-sight	 radio	 connectivity	 back	to	 me.	If	 I	hit	 the	ground,	 I’d	 lose
the	line	of	 sight.	 Luckily,	 I	 also	recognized	 the	distinctive	 whoosh	and	landing
pattern	of	the	rockets	as	that	of	a	Soviet-made	BM-21,	 which	 history	has	proven
to	be	notoriously	 inaccurate	and	ineffective.	 “It’s	  a	BM-21,	 fuck	 it!”	 I	 yelled	to
Spider	as	I	 continued	 walking	  and	talking	 to	 Slab.	 Spider	stood	 back	up	 and
brushed	himself	off.	 “If	  you	think	 I’m	 gonna	lie	 here	digging	 trenches	with	 my
buttonholes	while	you	 walk	around	looking	 all	 fearless	and	shit,	you	got	another
thing	coming.”	 Inside	I	 smiled;	outside	I	imagined	 what	Slab	and	his	team	might
need	next	as	I	continued	to	walk	and	talk.
   After	  Slab	 updated	me	 on	 the	 status	of	 his	 wounded	 teammate,	who	  was
stable,	the	AC-130	 called	to	inform	  me	that	they	would	 likely	  have	to	return	to
their	base	soon,	due	to	the	increased	risk	profile	of	flying	 during	daylight.
   He	 then	 added	that	 he	might	 not	 be	able	 to	stay	 long	 enough	to	 cover	 the
arrival	of	the	Ranger	QRF.
   “Ranger	 QRF?	What	are	you	talking	about”	 I	asked.
   That	 was	when	 it	 hit	 me;	now	 it	 all	made	 sense.	Someone	else	was	making
decisions	and	 issuing	 orders;	 everything	  I	 thought	 I	 knew	  about	 the	rescue
situation	had	turned	out	to	be	something	other	than	what	it	seemed.

242
   I	 called	Jimmy	 and	asked	him	to	find	 out	the	status	of	the	QRF	and	give	me	a
sit-rep	as	quickly	  as	possible.	Then	I	 called	 the	AC-130	 back	to	 make	sure	he
understood	how	critical	 it	was	that	he	didn’t	 leave	his	protective	perch	above	the
mountain	before	the	QRF	arrived.
   “I’m	  checking	 on	the	status	of	the	QRF	 right	now;	 in	the	 meantime	you	have
to	stay	in	position,”	 I	told	the	AC-130.
   The	 AC-130	responded:	“Roger,	 we’ll	 try,	 but	we’re	 being	told	 by	our	higher
headquarters	in	Uzbekistan	that	we	have	to	depart	the	area	before	daylight.”
   “You	  can	tell	 your	 higher	 headquarters	in	the	rear	 that	this	 is	a	direct	 order
from	the	AFO	 commander	on	the	ground.	You	 are	not	to	depart	this	area;	if	 you
leave	now,	 the	 QRF	helicopters	 will	  be	blown	  out	 of	 the	sky.	 Acknowledge,
over.”
   The	 AC-130	didn’t	 respond,	it	 was	already	leaving	its	protective	 perch	and,	in
the	process,	the	Ranger	QRF	completely	vulnerable	to	the	waiting	enemy.
   Captain	 Nate	 Self	 and	 his	 Ranger	 rescue	force,	 along	 with	  the	 brave	but
oblivious	 crews	 on	board	 two	 helicopters,	 were	 barreling	 at	breakneck	 speed
toward	Takur	 Ghar.	As	 the	QRF	 helicopters	 bore	down	 on	the	mountain,	 staff
officers	at	both	 Bagram	and	Masirah	 TOCs	frantically	  attempted	to	get	through
to	them	and	share	a	simple	 message:	“Don’t	 land	on	top	 of	 the	mountain.”	 But
they	had	 no	 communications	 with	 the	 helicopters,	 so	 onward	 the	helicopters
flew.
   Although	  the	satellite	 radios	 on	board	 the	 QRF	helicopters	 did	 not	 work,	 I
later	learned	from	Captain	Self	 that	he	could	hear	me	talking	on	his	 own	line-of-
sight	radio	as	his	helicopter	approached	the	Shahi	Khot	Valley.22	 My	 heart	sank
when	I	realized	the	implications	 of	his	 comment.	“Why	 didn’t	 you	check	in	 with
me	and	ask	me	for	an	update?”	I	asked	as	compassionately	as	I	could.
   “Because”	 he	replied,	 “you	 weren’t	 in	 my	chain	 of	 command;	I	 was	waiting
for	my	own	 chain	of	command	at	Bagram	to	give	 me	guidance.”	Once	again,	the
invisible	 boundary	 inferred	  by	 an	administrative	  organizational	 structure	 and
hierarchy,	combined	to	 prevent	someone,	in	this	case	the	young	Ranger	captain,
from	 accessing	his	last	 best	shot	 at	the	 lifesaving	 context	 of	 the	 guys	on	 the
ground.	 As	  a	 result,	  in	 the	  chaos	 of	 the	  moment	 he	  wasn’t	  able	 to	 go
entrepreneurial.	 How	 would	  we	 organize	  if	 we	 didn’t	   know	 how	 we	 were
supposed	to	organize?
   By	  the	time	 the	 Rangers	landed	 on	the	 top	 of	 Takur	 Ghar,	most	 everyone
monitoring	 the	 battle	realized	 that	 the	mountaintop	 was	 too	 hot	to	 land	 on—
except	the	Rangers	themselves.	The	snowball	effect	of	bad	decisions	caused	by	a

243
lack	of	shared	reality	was	now	turning	 avalanche.
   At	 6:10	 A.M.,	 as	the	two	CH-47’s	 carrying	 the	QRF	attempted	to	land	 on	the
peak,	 the	 lead	 helicopter	  was	 immediately	  disabled	 by	 the	  reinforced	 and
reinvigorated	Uzbek	fighters,	 who	were	 fending	off	 their	third	 helicopter	 assault
in	less	than	six	hours.
   “Today	  I	feel	 like	 a	Ranger!”	 shouted	a	brave	young	warrior	 who	 was	killed
the	minute	 the	lead	 CH-47	 touched	down.	 Captain	Self	 waved	 off	 the	 second
CH-47	 and	then	 hit	 the	 ground	 with	 his	 men.	His	  unstated	mission	 instantly
transitioned	from	rescue	to	survival.
   Over	  the	next	 few	  hours,	the	 Rangers	 fought	 a	 desperate	battle	against	 a
tenacious	band	of	Uzbek	fighters.	 The	Uzbeks	had	a	distinct	 advantage	over	the
Rangers:	most	had	been	living	  up	there	for	 many	 days;	they	knew	 every	 nook
and	cranny	 of	  the	 boulder-encrusted	peak.	 The	 Uzbeks	 used	 their	 backyard
knowledge	to	fire	 and	maneuver	from	 all	sides	of	the	mountain.	 But	the	Uzbeks
were	unaware	that	Juliet	team	had	their	backs.	As	they	had	done	hours	earlier	for
the	 10th	  Mountain	   soldiers	 on	  the	  valley	  floor,	   Juliet	  team	  seized	 the
opportunity,	 and	 began	relaying	 and	 reporting	 the	 positions	 of	 the	 unwitting
enemy	to	the	Rangers,	while	simultaneously	 providing	 targeting	guidance	to	 the
attack	aircraft	  flying	  overhead.	The	 turning	  point	 came	 around	 10:00	 A.M.,
when	 Juliet	 team	  pinpointed	 and	 then	  provided	 terminal	  guidance	 for	  the
precision-fired	 missile	that	neutralized	the	 last	of	the	enemy	fighters	 firing	 from
the	bunker.
   After	  reuniting	  with	 their	 teammates	 who	 landed	uncontested	 on	 a	secure
patch	of	 ground	on	the	 eastern	side	of	the	 mountain,	the	 Rangers	were	able	to
secure	the	entire	mountain	 peak,	link	 with	 Mako	 30,	and	recover	 the	bodies	of
both	 the	 missing	  SEAL	  (Neil	  Roberts)	 and	  his	 air	  force	 teammate	 (John
Chapman).	Counting	the	 two	members	of	 Mako	 30,	seven	brave	warriors	 from
army,	navy,	 and	air	 force	 special	operations	 units	died	 on	top	 of	 Takur	 Ghar.
Eleven	others	were	seriously	wounded.
   After	 the	Rangers	and	SEALs	were	evacuated	back	to	Bagram,	the	three	AFO
teams,	consisting	of	army,	navy,	 and	air	force	operators,	remained	undetected	in
their	OPs,	and	continued	 to	decimate	 the	last	vestiges	of	 enemy	fighters	 in	 the
valley.

           THE	 ENEMY:	  Brother	Abu	 Ali	Talha	 Al-Uzbeki	 even	contacted	me	over
           the	 wireless	 to	make	 me	firm,	 strengthen	 me,	and	 console	me,	and	 he
           swore	 that	victory	 was	 ours.	While	 I	 was	deep	in	thought	 over	his	 call,
           little	 did	 I	know	that	these	words	were	his	last	words,	as	he	bade	farewell

244
           to	 the	 mujahideen	 to	 join	 the	 martyrs,	 after	 sustaining	 heavy	 injuries
           from	  the	 aerial	  bombardment.	 We	 begged	 our	  commander,	 Saif-ur-
           Rahman	Mansoor,	 to	allow	 the	brothers	to	 leave	the	valley.	This	was	the
           way	 of	the	mujahideen,	 move	away	from	an	 enemy	that	outnumbers	and
           possesses	superior	weapons.	We	had	no	water,	 my	mouth	was	 bleeding,
           and	 the	sores	prevented	me	from	 eating	 my	bread.	All	 the	 Uzbeks	were
           now	martyred;	 the	Afghans	were	all	gone.
               Then	 I	received	word	 that	our	 commander	was	martyred	 and	I	 began
           to	 cry.	We	tried	 to	get	to	his	body	to	 carry	him	 away	but	the	bombs	were
           too	 many	and	the	enemy	were	now	everywhere.
               I	 asked	all	  our	brothers	 to	 retreat,	 except	the	 ones	manning	the	 PK
           machine	 gun	 and	RPG-7	 rocket	launcher.	 Brother	  Abu	Talib	 As-Saudi
           insisted	 upon	staying	and	said	to	me,	“I	 feel	ashamed	in	front	 of	Allah	 to
           retreat	  from	 the	Americans.”	  Due	 to	the	 heavy	bombardment,	 a	large
           portion	  of	 his	 head	 was	 missing,	 but	 he	joined	  us	as	 we	 began	our
           retreat.
               The	 brothers	 all	 dispersed	in	 different	 directions.	 I	traveled	 with	 ten
           Arab	 brothers.	Due	 to	the	increased	number	of	Coalition	 forces	blocking
           the	area	 as	well	as	the	aerial	 channels	the	enemy	had,	we	were	forced	to
           travel	 for	 three	days	and	nights	in	 conditions	 that	were	extremely	harsh.
           We	 had	nothing	 to	eat	with	 us,	 except	a	case	of	green	 tea	and	a	 pot	in
           which	 to	 boil	 snow.	After	 this	 long	 journey,	 enduring	 the	cold	 and	 the
           snow,	and	 traveling	over	 mountain	peaks	and	through	valleys,	 we	finally
           reached	 a	village	 where	we	received	a	great	welcome,	such	that	 it	made
           us	forget	 all	that	 we	had	suffered	and	endured,	and	All	 Praise	belongs	to
           Allah	 Alone.

   We	 had	to	 delay	the	 reinsertion	of	 our	 Afghan	 allies	due	 to	the	Takur	 Ghar
firefight,	 but	as	the	battle	on	top	of	 the	mountain	raged,	our	presence	around	the
fishhook	allowed	us	to	finally	  seal	off	the	western	side	of	the	valley.	On	the	third
attempt	to	insert	the	Afghans	into	 the	valley,	we	made	sure	they	were	allowed	 to
organize	 and	 fight	  the	 way	 they	  knew	 best—as	 Afghans.	  Released	at	 the
fishhook,	 they	starburst	into	 the	 valley	 in	teams	of	 three	 or	four	 men,	moving
like	 mountain	 goats	up,	 over,	 and	 across	the	 ridges,	 and	always,	 eventually,
gravitating	 to	 the	high	  ground.	Within	  a	 few	 short	 hours	they	 controlled	  the
entire	valley.
   Using	  the	grid	 coordinates	 of	 enemy	positions	 reported	 by	 the	AFO	 teams
during	 the	battle,	 we	 crisscrossed	the	 valley	 to	 examine	 remains	 and	collect

245
intelligence.	There	were	a	lot	of	both.
   We	 came	across	the	body	 of	one	of	 the	known	 enemy	leaders,	Saif	 Rahman
Mansoor.	He	too	had	recorded	his	thoughts	and	decisions	in	a	journal,	 which	we
read	 while	  standing	 over	 his	  catatonic	 carcass.	 Mr.	  Mansoor	 had	 ignored
repeated	pleas	from	his	fighters	 to	withdraw	 from	 the	valley.	 He	had	defeated	a
massive	Soviet	heliborne	assault	force	on	the	very	 same	terrain;	he	was	sure	the
pattern	would	 repeat	itself	against	the	 Americans.	But	 even	as	his	men	died	 all
around	him,	and	 the	10th	Mountain	 closed	in	 on	all	 sides,	he	refused	to	 accept
the	brutal	reality	of	 his	situation.	He	had	made	up	his	mind	to	stay,	and	he	wasn’t
going	to	change	it.	He	died	while	incarcerated	in	the	prison	of	 precedence.
   In	 the	dry	 creekbeds,	right	where	the	Russian	lessons-learned	report	said	they
would	  be,	 were	  five	  D-30	  122-millimeter	   howitzers.	   They	 had	  survived
undetected	 from	  our	  high-tech	  surveillance	 satellites	  by	  using	  good	 old-
fashioned	 low-tech	  guile;	  they	  were	  covered	 with	  tan	  tarps	 and	  leafless
shrubbery.	Blood	 trails	 and	 other	battlefield	  litter	 were	strewn	 about,	 forming
what	we	 called	 the	enemy’s	 trail	 of	 tears.	The	 trail	 pointed	 eastward,	like	  an
arrow,	straight	toward	Pakistan,	the	same	sanctuary	the	enemy	used	in	the	1980s.
After	 studying	 the	 terrain	 and	recognizing	  that	there	 were	 only	 a	 handful	 of
routes	the	 enemy	could	 take	 to	 get	 through	 the	mountains,	 India	 team	 (now
beefed	up	with	 five	additional	 Delta	 operators)	parted	company	with	 the	rest	of
AFO	 and	headed	into	 the	mountains	 to	 cut	 off	 the	enemy	 retreat	and	destroy
them	before	they	made	it	to	the	border.
   Patterns	 of	 thinking,	  patterns	 of	 decision-making,	  and	patterns	 of	 history.
Once	you	 recognize	the	patterns	that	 inform	 the	 behavior	of	 your	 enemy,	you
can	adapt	 to	 them,	 and	your	  enemy	is	 toast.	 AFO	 was	 able	 to	 successfully
recognize	many	of	 the	 enemy’s	patterns	in	 the	 Shahi	Khot,	 but	 it	 wasn’t	 their
patterns—creatures	of	habit,	historical	 hubris,	 and	fighting	 from	 high-ground—
from	which	 the	lessons	of	Operation	Anaconda	should	be	focused:	rather,	it	 was
the	use	 of	 the	 guiding	 principles	  that	 enabled	us	 to	 detect	 the	patterns	 that
provide	the	truly	meaningful	 lessons:

       •	 The	mission,	the	men,	and	me
       •	 Don’t	get	treed	by	a	chihuahua
       •	 When	in	doubt,	develop	the	situation
       •	 Imagine	the	unimaginable;	humor	your	 imagination
       •	 Always	listen	 to	the	guy	on	the	ground

   As	 artisans	of	 the	art	of	 war,	these	were	the	 paints	that,	when	 combined	and

246
applied,	revealed	the	key	 friendly	 and	enemy	patterns	as	they	unfolded	 in	 front
of	us.	Yet,	when	 we	stepped	back	to	assess	whether	we	created	a	masterpiece	or
a	piece	of	 you-know-what,	 we	 discovered	that	 Operation	Anaconda	 revealed	a
broader,	more	 overarching	 lesson	about	 patterns.	It	 was	 this:	 No	 matter	 how
many	patterns	you	recognize—or	 think	 you	 recognize—they	won’t	  do	you	 any
good	unless	they’re	shared.


                                   GUIDING-PRINCIPLE	     LESSON:


	
                                   It’s	 Not	Reality	 Unless	 It’s	 Shared!
	
How	 do	  perfectly	  smart	 people	 make	 bad	 decisions?	 In	  an	 organizational
context,	it’s	 almost	always	the	result	 of	a	lack	 of	shared	reality.	 “It’s	 not	 reality
unless	it’s	 shared”	 isn’t	  just	 a	guiding	  principle	  for	 how	 to	 think	 and	 make
decisions,	as	the	lessons	from	AFO	and	Operation	Anaconda	revealed;	it’s	also	a
guiding	  principle	  for	  how	 to	  operationalize	  those	 thoughts	 and	 decisions;
specifically	how	 to	organize,	communicate	with,	and	lead	an	organization.
	
                                                       Organizing
	
   Organize	 for	 the	mission.	Forget	 the	line	 and	block	diagrams;	 their	only	 true
function	 is	 administrative.	 They	 create	boundaries	to	 sharing	 information	 and
accomplishing	 your	 mission.	  Throw	 them	  out	 with	 every	  new	 mission	 you
undertake.	Imagine	  a	natural-disaster	 scenario:	 What	 would	  you	 do	 if	  your
people	were	cut	off	from	 all	their	different	 headquarters	and	all	their	institutional
histories?	Constantly	  ask	yourself	  and	your	  organization	 this	 question:	 How
would	we	organize	if	 we	didn’t	 know	 how	 we	were	supposed	to	organize?	Then
do	it!
	
                                                   Communicating
	
   Communicate	 with	  one	central	 philosophy:	 boundarylessness.	Boundaryless
means	no	borders,	and	in	all	directions.	Openness	is	good;	compartmentalization
and	secrecy	are	not.	Sharing	information	 is	how	 we	create	an	accurate	portrayal

247
of	reality.	  It	not	 only	 makes	the	 whole	 wiser	than	 the	individual	  parts,	it	 also
serves	  as	  an	   effective	    system	  of	   checks	   and	   balances	  to	   correct
misinterpretations	by	individuals	 who	don’t	 have	all	the	pieces	of	the	puzzle.
   “Need	 to	 share”	is	 the	most	 important	 stamp	any	information	  file	 or	 insight
can	have.	It	shouldn’t	 be	lost	on	 anyone	that	most	of	 the	key	clues	that	enabled
AFO	 to	 recognize	the	 enemy’s	patterns	 and	find	 their	 redoubt	 in	 Shahi	 Khot
came	from	 unclassified	 documents	and	sources.	The	 Ali	 Mohamed	 document,
the	 Afghan	 general’s	 advice,	  the	 books	 on	 the	 Soviet-mujahideen	 war,	  the
Haqqani	 interview	 article,	  the	 Soviet	 officer’s	  battle	 report,	 and	 finally,	  the
spindly	finger	 on	the	end	of	the	shepherd’s	hand.	Today,	the	key	information	 we
have	on	 the	 enemy’s	 reality	 during	 the	 battle	 comes	from	  the	mother	 of	 all
openness:	the	Internet,	 which	 underscores	a	key	 point	 concerning	information
openness;	databases	and	the	Internet	don’t	 download	themselves!	 You	 have	to
take	action	to	make	action.	You	 have	to	take	time	 to	search,	read,	contextualize,
and	save;	you	have	to	take	time	to	saturate,	incubate,	and	illuminate.
	
                                                         Leading
	
   How	 do	 you	ensure	that	 you	and	your	 organization	 establish	and	maintain	 a
shared	reality?	The	answer	is	common	sense.
   Let	 common	 sense	guide	your	 thinking,	 your	 decision	 making,	and	 the	way
you	operationalize	 both.	 The	 single	 best	thinking	  and	decision-making	 tool	 a
leader	has	 is	 to	 consistently	 conduct	 reality	  checks	 by	 asking	 a	 profoundly
simple	question:	“What’s	 your	recommendation?”	 I	asked	Ali	 Mohamed;	I	asked
the	Afghan	 general;	I	 asked	the	warlord;	 I	asked	Kris;	 I	 asked	Speedy;	I	 asked
Goody;	 I	 asked	Slab,	 and	what	 I	  got	in	  return	 was	pure,	 unadulterated	tacit
knowledge—knowing	 how	 to	obtain	 desired	end	states,	knowing	 what	to	 do	in
order	to	obtain	them,	and	knowing	 when	and	where	to	actually	 act	on	them.	The
power	 of	 the	 question	 goes	beyond	 just	  the	 context-rich	 tacit	 knowledge	  it
reveals;	it	also	has	a	potent	intrinsic	 effect	 on	the	responders.	It	lets	 them	know
that	you	respect	their	input,	 and	as	a	leader,	you	respect	the	primacy	 of	 the	guy
on	the	ground!
   Whether	 you’re	 working	  in	 an	organization	 such	as	the	U.S.	 government,	 a
billion-dollar	  business,	or	 even	a	 personal	relationship,	  your	 reality	 isn’t	 real
unless	it’s	 shared.	 You	 have	to	 share	 your	 straight-from-the-ground	  thoughts
with	 others	(preferably	 in	 a	face-to-face	setting)	 or	 your	reality	 will	  fester	and
decay,	and	eventually	the	decision	not	to	share	may	be	fatal.

251
Unless	otherwise	noted,	all	photos	are	from	the	author’s	private
collection.




















Something	other	than	what	it	seems:	Tanks	in	the	Iraqi	desert.

252
Something	other	than	what	it	seems:	Tanks	in	the	Iraqi	desert.





















Humor	your	imagination:	 Man,	beast,	or	metaphor?






Ali	 Mohamed
Department	of	Defense






John	Walker	Lindh
Department	of	Defense

253
Always	listen	to	the	guy	on	the	ground:	(L	 to	R)	Andy,	 Pete,	and
Predator,	back	together	again	on	top	of	the	Continental	Divide	in
September	of	2005,	four	years	after	the	original	trek.	In	June	ten	to
twenty	feet	of	snow	covers	this	same	spot.

254
Developing	the	situation:	Jimmy	 and	I	paying	our	respects	to	the	great
Afghan	leader,	Ahmed	Shah	Massoud,	near	his	grave	in	the	Panjshir
Valley.

255
View	from	hill	where	Shepherd	fingered	the	Shahi	Khot.

















Don’t	plan,	prepare:	Afghans	in	formation	before	loading	“Jingha”

256
Don’t	plan,	prepare:	Afghans	in	formation	 before	loading	“Jingha”
trucks	for	transport	to	Shahi	Khot	valley.	 Within	 a	few	hours,	three	of
the	Jingha	trucks	would	overturn,	killing	 and	injuring	 more	than
twenty	Afghans.	The	view	 is	from	the	Gardez	safe	house	watchtower
on	the	evening	of	March	1,	2002.























It’s	not	reality	 unless	it’s	shared:	March	4,	6:20	a.m.,	at	the
“fishhook,”	 minutes	after	we	discovered	the	Ranger	QRF	helicopter
had	been	shot	down	on	top	of	Takur	Ghar.	The	view	is	looking
eastward	toward	the	Shahi	Khot.

257
Reality	check:	What’s	your	 recommendation?	Clearing	the	Shahi
Khot	with	 our	Afghan	comrades.	Even	without	maps,	they	always
seemed	to	know	exactly	where	to	go	to	find	the	enemy,	the	best	way
to	get	there,	and	what	to	do	when	we	arrived.	All	we	had	to	do	was
ask.	March	12,	2002.	Note	the	physical	diversity	of	 the	Afghans.

258
Once	you	recognize	the	patterns	that	inform	the	behavior	of	your
enemy,	you	can	adapt	to	them,	and	your	enemy’s	toast:	Enemy
artillery	positions	 found	in	the	dry	creek-beds	of	the	Shahi	Khot,
exactly	where	history	books	revealed	the	Mujahideen	always	put
them,	and	exactly	where	the	Russian	combat	reports	said	they	would
be.

259
Recognizing	patterns:	Levitating	above	the	divisive	 influence	of
emotion	and	politics	allows	us	to	operate	at	an	altitude	where	we	can
recognize	and	adapt	to	life’s	underlying	patterns.

260
                                                    NOTES


                                           INTRODUCTION

1	Michael	R.	Gordon	and	Bernard	E.	Trainor,	Cobra	II	(New	York:	Pantheon
Books,	2006),	443.

2	Ibid.,	327.

3	http://www.defenselink.mil/home/features/2006/Iraqi-Freedom-Day-
2006/index.	html.

4	Gordon	and	Trainor,	443.

5	Ibid.

6	Ibid.

7	Ibid.,	444.

8	Ibid.,	443.

9	Fred	Barnes,	“The	Commander:	How	Tommy	Franks	Won	the	Iraq	War,”
Weekly	Standard,	June	2,	2003.

10	Gordon	and	Trainor,	map:	“Delta	Force	Route	and	Engagements,”	xiii.

11	Ibid.,	443.

12	Ibid.,	331.

13	Kevin	Woods,	Michael	R	Pease,	Mark	E	Stout,	Williamson	Murray,	and
James	G.	Lacey,	“A	View	of	Operation	Iraqi	Freedom	from	Saddam’s	Senior
Leadership,”	Iraqi	Perspectives	Project,	131.	“The	impression	of	these	reports
was	that	a	large	American	armored	force	was	driving	from	Jordan	and	across	the
western	desert.	This	impression	would	have	profound	implications	later	in	the
war.	Over	time,	these	and	other	reports	helped	to	fix	in	Saddam’s	mind	the	idea
that	the	main	coalition	attack	was	coming	out	of	Jordan.”

14	“Team	Tank:	Armor	in	Support	of	Special	Operations,”	Veritas:	Journal	of
Army	Special	Force	History	(Winter	2005),	69-73.

15	Ibid.

261
16	Ibid.

17	Gordon	and	Trainor,	443.

18	Ibid.

19	Ibid.

20	Ibid.,	442.

21	Ibid.,	444.

22	Ibid.

23	Ibid.,	443.

24	Ibid.,	444.

25	Woods,	Pease,	Stout,	Murray,	and	Lacey,	131.

26	General	Patton	was	one	of	the	first	military	 leaders	to	recognize	and	describe
this	historical	incongruity	 between	that	which	is	actually	 recorded	as	history	and
those	who	actually	make	it.

262
                                                CHAPTER	   1

1	See	Holloway	Commission	Report,
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB63/doc8.pdf.

263
                                                CHAPTER	   2

1	Eric	Haney,	Inside	Delta	Force	(New	York:	Delacorte	Press,	2002),	104.

2	Ibid.

3	Ibid.

4	William	G.	Boykin,	Never	Surrender	(New	York:	FaithWords,	2008),	74.

5	http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delta_Force.

264
                                                   CHAPTER	      3

1	Boykin,	297.

2	http://www.nato.int/sfor/organisation/mission.htm.

3	Ibid.

4	Richard	J.	Newman,	“The	first	 account	of	secret	U.S.	missions	in	Bosnia,”	US
News	and	World	Report,	June,	28,	1998.
http://www.usnews.com/usnews/news/articles/980706/archive_004280.htm.

5	Boykin,	303.

6	Mark	Bowden,	Blackhawk	 Down	(New	York:	 Atlantic	 Monthly	 Press,	1999),
23.

7	http://www.un.org/icty/cases-e/index-e.htm.

8	Sean	Naylor,	Not	a	Good	Day	to	Die	(New	 York:	 Berkley	Caliber,	 2005),	106.

9	Haney,	164.

10	www.bigfootencounters.com.htm	 “While	 traveling	 in	remote	parts	of
Montenegro	collecting	stories	and	beliefs	from	 the	local	people,	he	came	across
a	man	who	had	actually	claimed	to	have	seen	hairy	human-like	creature	many
years	ago	in	the	nearby	mountains.	The	man’s	name	was	Bozo	Radoviæ	who
was	a	peasant	and	a	sheep	watcher.”

11	Edward	de	Bono,	Lateral	Thinking	 (New	York:	 Harper	and	Row,	1970),	11.

265
                                                   CHAPTER	      4

1	National	Commission	on	Terrorists	 Attacks,	The	9/11	Commission	Report
(New	York:	 W.W.	 Norton	and	Company,	2004).	See	On	Fadl,	e.g.,	Intelligence
reports	on	historical	background	of	Bin	 Ladin’s	 army	(Nov.	26,	1996;	Apr.	 18,
1997);	on	the	structure	of	al	Qaeda	and	leadership	composition	(Dec.	18,	1996;
Dec.	19,	1996;	Dec.	19,	1996);	on	roles	and	responsibilities	of	the	organizational
component	(Dec.	19,	1996);	on	objectives	and	direction	(Jan.	8,	1997;	Jan.	27,
1997);	on	the	financial	infrastructure	 and	networks	(Dec.	30,	1996;	Jan.	3,	1997);
on	connections	and	collaboration	with	other	terrorist	 groups	and	supporters	(Jan
8,	1997;	Jan.	31,	1997;	Jan	31,	1997;	Feb.	7,	1997);	on	activities	in	Somalia
(Apr.	30,	1997);	on	Bin	 Ladin’s	 efforts	to	acquire	WMD	 materials	(Mar.	 18,
1997).	On	the	other	walk-in	source,	see	CIA	cable,	Jan.	3,	1997.	Material	from
the	Nairobi	cell	was	introduced	 into	evidence	during	the	testimony	of	 FBI
Special	Agent	Daniel	Coleman,	United	 States	v.	Usama	Bin	Laden,	No.	S(7)	98
Cr.	1023	(S.D.N.Y.),	 Feb.	21,	2001	(transcript	pp.	1078-1088,	1096-1102).	Mike
interview	(Dec.	11,	2003).

2	“The	Spider	in	the	Web”	 Economist,	September	20,	2001,
http://www.economist.com/world/na/displayStory.cfm?Story_ID=788472	   .

3	National	Commission	on	Terrorists	 Attacks,	The	9/11	Commission	Report,
111.

4	Ibid.

5	Steve	Coll,	Ghost	Wars	(New	York:	 Penguin	Books,	2004),	414.

6	The	9/11	Commission	Report,	110.

7	Ibid.

8	Coll,	391.

9	The	9/11	Commission	Report,	110.

10	Ibid.

11	The	9/11	Commission	Report,	111.

12	Ibid.

266
13	Coll,	342.

14	Ibid.,	391.

15	http://usmilitary.about.com/library/milinfo/navyfacts/bltomahawk.htm.

16	In	Undaunted	Courage,	Stephen	Ambrose’s	bestselling	account	of	the	Lewis
and	Clark	expedition,	there	is	no	chapter	on	planning;	instead,	chapter	Seven	is
titled	“Preparing	 for	the	Expedition.”

17	While	reading	the	9/11	Commission	report	 in	2004,	I	discovered	that	the	CIA
actually	landed	on	one	of	the	same	dry	lake	beds	in	1997	to	exfiltrate	Mir	 Amal
Kasi,	the	Pakistani	migrant	worker	 who	had	shot	up	the	entrance	to	the	CIA
Headquarters	in	1993.

18	The	9/11	Commission	Report,	113	(I	was	never	aware	of	any	other	“Unit”
involvement	in	 the	UBL	mission	 until	I	 read	the	following	 passage	in	the	9/11
Commission	report	in	2004):	“Military	   officers	reviewed	the	capture	plan”	 and,
according	to	“Mike,”	  “found	 no	showstoppers.”	The	commander	of	Delta	Force
felt	“uncomfortable”	  with	having	the	tribals	 hold	Bin	 Ladin	captive	for	 so	long,
and	the	commander	of	Joint	Special	Operations	Forces,	Lieutenant	General
Michael	Canavan,	was	worried	about	the	safety	of	the	tribals	inside	Tarnak
Farms.	General	Canavan	said	he	had	actually	thought	the	operation	too
complicated	for	the	CIA—“out	  of	their	 league”—and	an	effort	to	get	results	“on
the	cheap.”

267
                                                   CHAPTER	      5

1	“Bombings	of	 the	U.S.	Embassies	in	Nairobi,	Kenya	and	Dar	es	Salaam,
Tanzania	on	August	7,	1998.”	U.S.	State	Department	Report	of	the
Accountability	 Review	Boards.

2	“Chronology	 of	Planning,”	 DOD	memo,	December	14,	1998.

3	Osama	bin	laden	FAQ,	www.msnbc.com,	September	15,	2001.

4	Washingtonpost.comTerrorist	Data.htm.

5	The	9/11	Commission	Report,	130.

6	Sandy	Berger’s	testimony	before	the	Joint	Inquiry	 Committee,	September,	19,
2002.

7	NSC	e-mail,	Clarke	to	Berger,	August	 8,	1998;	Samuel	Berger	interview
(January	14,	2004);	CIA	memo,“Khowst	 and	the	Meeting	of	 Islamic	Extremist
Leaders	on	August	17,	1998.”

8	NSC	notes,	checklist	re	military	 strikes,	August	14,	1998	(author	appears	to	be
Clarke).	On	the	military	 plans	see	“Chronology	of	 Planning,”	DOD	 memo,
December	14,	1998.

9	For	a	time	line	of	the	decision-making	 events,	see	NSC	memo	to	Steinberg	et
al.,	August.	17,	1999.	The	list	of	 concurrences	is	drawn	from	talking	points
prepared	for	Berger’s	use	with	the	main	four	leaders	of	the	House	and	Senate;
the	list	explicitly	 mentions	the	attorney	general.	NSC	e-mail,	Clarke	 to	Berger,
August	19,	1998.	Reno	told	the	9/11	commission	she	did	not	mention	her
concerns	to	the	president	but	discussed	them	with	Berger,	Tenet,	White	House
Counsel	Charles	Ruff,	and	DOJ	staff.	Janet	Reno	interview	(December	16,
2003).

10	The	9/11	Commission	Report,	189.

11	Ibid.,	117.

12	Robert	Dorr,	“Battles	 Domestic	and	Military	 Heat	Up,”	 Washington	Watch
(October,	1998):	8.

13	The	9/11	Commission	Report,	145.

268
14	Ibid.,	140.

15	Richard	H.	Shultz	Jr.,	“Showstoppers:	Nine	 reasons	why	we	never	sent	our
Special	Operations	Forces	after	al	Qaeda	before	9/11.”	The	Weekly	Standard
(January	26,	2004).

269
                                                CHAPTER	   6

1	Coll,	442.

2	“Showstoppers:	Nine	reasons	why	we	never	sent	our	Special	Operations
Forces	after	al	Qaeda	before	9/11.”

3	Timothy	Roche,	Brian	Bennett,	Anne	Berryman,	Hilary	Hylton,	Siobhan
Morrissey,	and	Amany	Radwan,	“The	Making	of	John	Walker	Lindh,”
Time.com	(September	29,	2002).

4	United	States	of	America	v.	John	Phillip	Walker	Lindh,	a/k/a	“Suleyman	al-
Faris,”	a/k/a	“Abdul	Hamid,”	 In	the	United	States	District	Court	for	the	Eastern
District	of	Virginia,	Alexandria	Division.

5	http://www.merip.org/mer/mer224/224_aidi.html,	www.newsindia-
times.com/2002/02/15/after9-us.html,	http://www.yaleherald.com/article.php?
Article=185,	http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,121040,00.html.

270
                                                CHAPTER	   7

1	Haney,	104.

2	Boykin,	174.

271
                                                CHAPTER	   8

1	Gallaway,	J.	Carlton,	“The	Complete	Microwave	Oven	Service	Handbook,”
http://www.gallawa.com/microtech/microwave_repair_handbook.html.

2	Gunther	Greulich,	“Who	invented	GPS?”	GPS	World	(January	2007).

272
                                               CHAPTER	   10

1	“Operation	Enduring	Freedom-Order	of	Battle.”
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/enduring-freedom_orbat-02.htm.

2	Naylor,	32.	See	also:	“A	Nation	Challenged:	Strategy;	Shifting	Missions	Come
with	Rising	Risks,”	New	York	Times	(December	9,	2001).

3	Robert	S.	Tripp,	Kristin	F.	Lynch,	and	John	G.	Drew.	“Supporting	air	and
space	expeditionary	forces:	lessons	from	Operation	Enduring	Freedom,”	Rand
Corporation,	2004.

4	Boykin,	16,	251.

5	Bob	Woodward,	Bush	at	War	(New	York:	Simon	&	Schuster,	2002),	165.
“Special	Operations	early	were	not	possible,”	Rumsfeld	said.	“Can’t	do	it	in	the
north,	haven’t	really	got	good	targets	yet	in	the	south.”

6	Ibid.,	248.

7	Ibid.,	249.

8	“Deployed	commanders	now	use	secure	VTC	routinely	for	situational
awareness	in	status	briefing	updates”	http://www.mit-kmi.com/print_article.cfm?
DocID=505.

9	“The	Americans	have	left	it	too	late	to	send	in	ground	troops	before	winter,”
The	Independent	(November	6,	2001).	Available	at:	http://independent.co.uk,
accessed	on	November	7,	2007.

273
                                               CHAPTER	   11

1	Naylor,	76.

2	J.	M.	Berger,	Ali	Mohamed	Sourcebook	(More	than	400	pages	of	analysis,
court	and	intelligence	documents	about	al	Qaeda’s	most	dangerous	sleeper
agent).

3	Luke	Harding,	Julian	Borger,	and	Richard	Norton-Taylor,	“The	fierce	Taliban
response	to	the	Delta	Force	raid	led	to	a	review	of	similar	planned	operations,
and	to	questioning	of	the	leadership	of	the	war’s	US	commander,	General
Tommy	Franks.”	The	Guardian	(November	6,	2001).

4	http://www.globalsecurity.org/security/profiles/abu_musab_al-zarqawi.htm.

5	Woodward,	314.

6	Naylor,	28.

274
                                                  CHAPTER	      12

1	http://www.cooperativeresearch.org/timeline.jsp?other_al-
qaeda_operatives=aliMohamed&timeline=	 complete_911_timeline.

2	Joseph	Neff,	and	John	Sullivan,	“Al-Qaeda	terrorist	 duped	FBI,	Army,”
Raleigh	News	&	Observer	(October	24,	2001).

3	See	exclusive,	never-before-published	material	included	in	this	wire-bound
collection,	selected	and	compiled	by	INTELWIRE.com’s	  J.	M.	 Berger,	lead
researcher	of	the	cable	TV	documentary	on	Ali	Mohamed,	 National	Geographic
Presents:	Triple	Cross:	Bin	 Laden’s	Spy	in	America.	Preview	Introduction	 and
Table	of	Contents.	See	also:	http://www.aim.org/aim-column/bin-ladens-
military-mole.

4	U.S.	State	Department	Report	of	the	Accountability	 Review	Boards.
“Bombings	of	 the	U.S.	Embassies	in	Nairobi,	Kenya	and	Dar	es	Salaam,
Tanzania	on	August	7,	1998.”

5	Guilty	plea	of	 Ali	 Mohamed.	United	States	v	Ali	Mohamed,	October	20,	2000.

6	Raleigh	News	and	Observer,	October	24,	2001.

7	Larry	C.	Johnson,	a	former	deputy	director	of	 the	Office	of	 Counterterrorism	at
the	State	Department	who	had	previously	worked	for	the	CIA,	 confirms	 it	at
least	in	part.	He	told	the	San	Francisco	Chronicle	 that	the	CIA	had	a	brief
relationship	with	 Ali	 Mohamed	after	he	offered	in	1984	to	provide	 information
about	terrorist	groups	in	the	Middle	 East.	http://www.aim.org/aim-column/bin-
ladens-military-mole.

8	Raleigh	News	and	Observer,	October	24,	2001.

9	Lance	Williams	 and	Erin	McCormick,	 “Bin	 Laden’s	man	in	 Silicon	Valley,
Mohamed	the	American	orchestrated	terrorist	acts	while	living	 a	quiet	suburban
life	in	Santa	Clara,”	 San	Francisco	Chronicle	(September	21,	2001).

10	US	Immigrant	Veterans	New	Battle,
http://english.aljazeera.net/NR/exeres/BAECBE58-5596-4BCA-AFA0-
6A7B2B4B2807.htm.

11	George	Crile,	Charlie	 Wilson’s	War:	 The	Extraordinary	 Story	of	the	Largest

275
Covert	Operation	in	 History	(New	 York:	 Atlantic	 Monthly	 Press,	2003),	126.

12	Raleigh	News	and	Observer,	October	24,	2001.

13	http://www.aim.org/aim-column/bin-ladens-military-mole.

14	“Anatomy	 of	a	Terrorist	Attack:	 An	In-Depth	 Investigation	 into	the	1998
Bombings	of	the	U.S	Embassies	in	Kenya	and	Tanzania,”	Matthew	 B.	Ridgway
Center	for	International	Security	 Studies	at	the	University	of	Pittsburgh.

15	Raleigh	News	and	Observer,	October	24,	2001.

16	According	to	1999	court	 testimony	from	Khaled	 Abu	el-Dahab,	the	other
known	member	of	Mohamed’s	 Santa	Clara,	California,	Al-Qaeda	cell.	 New	York
Times,	November	21,	2001.

17	Guilty	plea	of	 Ali	 Mohamed,	United	States	v	Ali	Mohamed,	October	20,
2000.

18	Phoenix	Consulting:http://www.intellpros.com/traininginfo_fullcatalog.php?
offset=15&pagenumber=	4.

19	Naylor,	76.

20	Interviews	with	 Colonel	John	Mulholland	 and	General	Tommy	Franks	for
PBS	documentary.
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/campaign/ground/torabora.html.

276
                                               CHAPTER	   13

1	Woodward,	313.

2	Ibid.,	314.

277
                                               CHAPTER	   14

1	A	paper	written	by	Col.	Andrew	Milani	of	the	160th	Special	Operations
Aviation	Regiment,	entitled	“Pitfalls	of	Technology:	A	Case	Study	of	the	Battle
of	Takur	Ghar”	outlined	the	entire	force	structure	of	Special	Operations	forces	in
country	at	the	time.	This	unclassified	paper	is	now	one	of	the	main	references
used	by	Wikipedia	for	Operation	Anaconda.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Anaconda.

2	Naylor,	34

3	Executive	summary	of	the	Battle	of	Takur	Ghar,	released	through	the
Department	of	Defense,	May	24,	2002,
http://www.defenselink.mil/news/May2002/d20020524takurghar.pdf.

4	General	Tommy	Franks,	American	Soldier	(New	York:	HarperCollins,	2004),
251,	261.

5	Malcolm	Gladwell,	The	Tipping	Point	(New	York:	Little,	Brown	and
Company,	2000),	41.

6	Naylor,	23.

7	Executive	summary	of	the	Battle	of	Takur	Ghar,	released	through	the
Department	of	Defense,	May	24,	2002,
http://www.defenselink.mil/news/May2002/d20020524takurghar.pdf.

8	Naylor,	39.

9	The	story	of	our	encounter	with	the	warlord	was	told	by	Deputy	Secretary	of
Defense	Paul	Wolfowitz	during	a	public	speech	in	Washington,	D.C.,	in	2005.

278
                                               CHAPTER	   15

1	Naylor,	8.

2	Ibid.,	9.

3	Ibid.

4	Ibid.

5	Ibid.,	10.

6	Ibid.

7	Ibid.,	39.

279
                                               CHAPTER	   16

1	Jay	Solomon,	“Failed	Courtship	of	Warlord	Trips	Up	U.S.	in	Afghanistan,”
Wall	Street	Journal,	November	8,	2007.	“Mr.	Haqqani	is	now	one	of	the	major
rebel	leaders	roiling	Afghanistan.	But	back	in	autumn	2002,	he	secretly	sent
word	that	he	could	ally	with	the	new	U.S.-friendly	Afghan	government.	The
warlord	had	once	been	a	partner	of	the	Central	Intelligence	Agency,	and	later
closely	collaborated	with	Osama	bin	Laden	and	the	ruling	Taliban.”

2	Richard	S.	Ehrlich,	“Afghanistan:	An	American	Graveyard?”	The	Laissez
Faire	City	Times,	October	29,	2001.

3	http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1101030407-
438861,00.html.	The	Time	article	describes	that	the	Iraqi	military	circulated
copies	of	the	movie	Black	Hawk	Down	before	the	war,	as	a	manual	for	defeating
the	Americans.

4	Naylor,	32.

5	Ibid.

6	Ibid.

7	Franks,	493.

8	Naylor,	80.

9	Although	specifically	forbidden	in	the	USSOCOM	Public	Affairs	Guidance
from	providing	off-record	interviews,	it	is	obvious	from	a	close	reading	of	Not	a
Good	Day	to	Die	that	a	number	of	key	TF	11	high-level	leaders	talked	to	Sean
Naylor	“off	the	record.”

10	Naylor,	81.

11	Ibid.

12	Ibid.,	39.

280
                                                  CHAPTER	      17

1	The	Battle	of	Shahi	Koht	 of	March	2002,	described	and	analyzed	by	one	of	the
participants,	Abdul-’Adheem	 Article	 ID:	 1055	|	2516	reads	Translated	by	Azzam
Publications.	The	original	 form	 of	this	enemy	account	was	published	in	2003	on
the	Taliban	website	(www.azam.com)	The	website	had	a	similar	 interactive
protocol	as	Wikipedia.	As	 I	checked	on	site	over	the	many	months	that	followed,
the	account	continuously	transmogrified	from	 its	original	 content	into	the
propaganda-inspired	mess	that	is	posted	today.	There	were	at	least	three	enemy
first-person	accounts	written	by	enemy	fighters	during	 and	after	the	battle.	I	was
able	to	read	all	three	in	their	original	 untouched	format	and	corroborate	much	of
what	they	said	by	cross-referencing	each	account	with	both	friendly	 and	enemy
sources	of	information.	The	number	of	enemy	that	was	in	the	valley	 is	a	topic	of
much	debate	among	both	historians	and	participants	of	the	battle.	The	number
used	in	this	book	comes	from	an	aggregation	of	the	three	accounts	I	read.

2	Naylor,	141.

3	Ibid.,	142.

4	Ibid.,	144.

5	Ibid.,	156.

6	Ibid.,	157.

7	Ibid.,	169.

8	Ibid.

9	Ibid.

10	Ibid.,	176.

281
                                               CHAPTER	   18

1	See	Centcom	report	available	at
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/news/2002/11/mil-021108-
centcom01.htm.

2	Chinese	Recorder,	vol.	69,	no.	1	(January	1938):	2.

3	Joint	Publication	3-09.3	Joint	Tactics,	Techniques,	and	Procedures	for	Close
Air	Support.	See	chapter	5,	fig.	V-9,	example	of	standard	brevity	terms	required
to	vector	attack	aircraft	using	lasers,
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/policy/dod/doctrine/jp3_09_3.pdf
.

282
                                               CHAPTER	   19

1	Naylor,	286.

2	Ibid.

3	Ibid.

4	Ibid.,	302.

5	Ibid.,	303.

6	Ibid.,	307.

7	Ibid.,	309.

8	Ibid.

9	Ibid.

10	Executive	summary	of	the	Battle	of	Takur	Ghar,	released	through	the
Department	of	Defense,	May	24,	2002,
http://www.defenselink.mil/news/May2002/d20020524takurghar.pdf.

11	http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lockheed_AC-130.

12	Executive	summary	of	the	Battle	of	Takur	Ghar.

13	Ibid.

14	Naylor,	318.

15	Nate	Self,	Two	Wars:	One	Hero’s	Fight	on	Two	Fronts—Abroad	and	Within
(Wheaton,	Illinois:	Tyndale	House	Publishers,	2008),	216.

16	Ibid.

17	Ibid.

18	http://science.howstuffworks.com/predator.htm.

19	Naylor,	322.

20	Ibid.

21	Ibid.,	328.

283
22	Self,	146.	“I	 recognized	the	voice	on	the	radio,	it	was	Pete	Blaber,	a	man	with
a	long	history	with	 the	Rangers	and	Delta	Force	.	.	.	I	trusted	him,	if	he’s	in
control	here,	everything	will	 be	fine.”

284
                                                         INDEX



Page	numbers	followed	by	“n”	 indicate	notes.



Abdullah,	Fazul
Abu	Jihad
Abu	Zarqawi
Abu	Zubeida
AC-130s
“actionable	intelligence,”
action	(taking)	to	make	action
action	vs.	interaction
activity	patterns	of	UBL
adaptable	mind-set	of	AFO	men
additional	men,	request	for
advanced	force	 operations	(AFO).	  See	also	 battle	 begins	(stay	 calm,	 think!);
organizing	 for	 combat	 (dealing	 with	  a	 natural	 disaster);	 reality;	 Takur	  Ghar
adaptable	mind-set	of	AFO	men
 defined
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
 headquarters	of
 mujahideen	fighters	 destroyed	by
adventurer,	Ali	Mohamed
Afghan	general	(ex)	for	on-the-ground	 knowledge
Afghanistan.	See	also	Al	 Qaeda;	battle	begins	(stay	calm,	 think!);	 exploring	 the
frontier	  (recognizing	  enemy	 patterns);	  mujahideen	 fighters;	   organizing	  for
combat	(dealing	with	a	natural	disaster);	reality;	 Takur	Ghar
 Afghan	 soldiers,	Operation	Anaconda
 daughter	of	 Afghan	warlord	 as	face	of	future	of
 hatred	of	 UBL	 and	Al	Qaeda
 homes	in
 intelligence	 on
 mountainous	terrain	 of

285
 on	the	ground	in	 (riding	 the	edge	of	chaos)
 resistance	fighters,	Ali	 Mohamed	volunteering	 for
 Soviet	 war	in,	learning	from
 “too	 risky,”	 infiltrations	  into
 warlords,	 establishing	relationships	with
Afghanistan-Pakistan	border
AFO.	See	advanced	force	operations
Aideed,	Mohamed	Farrah
Aimes,	Aldrich
air	assault	(helicopter)
AK-47s
Albright,	 Madeleine	(Secretary	of	State)
Alexander	the	Great
Al	Farooq	mosque	(New	Jersey)
Al	Farooq	terrorist	 training	camp	and	Lindh
Al-Iman	 University	 and	Lindh
all-terrain	vehicles	(ATVs)	 used	by	Juliet	team
Al	 Qaeda.	See	also	Afghanistan;	embassy	bombings	(only	 failure	 is	a	failure	 to
try);	Taliban
 Afghan	 warlord’s	 hatred	of
 Ali	  Mohamed	falling-outs	 with
 caste	system
 embassy	bombings	and
 infiltration	  of	Al	 Qaeda	(discovering	the	art	of	the	possible)
 John	Walker	 Lindh	and
 leaders’	vulnerability	  in	Kandahar
 Osama	bin	Laden	(UBL)
 trained	 by	Ali	 Mohamed
altitude,	acclimation	to
always	listen	to	the	guy	on	the	ground	(guiding-principle	  lesson)	See	also	guy	on
the	ground
Ambrose,	Stephen
Americans	as	“creatures	of	comfort,”
Amin
“anvil	 and	hammer,”
Apocalypse	Now	(film)

286
Appalachian	Mountains,	Delta	Force	selection	process
Aqil’s	 infiltration	 of	 Al	 Qaeda
armored	division
arrest	of	Ali	 Mohamed
art	of	the	possible,	discovering	the	(infiltration	  of	Al	 Qaeda)
“Art	 of	the	Possible,	The,”
Atef,	Mohammed	and	Ali	 Mohamed
athleticism	of	Blaber
ATVs	(all-terrain	 vehicles)	used	by	Juliet	team
audacity,	principle	of	 war
“aye,	aye,”



backpackers	vs.	military
backpacking,	forty-pound	standard
“backside”	support
Baghdad
Bagram	Air	Base
battle	begins	(stay	calm,	think!)
battlefield	chaos	and	genius,	Special	Forces
Battle	of	LZ	 X-ray
Bear	Went	over	the	Mountain,	The	(Grau	and	Jalali)
Beirut
Berger,	Sandy	(National	Security	Advisor)
BGM-109C/D	 Tomahawk	Block	 III	 cruise	missiles
Bill	 (Unit	commander)
bin	Laden,	Osama	(UBL)	 See	also	Afghanistan;	 Al	 Qaeda;	mujahideen	fighters;
Taliban
Blaber,	 Pete.	See	also	  guiding-principle	  lessons;	 Special	 Forces	Operational
Detachment	(Delta,	Delta	Force,	the	Unit)
 Ali	  Mohamed	(counterfeit	double	agent)
 battle	 begins	(stay	calm,	think!)
 Bob	 Marshall	Wilderness	Area,	 “the	Bob”	 (Montana)
 calm	 before	the	storm	(Man-Huntin’	 Project)
 embassy	bombings	(only	 failure	is	a	failure	 to	try)
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)

287
 gorilla	 warfare	(Bosnia-Herzegovina)
 imagining	 everyone’s	potential	 as	the	guy	on	the	ground
 imagining	 how	 to	seek	out	the	guy	on	the	ground
 infiltration	  of	Al	 Qaeda
 natural	 selection	(getting	into	Delta	 Force)
 9/11	 (four-inch	 knife	blade)
 on	the	ground	in	 Afghanistan	(riding	 the	edge	of	chaos)
 organizing	 for	combat	(dealing	 with	a	natural	disaster)
 Osama	bin	Laden	(UBL)
 patterns	of	hindsight
 Takur	 Ghar
 Task	Force	Wolverine,	 cloverleaf	 incident	(Tikrit,	 Iraq)
Blackhawk	Down	(film)
Blade	(Unit	reconnaissance	expert)
blending	in	anywhere,	Special	Forces
BM-21
Bob	(Unit	 operator)
Bob	Marshall	Wilderness	Area,	 “the	Bob”	 (Montana)
body	movements	and	deception
Bogotá
bombing	cars
Bosnia-Herzegovina	(gorilla	 warfare)
Bosniaks	(Muslims)
boundaryless
boundary-spanning
box	(rank-and-file)	 formations,	Civil	 War
brainstorming
 gorilla	 warfare	(Bosnia-Herzegovina)
 imagining	 everyone’s	potential	 as	the	guy	on	the	ground
 imagining	 how	 to	seek	out	the	guy	on	the	ground
broken-down	vehicle	idea
Bruiser	(Unit	 operator)
burkhas
Bush,	George	W.	(President)
Bush	at	War	(Woodward)

288
C-17s
calm	before	the	storm	(Man-Huntin’	 Project)
camera,	taking	on	mission
capture	recommendations	for	UBL
cardboard	cow	idea
Casanova	(Unit	operator)
caste	system	of	Al	Qaeda
casualties,	Operation	Anaconda
CG	(commanding	general)	vs.	Blaber
CH-47s
challenges
Chamberlain,	Joshua
Chapman,	John	A.	(SEAL)
Cheney,	Dick	(Vice	 President)
childhood	of	Blaber
Chris	H.	(Special	Forces	commander)
CIA
 Ali	  Mohamed	and
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
 imagining	 how	 to	seek	out	the	guy	on	the	ground
 on	the	ground	in	 Afghanistan	(riding	 the	edge	of	chaos)
 organizing	 for	combat	(dealing	 with	a	natural	disaster)
 reality	 check	(what’s	 your	recommendation?)
civilian	 defense	contractors	and	military,	collaboration	between
civilians,	avoiding	 contact	with
Civil	 War	battlefield	 trip
Clarke,	Richard	(National	 Security	Council)
Clinton,	Bill	 (President)
clothing,	thermo-regulating
cloverleaf	incident	(Task	 Force	Wolverine,	Tikrit,	 Iraq)
cognitive	science
Cohen,	William	 (Secretary	of	Defense)
cold	weather	environment	skills,	 Special	Forces
Colombia
Colombian	drug	cartel	kingpins
combat	experience	of	AFO	men

289
combat	troops	to	support	troops	ratio	(tooth	to	tail)
“coming	off	 one’s	base,”
commanding	general	(CG)	vs.	Blaber
commando	costume,	Blaber
common	sense
 derailers	of
 essence	of	global	war	against	terrorisms
 providing	 context
Common	Sense	(Paine)
communication	(boundaryless)	and	shared	reality
communication	short-circuits	 and	decision-making	errors
communications	specialists,	pushing	to	pilot	teams
compartmentalized	nature	of	planning	and	intelligence
computer	whiz	in	NWFP,	 Lindh	 as
concussion	grenade	idea
congratulations	to	terrorists	about	embassy	bombings	from	UBL
connector	skills,	importance	of
conspiracy,	U.S.	government	incapable	of	planning	big
context
 common	 sense,	context	as
 don’t	  get	 treed	 by	 a	 chihuahua:	decision-making	  without	  context	 (guiding-
principle	lesson)
 recognizing	 patterns	and
Continental	Divide,	 crossing
conventional	vs.	guerrilla	 army,	Vietnam
counter-elicitation
counterfeit	double	agent	(imagining	how)
courage
“creatures	of	comfort”	 Americans
creatures	of	habit,	mujahideen	fighters	as
credibility,	 assessing
creekbeds	for	artillery	and	lines	of	communication,	 mujahideen	fighters
Croatians	(Catholic	Christians)
cruise	missiles
 Osama	bin	Laden	(UBL)
 Small	 Group	recommendation

290
cultural	dynamics	of	Bosnia
curiosity	and	human	nature



D-30	122-mm	howitzers
“danger-opportunity,”
Danno	(AFO	member)
daughter	of	Afghan	warlord	 as	face	of	future	of	Afghanistan
daughter	of	PIFWC
Dayton	Peace	Agreement
DCG.	See	deputy	commanding	general
D-Day
dealing	with	a	natural	disaster	(organizing	for	 combat)
decision-making
 poor	 by	government	agencies	and	military
 without	 context:	don’t	 get	treed	by	a	chihuahua	(guiding-principle	 lesson)
decisive	point	for	capture	operation
Dee	(Unit	intelligence	 analyst)
Deer	Hunter,	The	(film)
defense	acquisition	reforms
defense	contractors,	collaboration	with	military
Deliverance	(film)
Delta/Delta	Force.	See	Special	Forces	Operational	Detachment
Department	of	Defense
deputy	commanding	general	(DCG)
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
 Takur	 Ghar
desert	environment	skills,	Special	Forces
Desert	Island,	Persian	Gulf
Desert	One	Hostage	Rescue	Mission
developing	 the	situation.	  See	when	 in	 doubt,	 develop	 the	situation	  (guiding-
principle	lesson)
disclosure	agreements
discovering	the	art	of	the	possible	(infiltration	  of	Al	 Qaeda)
disguises,	deception,	diversions	to	confuse	and	confound	enemy	(Special	Forces)
Dolly	 Varden	Creek

291
don’t	 get	 treed	 by	  a	 chihuahua:	 decision-making	  without	 context	  (guiding-
principle	lesson)
dots	(facts	and	events)	prior	to	9/11,	connecting
Drago	(Unit	operator)
drag	queen	Afghan	security	guard
DShK	machine	gun



east	side,	Shahi	Khot	Valley	(Juliet	team)
effects-based	warfare
ego,	powerful	pull	 on	humans
Egypt	Air
Eid	ul-Fitr	 (Id-Ul-Fitr)
emailing	mother	from	 NWFP,	Lindh
embassy	bombings	(only	failure	is	a	failure	 to	try)	See	also	Al	Qaeda
emotional	intelligence,	respect	for
empty	target	raids
enabling	vs.	end-state	objective
enemy
 always	 having	a	vote
 defining
 patterns,	recognizing	(exploring	 the	frontier)
environment,	organizing	according	to
environmental	reconnaissance
 Bosnia-Herzegovina
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
 Shahi	Khot	 Valley
environmental	training,	Special	Forces
ethnic	cleansing
experimentation	by	reconnaissance	teams
exploring	the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
“eyes	on	the	target,”



face-to-face	meetings
 Blaber	 and	Ali	 Mohamed

292
 UBL	 and	Lindh
facts	and	events	(dots)	prior	to	9/11,	connecting
failure	(only)	 is	a	failure	to	try	 (embassy	bombings)
Falconview	mapping	software
false	reality	of	leaders
“fanatic”	 label
FARC	guerrillas	 of	Colombia
fatwah
FBI	and	Ali	 Mohamed
feet	(navigating	with),	 Delta	Force	selection	process
5th	 Special	 Forces	Group.	 See	 also	 Special	 Forces	Operational	  Detachment
(Delta,	Delta	Force,	the	Unit)
 imagining	 how	 to	seek	out	the	guy	on	the	ground
 on	the	ground	in	 Afghanistan	(riding	 the	edge	of	chaos)
 organizing	 for	combat	(dealing	 with	a	natural	disaster)
50/10	technique
5307th	Composite	Unit	(Provisional),	 “Merrill’s	  Marauders,”
filming	 of	raids
finding	missions,	Blaber
finger,	Shahi	Khot	Valley	 (Mako	 31	team)
firearms	and	walking	the	Bob
1st	Battalion,	87th	Regiment	(I-87)	 of	the	10th	Mountain	 Division
first-aid	bags
fishhook,	Shahi	Khot	Valley	 (India	 team)
Flathead	River
food	(scarcity),	Blaber’s	 childhood
footprint	paradox
foreign	intelligence	 sources
Fort	Bragg	(North	Carolina)
forty-pound	standard	for	backpacking
Foster,	Jodie
four-inch	knife	 blade
 Ali	  Mohamed	as
 9/11
Franks,	Tommy	(General,	Commander	in	Chief	 of	U.S.	Central	Command)
Fredericksburg

293
freedom	of	choice
Friedman,	Thomas
friendly	 fire	incident
Frosty	(intelligence	operative)
future,	preparing	for
future	of	Afghanistan,	 daughter	of	Afghan	warlord	 as	face	of



Gahahn,	Adam’s	infiltration	 of	 Al	Qaeda
Gardez	safe	house
Gettysburg
Ghazni
Gladwell,	Malcolm
Glenn	(Unit	intelligence	 analyst)
Goody	(SEAL)
Google	maps
Gore-Tex
gorilla	suit	idea
gorilla	warfare	(Bosnia-Herzegovina)
government	databases
GPS	navigation	system
Grau,	Lester
Green	Berets,	Ali	Mohamed	as	member	of
Grenada
grizzly	bears	in	Bob	Marshall	 Wilderness	Area
ground	infiltrations	 behind	enemy	lines	(longest)
guiding-principle	 lessons.	See	also	patterns;	when	in	doubt,	develop	the	situation
(guiding-principle	 lesson)
 always	 listen	to	the	guy	on	the	ground
 don’t	 get	treed	by	a	chihuahua	(decision-making	without	 context)
 imagining	 the	unimaginable,	humor	 your	imagination
 it’s	 not	reality	 unless	it’s	shared
 patterns,	recognizing	as
 3Ms	 (the	Mission,	the	Men,	 and	Me)
guy	on	the	ground.	See	also	on-the-ground	knowledge
 always	 listen	to	the	guy	on	the	ground	(guiding-principle	 lesson)

294
 Bob	 Marshall	Wilderness	Area,	 “the	Bob”	 (Montana)
 imagining	 everyone’s	potential	 as	the
 imagining	 how	 (counterfeit	double	agent)
 imagining	 how	 to	seek	out	the
 9/11	 (four-inch	 knife	blade)	and
 Takur	 Ghar
 understanding



Hagenbeck,	Buster	(Major	General)
 battle	 begins	(stay	calm,	think!)
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
 reality	 check	(what’s	 your	recommendation)
“hammer	and	anvil,”
“hand-cannon,	the”	(Smith	 &	Wesson
 Magnum)
handrailing
Haqqani,	Jalaluddin	(mujahideen	commander)
hatred	of	UBL	 and	Al	Qaeda,	Afghanistan
Hayat,	Khizar	and	Lindh
head-on	assaults	and	mission	failures
hedging	options
helicopter	air	assault
 longest	in	 history
 mujahideen	fighters,	 shooting	of
 no-helicopters	 policy
 Operation	 Anaconda
 Osama	bin	Laden	(UBL)
 Task	Force	Wolverine,	 cloverleaf	 incident	(Tikrit,	 Iraq)
helicopter	crash	(false)
helicopter	insertion	of	SEALs
Hersch,	Seymour	M.
H-hour
hiding	places	of	UBL
hierarchical	decision-making	process
“highly	 coveted	employee,”

295
high-probability	 countries	for	operations
high	school	years	of	Blaber
high-value	targets	(HVTs)
hijacked	plane	as	WMD
Hitler,	Adolf
Hollywood	 portrayal	of	 Special	Forces
homes	in	Afghanistan
Homer	(SEAL)
hostile	wilderness	of	Bob	Marshall	 Wilderness	Area
hot-spots,	feet
hubris,	derailer	of	person’s	common	sense
human	intelligence
humility	 (valued	over	self-aggrandizement),	Special	Forces
humor	your	imagination,	 imagining	the	unimaginable	 (guiding-principle	 lesson)
Hussein,	Saddam
HVTs	(high-value	 targets)
hypothermia	potential



ICTY	 (International	Criminal	 Tribunal	 for	the	former	 Yugoslavia)
Id-Ul-Fitr	 (Eid	 ul-Fitr)
illumination	 thinking	 phase
imagining	everyone’s	potential	 as	the	guy	on	the	ground
imagining	how	 (counterfeit	double	agent)
imagining	how	 to	seek	out	the	guy	on	the	ground
imagining	the	unimaginable,	humor	 your	imagination	 (guiding-principle	 lesson)
“impenetrable”	 Al	Qaeda
incubation	thinking	 phase
India	team
individual	 skills	(maintaining),	 Special	Forces
infiltrating
 Afghanistan
 Al	 Qaeda	(discovering	the	art	of	the	possible)
 Kandahar	and	Kabul
information	 as	currency	of	spies
integrating	CIA	 and	Special	Forces	into	pilot	teams

296
intelligence	analysts,	pushing	to	pilot	 teams
intelligence	captured,	Operation	Anaconda
intelligence	on	Afghanistan
interaction	vs.	action
interagency	unity	of	effort	 and	success
intercepted	phone	calls	(signal	intelligence)
International	Criminal	 Tribunal	 for	the	former	Yugoslavia	 (ICTY)
International	Criminal	 Tribunal	 in	The	Hague
Internet
Iran
iridium	 satellite	phone
Islam,	Yusuf	(Lindh)
Islamic	fundamentalism,	Lindh
Islamic	Movement	of	 Uzbekistan
it’s	not	reality	 unless	it’s	shared	(guiding-principle	 lesson)



Jalalabad
Jalali,	Ali	 Ahmad
Jama’at,	Tablighi	and	Lindh
Jan,	Qari	Muhammad	Tahir
Jawad,	Maulawi
Jeff	(Al	 Qaeda	supervisor)	See	also	Mohamed,	Ali	(counterfeit	double	agent)
Jefferson,	Thomas
Jimmy	(AFO	 member)
Jinga	trucks
John	(CIA)
Joint	Operations	Center	(JOC)
Juliet	team
jungle	environment	skills,	 Special	Forces



Kabul
Kahane,	Meier
Kalispell	(Montana)
Kandahar

297
Kap	(Unit	 operator)
Kashmir
“Kashmir”	 (Led	Zeppelin)
Kelty	backpacks
Kennedy,	John	(President)
key	terrain	occupied	by	AFO	 teams
Kherchtou,	L’Houssaine
Khowst
Kim	Il	 Sung
Knob	Creek	Kentucky	 Whiskey
Korean	War
Kris	K.	 (Unit	operator)
Kuwait



Landing	Zone	1,	Takur	Ghar
“last	supper,”
law	of	unintended	consequences
leading	and	shared	reality
Lecter,	Hannibal
Led	Zeppelin
Lee,	Robert	E.	(General)
lessons	from	key	events,	unlearned	See	also	guiding-principle	lessons
Lewis	and	Clark	scenario
 Bob	 Marshall	Wilderness	Area,	 “the	Bob”	 (Montana)
 calm	 before	the	storm	(Man-Huntin’	 Project)
 imagining	 everyone’s	potential	 as	the	guy	on	the	ground
 imagining	 how	 to	seek	out	the	guy	on	the	ground
 infiltration	  of	Al	 Qaeda
 Osama	bin	Laden	(UBL)
LexisNexis
Librettos	(mini-laptop	 computers)
life	experiences	of	terrorists
Life	magazine
Lindh,	John	Walker’s	 infiltration	 of	 Al	Qaeda
Lindh,	Suleyman	al-	(Lindh)

298
line-of-sight	 radio
listening	 to	the	 guy	on	 the	ground,	 always	 (guiding-principle	  lesson)	See	also
guy	on	the	ground
“living	 laboratory”	 for	 operational	breakthroughs,	Bosnia-Herzegovina
locals,	listening	to
 Bob	 Marshall	Wilderness	Area,	 “the	Bob”	 (Montana)
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
logistics	(Special	Forces),	awesome	capability	of
Longstreet,	James	(General)



M-4	rifles	 (checking	chambers)	and	changing	mind-set
madrassa
Mako	21	team
Mako	30	team
Mako	31	team
man-ape	creature	sightings	in	Balkan	Mountains
Manassas
Man-Huntin’	 Project	(calm	before	the	storm)
Mansoor,	Maulawi	 Saif-ur-Rahman	(mujahideen	commander)
Mao	Tse-tung
marauding	mission,	success	of
Masirah
maverick,	Ali	 Mohamed	as
maximum-security	prison
McNamara,	Robert
MDMP	 (Military	 Decision-Making	  Process)
“meat-eaters,”
Medal	of	Honor	 recipient
Menewar
Merrill,	 Frank	D.
“Merrill’s	  Marauders”	(5307th	Composite	Unit,	 Provisional)
MICE	(money,	 ideology,	coercion,	excitement)
microwave	oven
Military	 Decision-Making	 Process	(MDMP)
Mill	 Valley	 mosque	(California)	 and	Lindh

299
mind	set	of	terrorists
minefield	planted	by	Al	 Qaeda
Ministry	 of	Dirty	 Tricks
mission,	organizing	according	to
Mission,	the	Men,	and	Me	(3Ms),	 guiding-principle	 lesson	See	also	Blaber,	Pete
“modern-day	warfare,”	 models	of
Mogadishu	(Somalia)
Mohamed,	Ali	 (counterfeit	double	agent)
money,	ideology,	coercion,	excitement	(MICE)
Moore’s	Law
“moral	flexibility”	   of	Ali	 Mohamed
Motel	Hell	 (film)
mountain	environmental	recons
Mountain	House	freeze-dried	meals
mountainous	terrain,	Afghanistan
mountain	training	See	also	Bob	Marshall	Wilderness	Area,	 “the	Bob”	 (Montana)
moving	targets	and	cruise	missiles
mujahideen	fighters.	See	also	Afghanistan;	Al	Qaeda;	Taliban
 battle	 begins	(stay	calm,	think!)
 destroyed	by	AFO
 patterns	of
 reality	 check	(what’s	 your	recommendation)
 situational	 awareness	trumped	by	precedent
 Takur	 Ghar
 U.S.	 support	of
multisource	corroboration	of	 intelligence



Nairobi	(Kenya)	 U.S.	Embassy	bombing
National	Forest	Service
National	Park	Service	forest	ranger	(Sue)
natural	disaster,	dealing	with	(organizing	for	 combat)
natural	selection	(getting	into	Delta	 Force)
Navy	SEALs
 helicopter	 insertion,	Takur	Ghar
 Mako	 21	team

300
 Mako	 30	team
 Mako	 31	team
 ordered	by	DCG,	 Takur	Ghar
Naylor,	Sean
“need	to	share,”
negative	reflections	on	individuals	 and	learning	lessons
New	Yorker
nimble,	getting
9/11	(four-inch	 knife	blade)
Nixon,	Richard	(President)
nondisclosure	agreements
Noreiga,	Manuel
Northern	Alliance
Northwest	Frontier	Province	(NWFP)
Nosair,	Al	Said
Not	a	Good	Day	to	Die	(Naylor)
nuclear	material	for	WMD,	 Al	 Qaeda	attempts	to	obtain
NWFP	(Northwest	Frontier	 Province)



OBL	See	also	bin	Laden,	Osama	(UBL)
Officer	Candidate	School
olfactory	sense	of	grizzly	bears
Omar,	Mullah
101st	Airborne	Division
on	the	ground	in	Afghanistan	(riding	 the	edge	of	chaos)
on-the-ground	knowledge.	See	also	guy	on	the	ground
 Bosnia-Herzegovina	 area
 technology	 vs.
operational	insights,	Ali	 Mohamed
operationally	incarcerated	in	prison	of	 plan
operational	needs	(difficult-to-solve),	 finding	 solutions	to
operational	security
operational	sweet	spots
Operation	Anaconda	See	also	battle	 begins;	exploring	 the	 frontier	 (recognizing
enemy	patterns);	reality;	Takur	Ghar

301
Operation	Infinite	 Reach
opportunities	lost
 Ali	  Mohamed
 cancellation	 of	capture	mission,	UBL
 imagining	 how	 to	seek	out	the	guy	on	the	ground
 video	 teleconference	(VTC)
organizing	for	combat	(dealing	 with	a	natural	disaster)
organizing	for	the	mission	and	shared	reality
Orgun	AFO	team
Other	Side	of	the	Mountain,	The	(Grau	and	Jalali)
out-of-the	box	creative	options
outrageousness	as	barrier	buster
Owhail,	Mohamed	Rashed	Daoud	al



Padilla,	José’s	infiltration	 of	Al	 Qaeda
pain	and	fooling	your	 brain
Paine,	Thomas
Panama
Panther	(Unit	commander)	See	also	Blaber,	Pete
Pappas,	Billy
parachute	(phantom)	operations	around	Kandahar
paranoia	of	UBL
Pashtuns
patriot,	Ali	 Mohamed	as
patterns.	See	also	guiding-principle	lessons
 Blaber	 (patterns	of	hindsight)
 recognizing	 as	guiding-principle	 lessons
 recognizing	 enemy	patterns	(exploring	the	frontier)
Patton,	George
Pearl,	Daniel
pepper	spray	for	grizzly	bears
permission	to	fire,	request	by	AC-130
Persian	Gulf	tactical	operations	center
Persons	Indicted	for	War	Crimes	PIFWCs)
Peshawar	terrorist	training	camp	and	Lindh

302
physical	fitness	responsibilities	of	 Unit	operators
Pickett,	George	(General)
Pickett’s	Charge
PIFWCs	(Persons	Indicted	for	War	Crimes)
pig/bear	incident,	Delta	Force	selection	process
pilot	teams
Polartec	fleece
Popular	Science
post-holing
Pot,	Pol
potential	as	the	guy	on	the	ground,	imagining	everyone’s
Powell,	Colin
precedence,	prison	of
Predator	(Unit	operator)
Predator	drone,	images	from
preparation,	importance	of
press,	value	of
pride,	derailer	of	person’s	common	sense
proficiency,	higher	 state	of	(Special	Forces)
project	design	teams
prom	night	prank,	Blaber
psychological	impact	of	 helicopter	assault
psychological	objectives
psychologist	(“the	psyche”)



QRF	(Ranger	quick	reaction	force)
questioning	everything



“Rakkasans”	(3rd	Brigade	of	 the	101st	Airborne	Division)
Ranger	quick	reaction	force	(QRF)
rank-and-file	(box)	 formations,	Civil	 War
Rashid,	Ahmed
readiness,	higher	state	of	(Special	Forces)
reading	terrain

303
reality.	See	also	shared	reality
 correcting	 context	of	guy	on	the	ground
 it’s	 not	reality	 unless	it’s	shared	(guiding-principle	 lesson)
 reality	 check	(what’s	 your	recommendation?)
“real-world-mission	 scenarios,”
Recognition-Primed	Decision	 Model
recognizing	enemy	patterns	(exploring	the	frontier)
reconnaissance	missions,	Shahi	Khot	Valley
Red	Dawn	(film)
red	not	found	in	nature	(RNFN),	 Bosnian	women’s	hair
religiously	 defined	factions	within	 Bosnia-Herzegovina
rendezvous	point	(RV)
requests	for	information	(RFI)
“required	reading”	 table
rescue	mission,	Takur	Ghar
Rex	(AFO	team	leader)
RFI	(requests	for	information)
riding	the	edge	of	chaos	(on	the	ground	in	Afghanistan)
“ring	of	 fire”	 (tanks	and	antiaircraft	guns),	Kandahar
risk	aversion	of	modern-day	military
RNFN	(red	not	found	 in	nature),	Bosnian	women’s	hair
Rob	(Unit	operator)
Roberts,	Neil	(SEAL)
ROE	(rules	of	engagement)	flexibility
“Roger,”
Roy	(Unit	 operator)
rucksack
rules	of	engagement	(ROE)	flexibility
RV	(rendezvous	point)



SA.	See	situational	awareness
sacrifice	of	men	(senseless)	by	government	agencies	and	military
Sadat,	Anwar
sailor’s	guiding	 principles
Sana’a	(Yemen)

304
Santayana,	George
Sarajevo
satellite	cell	phone,	UBL	 stopping	usage	of
satellite	for	detecting	a	person’s	genetic	code
satellite	net	(overwhelmed),	Takur	Ghar
satellite	radio	frequency,	switched	by	DCG
saturation	thinking	phase
Schaefer	Meadows
SEALs.	See	Navy	SEALS
seeking	out	the	guy	on	the	ground,	imagining	how
Self,	Nate	(Ranger)
September	11	(four-inch	knife	blade)
Serbs	(Orthodox	Christians)
SFORs	in	Bosnia
Shahi	Khot	Valley
 Ali	  Mohamed,	hiding	place	of	UBL
 east	side,	Juliet	team
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
 finger,	 Mako	31	team
 fishhook,	 India	team
 organizing	 for	combat	(dealing	 with	a	natural	disaster)
shared	reality.	See	also	reality
 communication	 (boundaryless)	and
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
 it’s	 not	reality	 unless	it’s	shared	(guiding-principle	 lesson)
 leading	 and
 on	the	ground	in	 Afghanistan	(riding	 the	edge	of	chaos)
 organizing	 for	combat	(dealing	 with	a	natural	disaster)
 organizing	 for	the	mission	and
 Takur	 Ghar	and
Sharif,	Nawaz	(Pakistani	Prime	Minister)
Shawnee	National	Forest
Shelton,	Henry	(General,	Chairman	of	the	Joint	Chiefs	of	 Staff)
shepherd	(Afghan)	and	Shahi	Khot
Shillika	ZSU-23	 antiaircraft	 cannon
shock	and	awe	(thunder	run)	vs.	marauding	mission

305
signal	intelligence	(intercepted	phone	calls)
Silence	of	the	Lambs	(film)
Silver	Star	recipient
Simpson,	O.	J.
sit-rep
situational	 awareness	(SA).	  See	 also	 when	 in	  doubt,	 develop	 the	  situation
(guiding-principle	 lesson)
 enemy	(situational	 awareness	of),	reducing
 falsely	 increased	by	VTC
 maximum-security	 prison	 and
 Osama	bin	Laden	(UBL)
 trumped	 by	precedent	(mujahideen	fighters)
 trumped	 by	tyranny	of	the	plan
six-hundred-dollar	toilet	 seat
skepticism	of	locals	about	walking	 the	Bob
Slab	(SEAL)
sleeper	cells
Small	Group	and	embassy	bombings
Smith	&	 Wesson	.44	Magnum,	“the	hand-cannon,”
“snain,”
sniper	and	meetings	with	warlords
snowshoes
solution-focused	collaboration	between	military	 and	civilian	 defense	contractors
Somalia
Southern	Illinois	 University	 (SIU)
Soviet	war	in	Afghanistan,	 learning	from
Special	Forces	(Green	Berets),	Ali	Mohamed	as	member	of
Special	Forces	Operational	Detachment	 (Delta,	Delta	 Force,	the	 Unit)	 See	also
advanced	force	operations	(AFO);	 Blaber,	Pete;	CIA;	 5th	Special	Forces	Group;
Navy	SEALs
 battlefield	 chaos	and	genius
 blending	 in	anywhere
 Bob	 Marshall	Wilderness	Area,	 “the	Bob”	 (Montana)
 Desert	One	Hostage	Rescue	Mission
 disguises,	deception,	diversions	to	confuse	and	confound	enemy
 environmental	 training

306
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
 Hollywood	  portrayal	of
 humility	  ,	valued	over	self-aggrandizement
 individual	  skills,	maintaining
 logistics	 forces
 “meat-eaters,”
 operational	 sweet	spots
 physical	 fitness	responsibilities
 proficiency,	 higher	 state	of
 psychologist	 (“the	psyche”)
 readiness,	higher	state	of
 selection	process
 success	(past),	counting	for	nothing
 warrior	 hug,	no-touch
speed,	illogic	of
Speedy	(Unit	operator)
Spider	(CIA)
spike	mat	(tire-puncturing	device)
Stan	(Vietnam	veteran,	defense	contractor)
stationary	targets	and	cruise	missiles
stay	calm,	think!	(battle	 begins)
stealth	technology
Stevens,	Cat
strategic	reconnaissance	skills	of	AFO
Stress	Phase,	Delta	Force	selection	process
Stu	(Unit	operator)
“students	of	knowledge,”
success	(past),	counting	for	nothing	(Special	Forces)
Sue	(National	Park	Service	forest	ranger)
supplies	and	preparation,	walking	the	Bob
switchbacks



tacit	knowledge
tactical	operations	center	(TOC)
taking	action	to	make	action

307
Takur	Ghar
Taliban.	See	also	Afghanistan;	Al	Qaeda;	mujahideen	fighters
 dogma	and	Lindh
 research	on
 squad	leader,	sharing	information
Taliban	(Rashid)
tanks,	Task	Force	Wolverine
tanks	and	antiaircraft	guns	(“ring	 of	fire”),	 Kandahar
Tanzania	U.S.	Embassy	bombing
target	folder
Tarnak	Farms
Task	Force
Task	Force	Sword	See	also	Task	Force
Task	Force	Wolverine,	cloverleaf	 incident	(Tikrit,	 Iraq)
technology
 on-the-ground	 knowledge	vs.
 supremacy,	military’s	  faith	in
Tenet,	George	(CIA	Director)
10th	Mountain	Division
Tera	(Unit	communications	 specialist)
Tergal	Ghar
terrain,	reading
terrain	and	preparation,	walking	the	Bob
terrorism	See	also	Al	Qaeda
thermo-regulating	clothing
thinking,	making	 time	for
thinking	phases
3rd	Brigade	(“Rakkasans”)	of	 the	101st	Airborne	Division
3Ms	(the	Mission,	the	Men,	 and	Me),	guiding-principle	 lesson
thunder	run	(shock	and	awe)	vs.	marauding	mission
Tikrit,	 Iraq	(Task	Force	Wolverine	 cloverleaf	incident)
time/distance	estimates
 Bob	 Marshall	Wilderness	Area,	 “the	Bob”	 (Montana)
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
time-lapse	images	of	Tarnak	Farms
time	to	recognize	patterns

308
tire-puncturing	device	(spike	 mat)
TOC	(tactical	operations	center)
toilet	seat,	six-hundred-dollar
Tomahawk	(BGM-109C/D)	  Block	III	 cruise	missiles
“too	risky,”	 infiltrations	  into	Afghanistan
tooth	to	tail	(ratio	 of	combat	troops	to	support	troops)
Tora	Bora
Torres,	Hiram’s	(Mohamed	 Salman)	infiltration	 of	Al	 Qaeda
Toyota	Land	Cruisers	used	by	UBL
tracers
trapped	tank,	Task	Force	Wolverine
travel	by	UBL
travel	window	 of	wanted	PIFWC
treed	by	  a	chihuahua,	 don’t	  get:	 decision-making	  without	  context	 (guiding-
principle	lesson)
“tribals,	the,”
Trojan	horse	technique
Tuzla	safe	house



UBL.	See	bin	Laden,	Osama
UH-60	helicopters
Undaunted	Courage	(Ambrose)
unimaginable	  (imagining	  the),	  humor	  your	   imagination	  (guiding-principle
lesson)
Unit,	the.	See	Special	Forces	Operational	Detachment
United	Nations
unlearned	lessons	from	key	events	See	also	guiding-principle	lessons
urban	environment	skills,	Special	Forces
U.S.	embassy	bombings	(only	failure	is	a	failure	 to	try)
 Ali	  Mohamed	and
U.S.	Forest	Service
U.S.	News	and	World	Report
U.S.	secret	agent,	Ali	Mohamed’s	desire	to	become
U.S.	support	of	mujahideen	fighters
USS	Cole

309
Uzbek	fighters,	Takur	Ghar



Val	(Unit	 operator)
values	and	psychotic	terrorists
vehicle	reconnaissance	missions,	Shahi	Khot	Valley
Vic	(SEAL	 commander)
video	teleconference	(VTC)
Viet	Cong
 Blaber’s	 respect	for
 mujahideen	fighters	 vs.
Vietnam	War
 Battle	 of	LZ	 X-ray
 Blaber’s	 interest	in
 helicopters	 and	failed	missions	in
VTC	(video	 teleconference)



wadis
walking	the	bob	(Bob	 Marshall	Wilderness	Area,	“the	 Bob,”	 Montana)
Walter	(Vietnam	 veteran,	Special	Forces)
warlords	(local),	establishing	relationships	 with
warrior	hug,	no-touch	(Special	Forces)
“warrior’s	 cocktail,”
warrior	seed	in	every	boy
warriors’	 sharing	of	lessons	learned	See	also	guiding-principle	lessons
weather
 Afghanistan,	 on-the-ground	knowledge
 best	time	to	attack,	bad	weather
 preparation,	Bob	 Marshall	Wilderness	Area,	“the	 Bob”	 (Montana)
Welch,	Jack
Westmoreland,	William
We	Were	Soldiers	Once...and	Young	(film)
what’s	your	recommendation?	(reality	 check)	See	also	shared	reality
when	in	doubt,	develop	the	situation	(guiding-principle	  lesson)	See	also	guiding-
principle	lessons;	situational	awareness	(SA)

310
 adaptation	advantage
 audacity	 advantage
 embassy	bombings	(only	 failure	is	a	failure	 to	try)
 exploring	 the	frontier	 (recognizing	enemy	patterns)
 imagining	 everyone’s	potential	 as	the	guy	on	the	ground
 imagining	 how	 to	seek	out	the	guy	on	the	ground
 infiltration	  of	Al	 Qaeda
 innovation	 advantage
 on	the	ground	in	 Afghanistan	(riding	 the	edge	of	chaos)
 organizing	 for	combat	(dealing	 with	a	natural	disaster)
 Osama	bin	Laden	(UBL)
 reality	 check	(what’s	 your	recommendation?)
 traditional	 planning	 vs.
withdrawal	recommendation,	Operation	 Anaconda
Wolverine	Task	Force,	cloverleaf	 incident	(Tikrit,	 Iraq)
Woodward,	Bob
World	Front	 for	Jihad	against	Jews	and	Crusaders
World	War	 II	Manhattan	Project
Worldwide	 Most	Wanted	List



Yemen,	attack	on	U.S.	Troops
Yemen	Language	Center	and	Lindh



“zero-defect	operations,”
Zindani,	Sheikh	al-	and	Lindh
Zubaida,	Abu

311
   a
Inspired	 by	 World	  War	  II	 term	  used	to	  describe	three	 thousand	 American
volunteers	  of	  the	  5307th	   Composite	  Unit	   (Provisional),	   aka	  “Merrill’s
Marauders,”	 operating	 behind	 Japanese	lines	 across	Burma,	 pushing	 beyond
their	limits,	 and	fighting	  pitched	battles	at	 every	strongpoint.	 They	were	led	 by
army	officer	 Frank	D.	Merrill.
   b
Sit-rep	is	an	abbreviation	 for	situation	 report,	a	brief	 report	of	who,	 what,	when,
where,	and	why.
   c
Saddam	was	so	 sure	he	 was	 surrounded	that	 instead	of	 escaping	 to	 the	safe
sanctuary	of	Syria,	 he	stayed	in	 Tikrit	  instead.	Eight	 months	later	 many	of	 the
same	Wolverines	who	were	 on	his	scent	at	the	cloverleaf	 sniffed	 him	out	 of	his
spider	hole	and	captured	him.
   d
“Drago,”	 not	 his	 real	 name,	was	killed	  in	 action	during	  combat	operations	 in
Iraq.
   e
Within	 a	 few	 years,	most	 every	 police	 department	in	 America	 was	 using	 the
spike	mat.	Many	  police	departments	have	 now	equipped	 every	squad	car	 with
one.
   f
Target	folder	is	the	unofficial	  term	used	for	an	actual	folder	that	contains	a	high-
level	 overview	 of	 a	 person	or	 a	 place	 that	 is	of	  interest	for	  potential	 future
operations.
   g
Although	  his	  full	  name	 is	  often	  spelled	 Osama	 bin	  Laden,	  UBL	  is	  the
transliteration	used	by	the	U.S.	 government.	No	one	inside	 the	government	uses
OBL.	 It’s	 always	 UBL,	  which	 is	 the	way	 I	 will	  refer	 to	 him	 throughout	 this
book.
   h
Technically	 defined	 as	a	ruling	 issued	 by	an	 Islamic	 scholar.	During	  the	’90s
UBL	issued	three	fatwahs,	calling	on	Muslims	 to	take	up	arms	against	the	United
States.
   i
These	include	 the	UH-60	 and	 CH-47	 models	along	 with	 all	 of	 their	 specially
modified	versions.

312
   j
The	Recognition-Primed	  Decision	 Model	 is	 a	rarely	 used	alternative;	 but	 this
model	is	 virtually	  the	 same,	except	 in	 step	 2,	the	 commander	 makes	all	 the
decisions	to	“push	the	process	and	save	time.”
   k
All	  the	 dates	used	 for	  John	 Walker	 Lindh’s	  journey	  should	 be	 considered
approximate;	he	 never	wore	 a	watch	 or	 carried	 a	cell	 phone	or	 calendar	with
him.
   l
A	madrassa	is	an	Islamic	religious	school.	Many	 of	the	Taliban	 were	educated	in
Saudi-financed	 madrassas	in	 Pakistan	 that	  teach	Wahhabism,	  a	 particularly
austere	and	rigid	form	of	Islam	that	is	rooted	in	 Saudi	Arabia.
   m
Kashmir	 refers	 to	  an	 area	that	 includes	  the	 Indian-administered	 regions	  of
Kashmir	Valley,	 Jammu,	and	Ladakh,	and	the	Pakistani-administered	 regions	of
Northern	Areas	and	Asad	Kashmir.
   n
Continental	Divide	  or	 Great	Divide	  is	the	 name	given	 to	the	 North	 American
portion	of	the	mountainous	ridge	 that	separates	the	watersheds	that	drain	into	the
Pacific	Ocean	from	those	river	systems	that	drain	into	the	Atlantic	 Ocean.
   o
The	type	of	hole	dug	in	the	ground	to	secure	a	fence	post.
   p
A	burkha	 is	the	 concealing	overgarment	 worn	 by	Muslim	  women	for	 cloaking
the	entire	  body.	 Under	 the	 Taliban	 rule,	  all	 women	 were	 required	  to	 wear
burkhas	at	all	times.
   q
Set	in	the	future	of	a	United	 States	so	crime-ridden	that	New	York	 City	 has	been
transformed	into	 a	maximum-security	 prison,	 ex-soldier	 and	legendary	fugitive
Snake	Plissken	is	injected	with	a	time-delayed	 poison	capsule	and	given	twenty-
three	hours	to	find	 and	rescue	the	President	of	 the	United	States,	who	 has	been
captured	by	inmates.	Only	 if	 he	accomplishes	his	mission	in	 twenty-three	hours
will	 he	be	given	the	serum	to	save	his	life.
   r
For	security	reasons	I	have	chosen	to	 leave	out	much	of	 the	detail	 around	AFO
interactions	and	coordinations	with	 the	CIA.	 What	 is	important	 for	the	reader	to
understand	is	that	for	 Operation	Anaconda,	 we	were	one	organization.	 Without

313
the	CIA,	  and	 especially	 Spider,	 Operation	 Anaconda	 and	 most	 of	 the	 early
success	in	the	war	against	terrorists	would	never	have	happened.
   s
Bob	was	 killed	 in	 action	 in	 Iraq	 on	June	17,	 2005.	 “Every	 man	 dies,	but	 not
every	man	truly	 lives.”	 Bob	 truly	 lived,	 for	 family,	 for	 nation,	and	for	 the	guys
around	him.
   t
The	CH-47	is	a	twin-engine,	 tandem-rotor	 helicopter	designed	for	transportation
of	 cargo,	 troops,	and	 weapons	 during	 day	 or	 night.	 The	 aircraft	  fuselage	is
approximately	fifty	  feet	long.	With	 a	sixty-foot	  rotor	span	on	each	rotor	system,
the	effective	  length	 of	 a	 CH-47	  (with	 blades	 turning)	  is	 approximately	 one
hundred	feet	 from	  the	most	 forward	  point	 of	 the	 forward	  rotor	 to	 the	 most
rearward	point	on	the	aft	rotor.	Maximum	 airspeed	is	196	miles	per	hour.
   u
Eid	 ul-Fitr	  or	 Id-Ul-Fitr,	  often	 abbreviated	 to	 Eid,	 is	 a	 Muslim	  holiday	 that
marks	the	end	of	Ramadan,	the	Islamic	holy	month	of	fasting.
   v
Generally	refers	 to	the	 unrelenting	 advancement	of	technology	 and	 computing
power	and	the	resultant	ability	to	do	more	with	 less.
   w
In	the	 navy,	 Aye	aye	 means,	“I	 understand	the	 order	and	 I	 will	  carry	out	 the
order.”	The	army	uses	the	term	Roger	to	convey	the	same	thing.
   x
Jinga	trucks	 are	flatbed	 vehicles	about	 the	size	of	 a	 dump	truck,	 painted	 with
intricate	 patterns	and	bright	 colors.	 They	 get	their	 name	from	 the	 chimes	that
dangle	and	jingle	from	the	base	of	the	vehicle	whenever	it	moves.
   y
( )
   z
Key	terrain	 is	terrain	that	provides	 a	decisive	advantage	to	whichever	side	holds
it	in	battle.

